Mr. Akram (Pakistan): War has come again to
the Gulf. War is not only the last option. It is also an
ugly option. Pakistan deplores the resort to the use of
force. This was a war that Pakistan tried strenuously
and sincerely to prevent. This is a war that was 12
years in the making. It could have been prevented if the
increasingly robust United Nations inspections regime,
installed after the adoption of resolution 1441 (2002),
had been allowed more time to secure the effective and
verified elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction.

A large segment of the United Nations
membership has participated in this debate initiated at
the request of the League of Arab States and the
Movement of the Non-Aligned Countries. We hope that
the concerns voiced here and the positions articulated
will help the Council find a united way forward in
dealing with the challenges we confront. We thank the
Secretary-General for his very thoughtful statement
yesterday. His eloquent call for urgent humanitarian
relief for the Iraqi people and for unity within the
Council deserves out utmost attention.

The outbreak of this war was not due to the
failure of the Security Council. The Council did not
endorse the war. The Security Council remains relevant
to restoring peace, containing the conflict, providing
relief and restoring stability and the rule of law.

As Pakistan has said, the time and space for
diplomacy never ends. The mandate of this Council is
not only to maintain, but also to restore, international
peace and security. In this situation, the Security
Council cannot give up efforts to secure a cessation of
hostilities. Even in the midst of conflict, we must
continue our collective efforts to search for ways and
means by which peace can be restored. Obviously, we
will not be able to achieve this through condemnation
or recrimination, however deplorable the use of force.
We could do so through exploration of the possibilities
for peace between the warring parties. Surely no one
wishes to witness the needless loss of life of their sons
and daughters, and especially not innocent civilians.
Therefore, the search for the magic ring must not be
given up.

In this war, people must come first. To contain
the human consequences of the conflict is our most
urgent task. Pakistan was the first to call on the
Council to address the welfare of the Iraqi people. This
is a task that we can fulfil. We join in mourning for
those, especially the innocent men, women and
children, who have lost their lives in these early days
of the conflict. The Council must ask for strict respect
for international humanitarian law by the parties to the
conflict. The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) has warned that humanitarian law prohibits
direct attacks against civilians and requires that
belligerents must take every precaution in military
operations to spare the civilian population.
Humanitarian law also states that "the right to choose
weapons of warfare is not unlimited. Weapons having
indiscriminate effect and/or causing unnecessary
suffering are forbidden".

Besides protecting civilians, sparing
infrastructure and preserving the sanctity of the holy
places, the parties to the conflict must treat detainees
humanely and provide maximum protection and
assistance to refugees and internally displaced persons.

As stipulated by the Fourth Geneva Convention,
those in effective control or occupation of any territory
are responsible for meeting the humanitarian needs of
the population and are required to maintain dialogue
and cooperation with international organizations
engaged in humanitarian relief.

Due to the application of sanctions for a dozen
years, the Iraqi people are unfortunately dependent, in
order to meet their essential needs, on the United
Nations-operated oil for food programme. This
relationship has now been disrupted. Warned of the
impending war, the Secretary-General had no choice
but to withdraw United Nations personnel. However,
now, once the parameters of the conflict become
clearer, the United Nations could begin to resume its
role and responsibilities for humanitarian and food
assistance to the Iraqi people. Fortunately, the United
Nations has the machinery to discharge these
responsibilities.

Pakistan agrees that appropriate adjustments need
to be made to the oil for food programme to enable the
Secretary-General to ensure that the shipments of the
most urgently required items that have already been
contracted for are the first to be delivered at places
where they can be received and distributed.

We believe that, for the provision of emergency
relief, the first consideration should be humanity rather
than legality. The United Nations must deal with
whoever is in effective control in the areas where aid is
to be distributed. It must use all the existing Iraqi
distribution networks for that purpose.

In this context, arrangements should be put in
place to enable all humanitarian agencies and
organizations which are prepared to assist, including
humanitarian organizations in several Islamic
countries, to provide relief assistance to the Iraqi
people. In Pakistan, official and non-governmental
organizations are on standby for such arrangements in
order to bring help to their brothers and sisters in Iraq.

While the existence of the oil for food
programme and the $2.5 billion in contracted
shipments under way may be the best option to
urgently meet the essential needs of the Iraqi people, it
is vital to underline certain principles in this context.

First, the Security Council must reaffirm the
permanent sovereignty of the Iraqi people over their
natural resources. Control over those resources must
revert to them as soon as possible. To that end, the
sanctions imposed in the past must end quickly after
the conflict.

Secondly, the Iraqi people should not be asked to
bear the burden of the extra costs that will be incurred
in making the adjustments in the existing oil for food
programme by way of accelerating, delaying or
diverting shipments. Those extra costs should be met
through the normal insurance coverage. If paid for by
the oil for food programme, they should be reimbursed
by contributions from the international community as
soon as possible.

Thirdly, apart from the humanitarian
responsibilities of the parties to the conflict, the
international community must also contribute to
meeting the essential needs of the Iraqi people. The
existence of the oil for food programme should not
imply that the Iraqi people must pay for the emergency
needs created by a conflict which is not of their
making.

International humanitarian assistance to the Iraqi
people will need to be coherently planned and
effectively coordinated. This can best be done by the
United Nations. The Secretary-General may wish to
consider the appointment of an appropriate high
official who can serve as the focal point and
coordinator of international relief assistance to Iraq.

The third objective for the Security Council, the
United Nations and the international community is to
contain the conflict, to arrest the spread of instability in
the region and to restore the rule of law in Iraq and in
international relations. The principles involved are
clearly prescribed in our Charter: respect for the
political independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Iraq and of its neighbouring States; the right of the
Iraqi people to choose their own political destiny and
form of governance, in exercise of their right to self-
determination; non-intervention and non-interference
in internal affairs; permanent sovereignty and control
over their natural resources; respect for the religious
and cultural traditions of the people of Iraq and for the
sanctity of the holy places, which are among the most
venerated in the Islamic world; and the right of the
Iraqi nation to economic and social reconstruction.

Discussion, in our view, must commence within
the Council and with others concerned, at the United
Nations and elsewhere, to realize these principles and
objectives.

Finally, to contain the Iraqi conflict, to end
hostilities, to stabilize the region and to restore the rule
of law, it will be essential to adopt a comprehensive
and equitable approach to peace, security and progress
in the region. This conflict is being conducted with the
declared objective of securing the implementation of
Security Council resolutions. As everyone
acknowledges, the Middle East conflict must be
resolved on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the vision of two States, Palestine and
Israel, living side by side in conditions of peace, justice
and security. We look forward to concrete
implementation of the positive intentions that have
been announced for the Middle East.

Equally, the dispute between Pakistan and India
over Jammu and Kashmir must be resolved through
implementation of the Security Council resolutions
prescribing the exercise of the right of self-
determination by the people of Jammu and Kashmir.
The refusal of India to implement the Security
Council's resolutions, its refusal of dialogue, its resort
to repression of the Kashmiri people, and its
threatening of Pakistan with the use of force should
also be unacceptable to the United Nations and to the
Security Council.

The failure to display and implement equity will
accentuate the resentment and the suspicions regarding
the objectives of the current conflict. It will heighten
the incidence of violence and terrorism. It will spread
instability. It will erode the conduct of international
relations on the basis of the principles of the United
Nations Charter and of international law.

Whatever our views about the current conflict, we
all acknowledge that we are living through a defining
moment in world history.

The future of our countries and of our peoples
will depend considerably on the manner in which we
respond to this crisis. Every crisis presents challenges,
but it also opens up opportunities. Our response to this
crisis must therefore be principled, but it must also be
wise, designed to construct a new world order for the
twenty-first century and based on the principles of the
Charter and on the unrelenting quest of the human race
for global peace, progress andjustice.

