The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Republic of Korea.

My delegation would like to thank Special
Representative Farid Zarif for his briefing. We warmly
welcome President Nikolie and President Jahjaga to
the Council and thank them for their statements today.
I would also like to express our deep sympathy and
condolences to those affected by the recent floods in
Serbia and other countries in the Balkans, and wish
them a rapid recovery.

A year after the signing of the historic 19 April
agreement between Belgrade and Pristina, there has
been significant progress on their path towards the
normalization of relations. Building on such hard-won
gains, we look to Serbia and Kosovo to continue to
engage constructively in the European Union-facilitated
dialogue with a view to resolving the remaining issues
expeditiously, including the establishment of the
association/community of Serb municipalities.

While we commend such accomplishments, we
remain concerned over violent incidents in northern
Kosovo, such as the recent attacks on Kosovo Police
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), as well as the protests against their law
enforcement activities. We believe that such incidents
illustrate the need to strengthen the credibility of the
justice system. In this regard, we stress the importance
of the work of EULEX in consolidating the rule of law
in Kosovo's institutions. We encourage leaders in the
north, as well as in Belgrade and Pristina, to cooperate
constructively with EULEX.

Lastly, we encourage the Kosovo authorities to
promote the protection of minorities. In particular,
further emphasis should be given to facilitating the safe
and voluntary return of internally displaced persons.
The strategy for the reintegration of repatriated person
for 2014-2018 is a positive development in this regard.
We once again commend the entire staff of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, EULEX and other international partners
for their tireless efforts for the continued peace and
stability of Kosovo.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

His Excellency President Nikolie has requested to
take the floor to make a further statement.

