Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, we thank you for having organized this
debate today. We welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/158) and thank Ms. Coomaraswamy
and all other representatives of the Secretariat for their
excellent work. My written text is the official text of
my statement, but I would like to focus my abridged
oral presentation on just a few points.

We all know that in spite of the marked interest
and action by the international community, violations
of law and abuses continue. A very recent example is
the desperate situation of thousands of children trapped
in the conflict zone in north-eastern Sri Lanka.
Credible reports indicate that several hundred children
have been massacred and that a number of hospitals
have been targeted for attacks during the fighting of the
past few months. The situation is even more worrisome
because humanitarian access to these children trapped
in the war zones is still severely restricted.
Additionally, it has been reported that the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam have intensified their use of
child soldiers. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Working Group should use
every available opportunity to engage the parties to the
conflict so that they will improve the situation on the
ground.

This situation should not let us forget other
serious situations, such as those in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Myanmar, the Sudan, Somalia
and other hotbeds of tension and crisis.

Generally, we call on the Security Council to use
all its influence to ensure implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1612 (2005), to include this
question on the Council's agenda and to make better
use of existing mechanisms and instruments, such as
sanctions, peacekeeping missions, political missions
and statements and resolutions.

We fully endorse all the recommendations made
by the Secretary-General in his report and stress the
following points. First, we support the idea of
expanding the criteria that trigger the inclusion of
parties to armed conflict in the annexes of the reports
of the Secretary-General. This could be carried out
using an incremental approach, starting with the
intentional killing and maiming of children and
concluding with all six grave violations.

Secondly, we support the idea that all parties
listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General's reports
should prepare and implement concrete action plans to
halt the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflicts. The Council should take measures against
any party that does not comply with its obligations.

Thirdly, the Working Group should be
encouraged to report to the competent sanctions
committees those parties to conflict committing
repeated grave violations against children. Moreover,
targeted measures should be taken against parties or
individuals responsible for such violations.

Fourthly, we encourage the Security Council to
defer to the International Criminal Court when
appropriate regarding violations committed against
children that fall within its jurisdiction.

Finally, the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict should receive more significant
administrative support and should improve its methods
of work.

The question of children and armed conflict is
only one facet of the protection agenda on which the
Security Council, the Secretariat, the operational
system of the United Nations and all Member States
should focus. Still, it is vital to monitor the
implementation of decisions on the ground, including
their impact on the populations concerned.
Accordingly, it is imperative that, through our work at
Headquarters, we develop mandates, including the
terms of engagement of United Nations missions, in
order to facilitate protection activities, ensure that
recommendations coming from thematic debates are
reflected in work on specific countries, support as
much as possible protection on the ground in terms of
human and financial resources, build capacity and
conduct leading to good management of key dilemmas,
and ensure that all stakeholders on the ground work in
close cooperation on the basis of a common
framework.

There are a number of financial mechanisms to
support United Nations protection activities: the
peacekeeping budget; the regular budget, including
special political missions; the budgets of relevant
United Nations agencies; and the Central Emergency
Response Fund; and various other funds financed
through voluntary contributions. This variety of
mechanisms represents a challenge in terms of the
effectiveness of planning and the strategic use of
resources.

The lack of a broad View of transparency or
predictability in resources is an obstacle to the
effectiveness of protection activities. It is the
responsibility of all of us to find appropriate solutions
to resolve this problem. A common framework would
contribute to improving the current situation.

