President Tadie (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this meeting of the
Security Council to once again debate the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija. I also pleased to acknowledge
the presence here of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Lamberto Zannier, with whom I
recently had a productive meeting in Belgrade.

Tomorrow, 24 March, will be the tenth
anniversary of the start of NATO's bombing of my
country. I would like to recall that that tragic event,
which lasted a full 78 days, was not undertaken with
the approval of this body. During a three-month period
in which cities and villages were bombed every day,
2,500 civilians were killed, including 89 children, and
12,500 more were injured. The number of victims does
not include those who subsequently succumbed to
leukemia and other deadly diseases caused by the
depleted-uranium-coated bombs that were dropped on
my country.

As a result of 2,300 air strikes throughout Serbia,
148 residential buildings and 62 bridges were
destroyed, while 300 schools, hospitals and other
public buildings were damaged, as were 176 cultural
heritage sites. One third of the country's electrical
capacity was destroyed, as were two major oil
refineries. According to studies conducted by
economists, the direct damage to my nation's economy
has been estimated to be approximately $30 billion; the
indirect damage was much greater.

We were collectively accused, and then
collectively bombed for, as it was then claimed, the
expulsion of 800,000 ethnic Albanians from Kosovo
and Metohija. A result of that tragic war, which
produced an awful catalogue of casualties among the
sides and whose end was marked by the establishment
of an international administration, was the exodus from
the province of more than 200,000 ethnic Serbs and
Roma. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's report
(S/2009/149) includes the sad observation that even
today, 10 years later, those people cannot return to their
homes.

I would like to underline one further counter-
intuitive fact. Serbs were punished 10 years ago with
bombs, but 10 years later, in the wake of the mass
expulsion of Serbs and the firebombing of their homes
and holy sites, Kosovo Albanians have been rewarded
by having their illegal declaration of independence
recognized by more than 50 countries.

Just as for Serbia the lesson of the tragic military
campaign of 1999 is that never again should a situation
be created in which its citizens are punished and killed,
so must the lesson for the international community be
that innocent civilians should never have to pay for a
wrongful policy with their lives.

The Republic of Serbia condemns every war
crime as a matter of principle and affirms that all
accused must be brought to justice. Our principled
position is that every indictee is an individual with a
particular name and surname and that the doctrine of
collective responsibility of nations or States cannot
legitimately exist. The recent decisions by the Hague
Tribunal against particular individuals in the Kosovo
case - involving four former officials of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and one Serbian official -
demonstrate that the State's collective responsibility, or
that of its citizens, does not exist.

It is possible to debate whether the sentences
were too harsh, especially in the light of the not-guilty
verdict handed down in the case of a leader of the
Kosovo Liberation Army, Ramoush Haradinaj. I note
that, according to a statement by the then Prosecutor of
the Tribunal, Witnesses were not only intimidated but
also even physically liquidated. However, one thing is
certain: specific individuals were convicted for specific
crimes. That is precisely the reason why Serbia will
continue to fully cooperate with the Hague Tribunal,
and why we will keep doing everything in our power to
arrest and bring before the Court the two remaining
indictees at large, namely, Goran Hadzic and Ratko
Mladic.

Today, nine years after the fall of Milosevic,
Serbia is a modern European democracy that poses no
threat to anyone. The country of which I am President
has repeated time and again that joining the European
Union is its most important strategic goal. We will
continue to be dedicated, as a matter of principle, to
resolving outstanding problems exclusively through
peaceful dialogue and without recourse to force.

The attempt at secession by ethnic Albanian
authorities of our southern province of Kosovo and
Metohija that took place on 17 February 2008, nine
years after the bombing of Serbia, is a direct violation
of the United Nations Charter, the Helsinki Final Act
and resolution 1244 (1999). Pristina's unilateral and
illegal declaration of independence represents an
attempt to forcibly partition a Member State of the
United Nations, against its will, and without the
consent of the Security Council. Unfortunately, that
was supported by a certain number of countries,
primarily because of the constant threat of violence if
Kosovo's ethnic Albanian community's secessionist
demands were not met.

Even today, Serbs in Kosovo have no security,
freedom of movement, rule of law, electricity or water.
In short, respect for the basic norms of civilization is
denied to them. That is why I would like to underline
my disagreement with the optimistic views expressed
in the report. The aggression committed against the
Serbian residents of the village of Silovo is a case in
point. The village was without power for weeks in the
middle of winter because of a condition set by
authorities in Pristina for the signing of written
contracts that would have meant indirect recognition
on the part of the residents of the illegal construct
known as the Republic of Kosovo. That illustrates how
Serbs are the most endangered community in all of
civilized Europe.

Let us recall that, in the March 2004 pogrom,
more than 50,000 ethnic Albanian extremists
participated in an organized campaign of violence in
which 19 were killed, 950 were injured and more than
4,000 Serbs were expelled. Additionally, more than 900
buildings were destroyed and 35 Christian churches
and monasteries set ablaze, shelled or otherwise
destroyed. Many of those structures dated to the
fourteenth and sixteenth centuries. Five years later, not
a single individual remains behind bars for the
organized burning down of a church in Kosovo.

That is why I have called on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) to take the necessary measures to
ensure that justice is done for every resident of Kosovo
and Metohija, irrespective of ethnicity or religious
affiliation. Every crime, especially hate crimes, must
be thoroughly investigated and prosecuted. Those
accused must be tried before a just and impartial court.
We expect the United Nations and European Union
peacekeeping missions to establish the rule of law and
provide the preconditions for a peaceful life. They
must prevent the release of perpetrators as was recently
done in the case of one who had been sentenced by
UNMIK's court to a 40-year sentence for the terrorist
attack of booby-trapping a bus, in which nine Serbs
lost their lives.

I would now like to refer to some of the attacks
on Kosovo Serbs that have taken place in the past
month. Two houses, in which lived returnees to the
village of Drsnik, near Klina, were burned to the
ground on 14 March. On the same day, shots were fired
at the home of Dragoljub Budzevic in the village of
Ljug, near Istok. Mr. Budzevic had returned to his
village in Kosovo three years ago, together with 45
other Serbs. Before their return, they had lived as
internally displaced persons in other parts of Serbia
since their expulsion in the summer of 1999. In another

part of Kosovo, the village of Silovo, 14 Kosovo Serbs
were injured due to the excessive use of force by ethnic
Albanian police.

It is obvious to everyone today that, 13 months
after the illegal unilateral declaration of independence,
Kosovo is no State. There is minimal protection of
human rights, as demonstrated by the small number of
Kosovo Serbs and other non-Albanian who have
returned to the province. Serbia, along with a number
of European Union member States, faces tremendous
problems arising out of the activities of the ethnic
Albanian mafia in Kosovo, which specializes in the
trafficking of narcotics, human beings and weapons.

We want to see life return to normal in our
southern province. I am convinced that Albanians and
Serbs can live side by side. That is why the United
Nations and EULEX have to work hard to discharge
the mandate in full.

Here and on this occasion, I would like to
underline that it is of exceptional importance for
UNMIK and EULEX to ensure freedom of movement
throughout Kosovo for the democratically chosen
officials of the Republic of Serbia. They must not be
turned back at the Administrative Boundary Line by
the Pristina authorities. Such provocations can only
serve to deeply distress the Serbian population of the
province.

The legal aspect of the Kosovo case, as we all
know, finds itself before the International Court of
Justice. The principal judicial organ of the United
Nations will provide an advisory opinion on the
following question: Is the unilateral declaration of
independence by the Provisional Institutions of Self-
government of Kosovo in accordance with
international law?

I believe that all United Nations Member States
should respect the fact that the International Court of
Justice will decide the issue and that no one should in
any way prejudge its deliberations. Therefore, we
expect no encouragement for further recognitions. I
call on all United Nations Member States that have not
recognized the unilateral declaration of independence
to stay the course while the Court conducts its work.
The Republic of Serbia supports new negotiations
on Kosovo's future status. That is the only way to find
a just compromise and a mutually acceptable solution.
Serbia will never recognize the independence of
Kosovo, either directly or indirectly, and we will
continue the diplomatic, legal and peaceful defence of
our integrity. We are persuaded that the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice will be
immensely useful for the international system in its
entirety, because we believe that its answer to the
question posed by the General Assembly will prevent
the Kosovo issue from serving as a deeply dangerous
precedent.

Serbia will remain a good-faith partner to the
international community in the interim administration
of our southern province. The role of the European
Union is of great significance. Now, as a result of the
fact that the Security Council has welcomed the
November report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/692), in which the mandate of EULEX is
clearly defined as fully respecting resolution 1244
(1999) and operating in a strictly status-neutral manner
under the auspices of the United Nations, our
cooperative partnership with EULEX and UNMIK
should continue in order to implement the provisions
of the November report, namely, the six points that
provide for the continuation of the dialogue with
Belgrade.

Serbia has and will continue to contribute
constructively and seriously to finding mechanisms to
fully implement the six points in the context of the
negotiating process. We have made concrete proposals
on the issues of the judiciary and the safeguarding of
Serbian patrimony in Kosovo. We remain open to
further talks with the aim of implementing the six
points, in line with resolution 1244 (1999).

What has always been a crucial condition for our
acceptance of reconfiguration was a clear and binding
commitment by the European Union, confirmed by the
Security Council, to be fully status-neutral and to
completely anchor its presence in Kosovo under the
authority of the United Nations, with full respect for
resolution 1244 (1999).

I am pleased that those reasonable conditions
have been met. The precisely formulated text of the
November 2008 report, welcomed by the Security
Council and reaffirmed in the report (S/2009/149)
before the Council today, defines the status-neutrality
of EULEX's engagement, which is a guarantee that no
part of its mandate can be devoted to the
implementation of the Ahtisaari plan for Kosovo's
independence, which was rejected by the Republic of

Serbia and was not endorsed by the Security Council,
in the words of a previous report. However, it is of
great significance that the implementation of the six
points, as well as the full deployment of EULEX, shall
be put into operation, notwithstanding the existence of
some problems, and that this shall be done in
consultation with all relevant stakeholders, most
importantly with the Republic of Serbia.

I call on the authorities in Pristina not to obstruct
the will of the international community. The Republic
of Serbia is ready to continue to cooperate with
EULEX in our southern province, because it has been
confirmed by the United Nations that EULEX is
welcome in Kosovo and Metohija.

I would like to repeat that it is of great
significance for us that UNMIK continue its mission
and mandate and remain fully and ably present on the
ground throughout Kosovo and that its budget not be
reduced. Without UNMIK, it would not be possible to
fulfil the requirements of either resolution 1244 (1999)
or of the Secretary-General's six-point plan. I would
like to underscore UNMIK's duty to be part of the
Pristina delegation at all international and regional
meetings, where it must be identified and heard under
the name UNMIIUKosovo. Serbia will continue to
contribute to such cooperation.

I conclude by quoting from the Secretary-
General's report: UNMIK must "continue to play a
crucial role in maintaining peace and stability on the
ground" (S/2009/149, para. 35). Serbia will remain a
factor for peace and stability, a partner to the
international community in seeking a sustainable
solution and a country that has its future in the
European Union.

