Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to express my thanks to the Swedish presidency for
convening this important open debate. I also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his updated briefing on
the situation.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

The current negative developments in the Middle
East, particularly the recent deadly clashes and the
dire humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, have
put the whole region's security at risk and seriously
imperilled the prospect of the two-State solution.
Despite the tireless efforts made for many years by the
international community, including the United Nations
and the Security Council, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict remains unresolved and has become even
more complex, without any feasible and sustained
political solution.

We are deeply concerned about the situation on
the ground and strongly condemn and oppose all acts
of violence, including the excessive use of lethal force
against civilians and critical civilian facilities. We
therefore join Special Envoy Mladenov in urging the
parties concerned to exercise self-restraint and refrain
from any act that would escalate tensions. All settlement
construction and blockade activity need to stop
immediately, while special attention must be focused
on protecting and improving Palestinian lives in Gaza.
It is also crystal clear that the Security Council should
take swift and unified action to put the peace process
back on track by creating favourable conditions for
the pursuit of constructive dialogues and negotiations
between the parties concerned.

Viet Nam has consistently supported the two-State
solution, with a vision of Israel and Palestine living
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition
within the pre-l967 borders. All solutions to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict must be in line with international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, as
well as the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. We welcome all efforts and
initiatives aiming at achieving a just, comprehensive
and lasting solution, thereby ensuring the legitimate
interests of both Israel and Palestine. We highly
appreciate the indispensable role and tireless efforts
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East to ease the suffering
of the Palestinians.

Viet Nam reaffirms its support for the legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination and the
establishment of an independent and sovereign State.
We reiterate our unwavering commitment to working
with you, Mr. President, and all other Member States
to end the conflict, thereby bringing sustainable peace
and security to the region.

