Mr. Henze (Germany): The present situation in
Liberia is a matter of deep concern to all of us. We
welcome this open debate, which gives members of the
Council, as well as other Member States of the United
Nations, an opportunity to express their views on a
conflict which affects many countries. We wish to offer
our Views in the light of the recent report submitted by
the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL),
which bears the rather misleading title of "progress
report". There has been no progress; unfortunately, there
has been only backward movement, from a cease-fire to
new fighting and killing.

 

Our assessment of the situation is clear: we are deeply
disappointed by and concerned about the continuation of
fighting in Monrovia and in other parts of Liberia. The
considerable efforts to restore peace and stability to that
country, which has seen so much violence over the past six
years, have been undone. The substantial hopes related to
the now-interrupted peace process have been shattered since
fighting resumed in Monrovia six weeks ago.

The responsibility for disrupting the peace process lies
solely with the leaders of the various militias, who have
shown no regard for the Liberian people's quest for
survival - let alone their well-being - or for the
universally accepted principles of international humanitarian
law and human rights. They have inflicted a cruel war upon
the population of Liberia and have been involved in
committing outrageous atrocities against the civilian
population. The international community must hold them
responsible for their deeds. Our sympathy is with the
people of Liberia. We are keeping their plight in mind
while trying to find ways to respond adequately to the
situation.

We strongly urge the faction leaders to put an
immediate end to the fighting and to comply with the
demands put forward in the Mechanism for Returning
Liberia to the Abuja Agreement, issued by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Committee
of Nine on Liberia on 8 May, which also received
unanimous support from the members of the International
Contact Group on Liberia (ICGL) in its second meeting on
24 May 1996 in New York.

We expect the faction leaders in Liberia immediately
to implement concrete measures to return to the peace
process in accordance with the Mechanism, including in
particular the restoration of the cease-fire, the withdrawal
of armed fighters from Monrovia, the re-establishment of
Monrovia as a safe haven, the return of vehicles and other
equipment looted from UNOMIL, United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations and the return of
weapons taken from the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG).

We expect the faction leaders to prove their
commitment to the principles of the Abuja Agreement by
immediately taking these measures. ECOWAS has already
indicated that its further involvement in Liberia will be
reviewed by early August on the basis of progress made in
fulfilling these conditions. Let me add that we are also in
favour of a more efficient arms embargo, which would help
stop the flow of arms for the senseless killing.

The Security Council will have to decide by the end
of this week on the possible extension of the mandate of

 

UNOMIL. The Council will have to decide under what
circumstances the presence of UNOMIL in Liberia still
makes sense. We urge the faction leaders in Monrovia to
make every effort to show by their immediate
implementation of those measures that they welcome the
continued presence of UNOMIL in their country.

We will also have to find ways and means to enable
civil society to assume its rightful place in the peace
process and thus to meet the desire of Liberian civilians
to reinsert themselves in that process.

Germany has contributed substantially in the past to
humanitarian efforts to alleviate the plight of the war-
ravaged Liberian people and will continue to do so
through bilateral contributions, contributions to the budget
of the European Community Humanitarian Office and
contributions to the budgets of the various agencies of the
United Nations. Delivering humanitarian assistance,
however, depends on the existence of a safe and secure
environment, which, unfortunately, does not prevail in
Liberia at the moment. While urging the faction leaders
to comply with the demands outlined before, we wish to
express our hope that conditions may soon be restored
which will allow the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to the needy Liberian population.

Allow me to conclude by commending ECOWAS
and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) for their
continued efforts to facilitate the resumption of the peace
process. We deplore the deaths of more than 100
ECOMOG soldiers in the recent fighting. I also wish to
express our appreciation to the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, to his Special Representative and to
the staff of UNOMIL for their continuing efforts to
facilitate a peaceful resolution to the crisis.

