Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank the Secretary-General; Dr. David Nabarro,
United Nations System Senior Coordinator for Ebola
Virus Disease; Dr. Margaret Chan, Director-General of
the World Health Organization (WHO); and Mr. Jackson
Niamah of Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) in Liberia
for their briefings.

We also commend the United States' leadership in
its presidency of the Security Council in devoting this
special meeting to the Ebola epidemic. On top of the
civil wars, the dire effects of climate change, terrorism
and other scourges that often affect the African
continent, the Ebola epidemic represents a threat to
peace and security in African countries and in the rest
of the world.

Three countries on the continent are directly
involved: Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia. The latest
WHO figures report that 2,600 persons have died out,
with at least 5,000 cases reported in all three countries.
Those figures may, unfortunately, be lower than the
actual ones, as many cases go unreported.

Liberia is by far the hardest hit country, judging
from the magnitude of the ravages caused by Ebola
in the country. As noted by the Secretary-General,
Ebola is not simply a public-health crisis; it has lasting
humanitarian, social and economic consequences
and could even threaten the economic stability of the
countries affected.

On the economic and social levels, the measures
taken by some international transportation companies
and some countries to limit air and sea traffic with
those countries affected by Ebola have dire effects
on the countries' economies, because they lead to a
decrease in the activity level in many sectors and affect
the living conditions of the populations.

According to a forecast by the World Bank, a drop
of around 2.5 per cent in gross domestic product is to
be feared in the three countries affected. The deaths
caused by Ebola, the precarity of the basic health and
social services and the lack of organization of State
institutions, which includes hospital closures in some
countries, are just some of the many consequences of
the Ebola epidemic. The case of Liberia is an illustrative
one in that respect and broadlyjustifies the call made to
the Secretary-General on 29 August last by the leaders
of the three countries, calling for the lifting of the
aforementioned measures.

The Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, during its sixteenth special session held in
Addis Ababa on 8 September, also called for similar
measures to be taken so as to prevent isolation of the
affected countries. In response, Senegal decided to
open a humanitarian corridor to facilitate the delivery
of assistance to the countries affected, and Ghana
authorized the establishment of an air bridge with
Liberia for humanitarian flights.

In Africa as a whole, we are seeing the continued
spread of the Ebola epidemic, with recent cases in
Nigeria, which, fortunately, have been contained. That
trend shows clearly that the situation, is far from being
contained, and that the continent and even the rest of
the world are at risk.

We are pleased at the somewhat tardy response of the
international community, led by the Security Council.
Today's meeting devoted to Ebola shows a collective
growing awareness of the gravity of the situation,
particularly through resolution 2177 (2014), which we
have just adopted unanimously and which calls for the
mobilization of the international community against
this scourge.

According to the United Nations, the cost of the
fight against the Ebola epidemic in West Africa will
total at least $1 billion, half of it for Liberia alone.
The gestures of solidarity from the African Union,
whose Peace and Security Council has decided to send
a military and civilian team to Liberia to fight Ebola,
are commendable, as are similar efforts on the part of
the Economic Community of West African States. We
also welcome the European Union's decision to provide
€140 million in financial aid, and that of the World
Bank, which has announced that it will divide around
$105 million between the three countries.

At the bilateral level, we were pleased to note the
decision of the United States Government to release
the substantial amount of $250 million in financial
assistance, including sending a specialist team of
3,000 soldiers to combat the Ebola outbreak. We
thank bilateral partners such as China, France, Cuba,
the United Kingdom, Chile, Pakistan and others for
their contributions to the fight against Ebola. And the
ministerial meeting on Ebola to be held next week on the
margins of the general debate of the General Assembly
will undoubtedly enable us to improve our formulation
of the priorities and our coordination of international
aid in order to combat this epidemic more effectively.

In conclusion, as the Director General ofthe World
Health Organization said, we believe that the crisis we
are facing today is unprecedented in our era. That is
why we think it is possible to continue to reduce the
spread of the Ebola epidemic only if the international
community can react more quickly and effectively.
One of the priorities in this fight is focusing particular
attention on children, women and other vulnerable
sectors of society. My country is ready to make a
financial contribution whose amount we will announce
shortly.

