Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank Mr. Swan, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General; Mr. Madeira, Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia; Ms. Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict; and

Ms. Arale, Executive Director of the Somali Women
Development Centre, for their briefings.

Located in the Horn of Africa, Somalia represents
an important strategic location. The maintenance of
peace and stability in the country is important to peace
and development in Africa as a whole. According to the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2019/661), in the
past three months the Federal Government of Somalia
has actively engaged in national reconstruction,
making progress in the political, economic and security
spheres. It is currently actively preparing for the 2020
general elections.

Nevertheless, the overall situation in Somalia
remains relatively complex, and peace and stability are
still facing challenges. The international community
should continue to play close attention to the situation
in Somalia and actively provide help.

I would like to make the following observations.
First, we should continue to help Somalia to strengthen
its governance capacity. On the basis of respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Somalia, the international community should
help improve the federal mechanism, strengthen the
relationship between the Federal Government and
the federal member states, and properly review the
Constitution. In the spirit of cooperation, all federal
member states of Somalia should fully respect and
safeguard the authority of the Federal Government
and jointly work towards national peace, stability
and development.

Secondly, we should continue to help Somalia to
build its security capacities. All international partners
should strengthen coordination and create synergies to
help the Somali Government steadily implement the
Somali transition plan so as to eventually transfer the
security tasks of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) to the Somali security forces. The United
Nations and the international community should provide
stable, predictable and sustainable financial support
to AMISOM. in order to help the troop-contributing
countries build their capacities to more effectively
combat terrorism.

Thirdly, we should continue to increase support for
humanitarian aid and economic and social development
in Somalia. This year, owing to the effects of climate
change, wars and conflicts, the humanitarian situation
in the country has deteriorated, and international
humanitarian assistance has major shortfalls. China
calls on the international community to further
increase humanitarian assistance and help Somalia
achieve internal social and economic development, thus
addressing the root causes of the conflict and ensuring
the long-term stability of Somalia.

Since its deployment, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) has played a key role
in maintaining peace and stability in Somalia. China
appreciates its efforts and will continue to support the
Special Representative and UNSOM. in the discharge of
their duties.

China has always supported Somalia's efforts
to achieve peace and development. It has actively
participated in the peace process in Somalia and has
played a positive role in promoting a political settlement
of the Somali issue. In June, in order to help the Somali
Government with the food crisis, China sent a shipment
of food aid to Somalia. China will continue to support
the Somalia's national reconstruction process and play a
constructive role in the achievement of peace, stability
and development in Somalia and the Horn of Africa.

