Mr. Annabi: As you have just said, Sir, members
of the Council have before them the latest report of the
Secretary-General, which describes in some detail the
recent developments in Afghanistan.

On 15 January, members of the Council received
a comprehensive briefing from Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi
on the adoption of the new Constitution - the most
significant step of the Bonn political process completed
during the reporting period. I will therefore not cover
the same ground. What I intend to do, Sir, with your
permission, is to use this opportunity to brief the
Council in broad terms on the challenges that remain in
implementing the Bonn Agreement, as well as the
measures which will lead to the further transition of
Afghanistan towards stability and effective governance.

After 26 months of steady progress in the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement's political
agenda, the process has now reached one of its last
major benchmarks: the holding of free and fair
elections. The purpose of these elections is to confer
political legitimacy on the new Government. This
legitimacy alone is not sufficient, however, and it is
therefore essential that the processes of reconstruction
and the building of State institutions accelerate. To
equip the new Government with the tools essential for
effective governance - viable, accountable and
representative State institutions that can ensure security
and establish a credible base for the development of the
country - further progress is required in the
implementation of security sector reform.

The ratification of the Constitution has helped
focus attention on the last remaining political
undertaking of the Bonn Agreement: the registration of
voters and the holding of credible elections. The
Constitution, by defining a system of government, also
clarified the types of elections that will eventually have
to take place. The Constitution requires elections for
the presidency and for the upper and lower houses of
the national assembly. The upper house - the
Meshrano Jirga or House of Elders - raises some
particularly difficult issues. Two thirds of the upper
house delegates are to be elected from district and
provincial councils. This means that district and
provincial councils must be elected. Only then can
there be elections from among the members of these
councils to determine who the members of the upper
house shall be.

The complexities of carrying out multi-level,
simultaneous elections in Afghanistan's current
circumstances are enormous. Not least of these
complexities is the fact that credible population figures
for all provinces are not yet available and a number of
district boundaries remain under dispute. Nonetheless,
the Constitution states that "every effort shall be made"
to hold these elections simultaneously. Every effort is
being made. Attention in Kabul is focused on this task
and we hope that a decision will be made in the very
near future on the timing and sequence of the elections.
We are very hopeful that this can happen before the
Berlin conference next week.

The lack of absolute clarity on this question today
will no doubt be frustrating to some. In the early days
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Brahimi used to caution
this Council that Afghanistan needs to "make haste
slowly". This paradox is especially true for elections.
On the one hand, we understand the urgency of holding
elections as close as possible to the Bonn time frame.
On the other hand, holding elections is not, as
Mr. Brahimi has also said many times, like making
instant coffee. The conditions must be conducive and
the preparations must be thorough for the effect of
elections to be positive and for the elections themselves
to be seen as free and fair.

Another paradox we have faced is the need to
work closely with the Afghans while recognizing that
there are few Afghans with electoral experience. The
Afghan Government and UNAMA have addressed this
by adopting a co-responsibility management model,
which has been defined in a presidential decree issued
on 18 February. This decree creates an Electoral
Secretariat in which international electoral experts are
paired with Afghan counterparts at the management
level. This will allow Afghan capacity to be built as
electoral activities are implemented.

At the implementation level, around 40,000
Afghans will be trained to manage 4,700 polling sites
on election day, when the United Nations will verify
the work of the registration and polling teams, which
will be composed entirely of Afghans. The Electoral
Secretariat will implement the instructions of the Joint
Electoral Management Body, whose mandate was
extended on 18 February to cover elections as well as
registration. Members of the Council will recall that
the JEMB is composed of six independent Afghan
electoral commissioners and five international electoral
experts.

Since its formation in July 2003, the Afghan
commissioners have been working with the
international experts and have acquired a great deal of
knowledge about electoral systems and operations. The
Joint Electoral Management Body will take the lead
role in deciding, based on technical criteria, when
elections will take place, and it will be responsible for
the preparation, conduct and oversight of those
elections.

In the meantime, the first phase of the registration
process has progressed more or less on target. As
indicated in the report, this phase, which covers the
eight main cities in Afghanistan, will continue until
early April. As of yesterday, 1.56 million voters out of
an estimated 1.9 million eligible voters in those cities
have registered. Of those, around 28 per cent are
women. More detailed information is provided in the
handout that I understand is being distributed to
members of the Council.

What this information suggests, however, is that
we are therefore well placed to complete the first phase
of registration as planned, especially if we can increase
the registration rate of women, which UNAMA is
working to achieve. I should note that one of the
positive trends in recent weeks has in fact been the
constant increase in the overall participation of women,
though it remains far lower than we would like,
especially in the southern areas of the country.

At the same time, preparations are being made to
launch the second phase of the registration process,
when registration teams will deploy to provincial
capitals, security conditions permitting. We hope to
register the remaining estimated 8 million eligible
voters during this second phase. That phase is
scheduled to begin on 1 May and to continue at some
4,200 sites for approximately one month. It is
anticipated that, as registration is extended to cover
districts which are unsafe, special attention by
domestic and international forces will be required, in
close coordination with the Coalition forces.

As we have stressed and must continue to stress,
success in completing the registration and in holding
elections will depend on support from Afghan and
international security forces. We welcome the
deployment of additional provincial reconstruction
teams, particularly in the south, as described in the
report. We welcome also President Karzai's request to
NATO to provide additional security during the
election period. UNAMA is currently holding
discussions with NATO on these security issues and
hopes to discuss them further at the Berlin conference
next week.

Success will also depend on continued and timely
donor support. I am pleased to say that the financial
requirements for registration are almost fully pledged.
Delays, however, in actually disbursing funds to the
United Nations Development Programme trust fund
continue to hinder and delay procurement, staffing and
planning activities. It currently takes an average of two
months from the time when funds are committed to the
time when they can be disbursed by the project. We
urge donors to work with us to speed up the
disbursement process as well as to set aside additional
funds for the other phases of the electoral process and
the elections themselves.

Despite a number of obstacles, the electoral
process is moving forward, albeit under very difficult
conditions. The next phase of registration will demand,
however, an enormous increase in logistics
requirements. It will also face greater security risks and
complex organizational requirements. In order to
succeed, we will be counting on the support of all of
our partners in this extremely important process.

Let me now turn to the issue of security. As the
report highlights, extremist attacks on aid agencies and
on government officials continue to occur,
predominately in the southern provinces, but also, in
some cases, against International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) troops in Kabul itself. Factional feuds,
rivalries and, increasingly, drug-related incidents
continue to affect the lives of the population. The
report notes that factional fighting has broken out in
the north-east, which has traditionally been one of the
safest regions of the country.

Unfortunately, recent events suggest that even
areas that most observers believe are stable and safe
are not immune to security problems. As members of
the Council are surely aware, fierce fighting erupted in
Herat on 21 March between factional forces loyal to
the Provincial Governor, Ismael Khan, and troops onal
to the government-appointed commander, General
Zahir. According to preliminary reports, the fighting,
which has its origins in long-standing tensions between
the two leaders, was ignited by a traffic accident
involving some of their respective supporters.

The traffic accident was apparently interpreted as
an attempt to assassinate the Governor. That
interpretation, or rumour, if you like - which was
false, as far as we can tell - reached the Governor's
son, Mirwais Siddiq, who was the Minister for Aviation
and Tourism, who then sought to use his vehicle to
forcibly enter the General's residential compound. The
General's guards fired at the vehicle, sparking an
exchange of gunfire in which the Minister, together
with Herat's head of police intelligence and the head of
the counter-narcotics department, were killed. The
Governor's forces then mobilized, deploying heavy
weapons and firing artillery and tank- and rocket-
propelled grenade rounds during a battle that lasted
over six hours and which resulted in the occupation of
General's Zahir's military headquarters by Governor
Ismael Khan's forces. Casualty estimates vary greatly,
from 20 to 100. A government delegation and
additional Afghan National Army troops have been
deployed to Herat. The situation is now reported to be
calm, but it remains very tense.

As members of the Council will recall from their
visit to the province last year, notwithstanding the
Governor's de facto independence from Kabul and
troublesome reports regarding human rights and the
treatment of women, Herat was considered to be one of
the most stable areas in Afghanistan. Indeed, the
province has one of the highest voter registration rates,
including female registration of some 36.8 per cent,
compared to a national average so far of 28 per cent.
This demonstrates that, even in an area like Herat,
considered to be conducive to electoral activities, the
security problem cannot be discounted.

In fact, the fighting in Herat, as well as the recent
factional fighting in the north, strongly indicates that
security remains an unsolved problem. In particular,
more progress in the implementation of security sector
reform is now required. This must include further
substantive reform of the Ministries of Defence and of
the Interior as well as the National Security
Directorate. It must also see the implantation of a more
vigorous disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme than the Ministry of
Defence has so far been willing to commit itself to.

UNAMA has advocated that 100 per cent of
heavy weapons should be cantoned and that 40 per cent
of Afghan militia forces be demobilized before
elections proceed. Without significant demilitarization,
genuine political choice, as required for a credible
election, is simply impossible, and events such as those
in Herat are likely to recur. However, the leadership of
the affected militia will need to be convinced that the
drawdown of their forces will not create an opening for
their rivals. The newly created national forces that are
being trained by the United States with the support of
France do not yet have the necessary capacity to
provide such assurances. Accordingly, the presence of
international forces, including provincial
reconstruction teams, remains indispensable to allay
the concerns of factional leaders and to allow the DDR
process to move forward.
At the same time, that presence will provide an
environment in which the Afghan security forces can
build capacity. That, in turn, will provide a clearer,
earlier, exit strategy for the international forces. The
international community, particularly NATO/ISAF and
the Afghan Government, will need to work hard
together towards this objective.

Past efforts to expand government authority to the
provinces, including the appointment by Kabul of
senior civil servants, have been hampered by the
insufficient number of trained and well-equipped
police. At present, a total of 4,339 officers have
received training. With the additional programmes
recently initiated by the German police project and
United States training programmes, there should be an
additional 20,000 trained officers by June this year.
Given the limited number of international police
trainers, we encourage the provincial reconstruction
teams to consider engaging in post-deployment
mentoring in support of the Ministry of the Interior.

Many members of the international community
have contributed to strengthening the system of law
and order through their contributions to the Law and
Order Trust Fund. Almost all of the stated financial
requirements were met last year. We hope that that
commitment and generosity will continue this year.

At the Tokyo donor conference held in December
2001, contributions from Member States for
reconstruction were solicited on the basis of a
preliminary assessment of immediate and short-term
reconstruction needs. Since its establishment on 19
June 2002, the Transitional Administration has
progressively taken over from the United Nations the
leadership and ownership of the coordination of
reconstruction priorities. That is a process that we
welcome, and we fully endorse the use of
Afghanistan's national budget as a mechanism for
coordinating assistance and reconstruction.

Looking towards the future, we are concerned -
and this concern is shared by the Afghan
Government - that the impact of Afghanistan's
economic growth during the past two years, estimated
at 30 per cent for 2002 and 20 per cent for last year,
has largely been felt in the urban centres alone. This
has prompted a demographic shift from rural areas to
the cities, exacerbating social tensions in urban centres.
In response, assistance policy has shifted from
humanitarian assistance towards broader, long-term
social protection programmes, so as to prepare the
ground for sustained economic recovery while
maintaining a safety net for the poorest and most
vulnerable.

Taking into account those emerging trends, which
help define long-term needs, the Government has
undertaken a comprehensive analytical exercise to
determine the cost of meeting its long-term recovery
and reconstruction targets, including the security
sector, which was not included at the Tokyo
conference. The report entitled "Securing
Afghanistan's Future", prepared by the Government in
close consultation with its international partners,
promotes a policy of broad-based economic growth
that is ethnically and regionally balanced, in order to
reinforce national reconciliation and peaceful political
development. The exercise determined that public
investment of $28.5 billion over seven years will be
required for the Afghan economy to become financially
viable.

However, the report recognizes that the economy
will continue to be plagued by the lucrative illegal drug
economy and related disputes over land ownership. The
scale and continuing proliferation of the production of
and trafficking in illegal narcotics has been reported by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in a
recent survey. The survey suggests that the drug
economy and the instability that it promotes remains
perhaps the greatest threat to the development of a
stable functioning State.

The Government's recent implementation of a
robust strategy to combat narcotics, with the support of
the United Kingdom as lead nation and of the coalition

forces, is encouraging. But the task, we have to say, is
enormous and requires the implementation of a
comprehensive policy of interdiction by Afghanistan as
well as by transit and recipient States, alongside
alternative livelihood options for farmers.

In conclusion, I have tried to highlight a few of
the major issues that the international community will
be facing in the year ahead. Many of these - and other
issues, such as human rights in particular - are
addressed in more detail in the Secretary-General's
report. Many of these issues will also be part of the
agenda at the international conference on Afghanistan's
future that will take place next week in Berlin. There
will be opportunity at Berlin to examine the way ahead,
as well as the difficulties that Afghanistan and the
international community face in fulfilling the letter and
spirit of the Bonn Agreement.

Nonetheless, if we look back for a moment, we
can see that the distance that has been travelled is
encouraging. The United Nations remains determined
to fulfil its Bonn Agreement commitments, and
accordingly the Secretary-General recommends in his
report that the mandate of UNAMA be extended for an
additional 12 months. We hope that the Council will
endorse that recommendation. We also hope that it will
extend to the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, the same strong
support that it always extended to his predecessor,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi.

