Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal): Let me start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this
meeting and the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Hedi
Annabi, for his very comprehensive and useful
briefing.

The presidency of the European Union will make
a statement after mine on the situation in East Timor.
Allow me to add some remarks on behalf of my own
country.

I would like to take advantage of this occasion to
extend a very special greeting to President-elect
Xanana Gusmao. We are used to seeing distinguished
guests seated in those chairs, some of them historically
important in the life of their countries. The members of
the Council may understand how pleased I am, as a
Portuguese ambassador, to have the opportunity to see
here today the newly and democratically elected
President of a territory which for a long time my
country had wanted to see free and independent.

President Xanana Gusmao, as well as Chief
Minister Mari Alkatiri, are the legitimate voices of a
courageous people whom my Government wishes to
praise and salute. Their visit to New York, on the eve
of East Timor's independence, is a tribute to the United
Nations contribution to their country's cause. It is also
a fresh opportunity to hear their important reading of
the current situation in the territory.

The next time the Security Council meets on East
Timor, it will probably be to approve the mandate for a
United Nations mission in the country after
independence. We very much expect that this mandate
will guarantee the necessary conditions for the
fulfilment of the obligations created by the
international community to the East Timorese situation.

Today seems like the right time to look back and
to briefly evaluate the work the United Nations has
done in East Timor to date, not to benefit history, but to
draw some lessons for the future. I do not think I need
to go into details, as most of the facts are well known
to us all. Throughout recent years, the Secretary-
General has presented a full account not only of United
Nations efforts and achievements, but also of the steps
necessary to guarantee a smooth transition to the
independence of East Timor. The Timorese themselves
have on several occasions contributed their own
experience and expectations to this Council. We all
recognize that East Timor is in a much better situation
today than it was three years ago and that most of that
improvement is due to United Nations efforts.

It is easy to read in the reports of the Secretary-
General how many schools have been rebuilt, how
many roads have been repaired, how many civil
servants have been recruited, and to simply take that
for granted. It is easy to look upon that lightly, without
realizing how much it means to East Timor, how
difficult it was to achieve and - I need to stress this -
how complex it will be to sustain.

Calling the United Nations role in East Timor so
far a success is already a platitude - a success that is
not without flaws or gaps, but still an obvious success.
We have always said that we should be careful not to
create a future situation in which all these efforts might
be jeopardized and wasted.

I want to take this occasion to reiterate once more
Portugal's appreciation for the excellent work of the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
throughout this entire process, from Ambassador
Jamsheed Marker and Ian Martin, to Sergio Vieira de
Mello. It was their dedication and skills which made it
possible to carry out the United Nations mandate in
East Timor. They did it at different times, but always
under strenuous conditions.

The recent appointment of my colleague and
friend, Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the post-
independence period gives me the guarantee that this
work will be furthered with the same ability. The
Secretary-General will have a distinguished and
outstanding diplomat, a man of good will and
exceptional experience, to represent him and to be the
face and the voice of the international community in
East Timor. We wish him all the best, and I want to
assure him of our full cooperation in his very
demanding task.

The case of East Timor has very painfully earned
the international community's support. I am sure that
the Council agrees with me that the Timorese have
proved to us that that support was totally deserved.
Anyone who has followed the process knows that we
are in the presence of a people of incredible courage
and tolerance, with leaders of remarkable vision and
commitment.

I believe we can consider the democratic process
in East Timor to be exemplary. The presidential
election of 14 April was just one more instance of this.
However, a new democracy is not merely a question of
new institutions; it is also about the capacity to face
internal political conflicts and disagreements and to
wisely manage the difficult periods - despite the lack
of resources and given the many expectations. It will
require an adjustment in mentality and adequate
material conditions on a sustained basis if it is to bear
fruit.

Difficult to establish, a democracy is even more
difficult to sustain and to strengthen. That is why we
believe that the emerging institutions in East Timor,
created under the responsibility of the United Nations,
must continue to be protected and supported - not for
too long, but for as long as is needed for us to be able
to say that the work of the international community and
its main organizations there is complete.

The United Nations, working with the
international community, is responsible for keeping an
adequate presence in East Timor and for supporting it
after independence. Portugal welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General and supports its
recommendations for the establishment of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). I believe it is worth underlining the
consistent manner in which this presence was planned.
About a year ago, a concept was outlined and was
subsequently developed into what we now have in front
of us: a clear and reasonable road map for the two
years ahead of us. We welcome the fact that this road
map provides a milestone-based approach, focused on
specific targets and on-the-ground assessments.

On security aspects, I would underline the need to
develop and strengthen the East Timorese institutions.
Well-trained police and defence forces that respect
human rights and civilian supervision are a requirement
not only for the sustainability of true independence but
also for guaranteeing democracy and the rule of law.
Since the United Nations police and military will have
executive as well as training functions, it will be very
important to clearly define arrangements guiding the
relationship between them and the Timorese forces,
namely, command and control mechanisms. We
encourage the efforts under way to finalize these
arrangements before independence.

The calm situation and the fact that there have
been no recent security incidents related to militia
activity from West Timor should not fool us into
thinking that there are no risks at all to the security and
stability of East Timor. We firmly believe that the
current situation is the result of the presence of a robust
United Nations peacekeeping force and the deterrent
effect that it has had during almost three years of
operation.

After 20 May, the international lights will start
fading over East Timor. As soon as the situation in the
new country becomes one of business as usual in the
eyes of the international community, the Council - as
is perfectly understandable - will be inclined to put
East Timor into its archives. But what will happen if
things go wrong, if the East Timorese leaders'
efforts - even with the residual support of the
international community - prove insufficient to tackle
the actions of those who may be interested in
disrupting normal life in the territory? How long will
the Council take to re-engage by taking a concrete
course of action to counter such acts? Why take that
risk, given the immense financial and political cost for
the future that it might entail? It would also risk the
credibility that the United Nations has earned in recent
years.

We are not asking the Council to consider
creating a sort of dependent State - a permanently
assisted administration. Very simply, we are asking for
the phasing-out of the military and security forces to be
undertaken on the basis of a clear assessment of
concrete risks, not on the basis of those that are
surfacing under current circumstances. In particular, we
consider that no final assessment should be made, with
practical consequences for capacity on the ground,
without taking into account the experience of the first
months after the independence.

It is not my intention to try to invoke ghosts or to
create artificial threats. By nature, we diplomats are
interested in being professional optimists but we also
want to have permanent reasons to remain such. That is
why I want the Council to know that it is my
Government's firm belief that there are important
potential security risks that need to be taken fully into
account, not only with regard to the external dimension
but, increasingly, on the internal front.

I do not want to create alarm or sound gloomy,
but I must call the attention of the Council to the
potential threats that exist in Timorese society that will
challenge the new Government very seriously. This is a
society where opportunities for the new generation are
still lacking, where important sectors of the former
resistance and the former administration still tend to
feel excluded from the new social, political and
economic life, and where a possible new wave of
refugees could trigger an immense social problem, with
public-security implications.

In addition, the new Government will have to
deal with the economic and social impact of the
drawdown of the international community. Obviously,
the international presence will have less and less
weight in the local economy, and the Timorese will
have to adapt their lives to this new reality. But it is
essential to recognize that for the new Government this
will represent considerable additional challenges. The
extent of those challenges will not be fully known until
some time after independence.

Regarding the civilian component of UNMISET, I
would like to highlight once again the importance of
including the Civilian Support Group in it. I do not
need to repeat the fundamental importance we attach to
these core functions in ensuring that the achievements
of the public administration are not jeopardized. We
also welcome the intention to include a human rights
office, as well as a serious crimes unit, in the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. In
the past, I have spoken extensively in the Council
about the fundamental importance of justice and the
judicial system in East Timor, therefore, and I do not
intend to take up more of the Council's time on this.

Before I conclude, I would like to express
Portugal's appreciation for the work that the
international financial institutions and the United
Nations specialized agencies have accomplished to date
in East Timor in their different areas of expertise. We
believe that the joint efforts of these institutions, the
Secretariat, non-governmental organizations and
bilateral donors will be crucial not only for the
successful accomplishment of the United Nations
mandate but also for a smooth transition to a normal
development framework. In this regard, we welcome
the information in the Secretary-General's report about
the mechanism set up for coordination among these
different actors.

In less than a month East Timor will be
independent. We will all be represented at the
ceremonies in Dili to celebrate with the Timorese that
important and historic moment. I believe that the
Timorese will see that presence as a sign of the
continued commitment and support of the international
community, especially the United Nations, for the
future of their territory and their country. Let us not
disappoint them.
