Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to reiterate our congratulations to Malaysia on
its presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Madam President, we know that Malaysia has all
the requisite qualities to conduct a debate on this
issue, namely, the fate of children in armed conflict.
Furthermore, my country's delegation would like to pay
tribute to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF for their briefings. We also pay
tribute to the Malaysian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Anifah Aman.

The Sudan aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Arab States. We welcome the fact that
resolution 2225 (2015), adopted this morning, mandates
that those parties responsible for abductions are to
be listed in the annex of future annual reports of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

The rights of children are a priority for the Sudanese
Government. Proof can be seen in the Government's
measures and progressive steps, of which I would like
to cite a few examples.

First, in terms of our international commitments,
my country's Government has ratified the optional
protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child - the Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflict and the Optional Protocol
on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography. My Government has also ratified the
two relevant Conventions of the International Labour
Organization related to children, No. 182 of 1999, on
the worst forms of child labour, and No. 138 of 1973,
on the minimum age for admission to employment and
work. We supported and took part in the ceremony that
launched the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign on the
issue of children and armed conflict, organized by the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and UNICEF.

Secondly, in our national legislation, the code for
the police, the security forces and the armed forces
prohibits the recruitment of those under the age of 18.
We also have a justice system for young people, and a
2010 law that deals with child employment. A number
of measures in the justice system cover minors. In
regard to the mechanisms for the protection of children,
the Sudanese Government has established a special unit
within the armed forces to protect children.

Thirdly, in the Ministry of the Interior, we have
established a National Council for Child Welfare. The
Prosecutor General is responsible for dealing with
crimes committed in Darfur, for instance, and has
acted on all allegations since 2003, particularly the
violations of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
In addition, we have established a commission on the
recruitment of children in the Darfur and Blue Nile
provinces. In July 2014, we developed a 10-year plan to
promote and protect the rights ofthe child in the Sudan.

Fourthly, in terms of our cooperation with United
Nations agencies responsible for the rights of the child,
the Sudanese Government, through its Permanent
Mission to the United Nations, remains in contact with
the Offices of the Under-Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict, and UNICEF when dealing with
concerns regarding children. My Government is
continuing its efforts to promote the status of children.
The National Council for Child Welfare in the Sudan has
established a national coordination committee and a task
force on the status of children in emergency situations,
which deals with all issues related to children. Among
the committee's mandates is the protection of children
in emergency situations and the coordination of issues
with UNICEF and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

In that regard, the National Council for Child
Welfare in the Sudan organized a seminar on national
cultures and their impact on the protection of children,
particularly with regard to the recruitment of children
in armed conflicts. Furthermore, the various players in
that area are striving to complete the final work plan
on the protection of children in armed conflicts. In the
light of those policies and the specific steps we have
taken with regard to children, we call for the Sudan to
be removed from the listing in the annex to the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the situation of
children in armed conflict.

I would like here to categorically refute and reject
the contents of paragraph 183 of that report, which
contains errors that lead to confusion. The paragraph
is based on naive accusations that were broadcast by
Radio Dabanga about the village of Thabit last October.
We categorically reject that information. We would like
to remind members of the Council of the documentary
evidence that has been presented in that regard and
which should put an end to those lies once and for all.
Those accusations were very naive and superficial lies.
No one with the least experience in the traditions of
those nomadic and rural communities could believe
such erroneous information. Members will recall that
that radio station is simply a source of lies and is used
as a tool by the armed groups that reject peace, with its
headquarters in the Netherlands. UNAMID visited the
area and issued a report in November 2014 that refuted
the allegations. We wish, therefore, for this newer
information to be reflected in the Secretary-General's
report, because the Secretary-General's reports to the
Council must be based on correct, verified information
and not on rumours. Furthermore, there is no link
whatsoever between that information and the mandate
of Ms. Zerrougui. The same information appeared
in the Secretary-General's report on sexual violence
(S/2015/203), which was submitted to the Security
Council in April. That constitutes duplication, because
there are two offices presenting separate reports on
the same issue, both of which were submitted to the
Security Council. So, is that not duplication?

There are also contradictions in the report. I am
speaking here of paragraph 174. Although there has
been no new case of recruitment by the Sudanese Army,
the United Nations received reliable reports indicating
that the Popular Defence Force was recruiting and using
children; however, the Popular Defence Force referred
to in that paragraph has now become an integral part
of the Sudanese Armed Forces, and they assume the
same responsibility as our armed forces. That has been
the case for years. It is not a new fact. Furthermore,
eyewitnesses suggest that 15- to l7-year-old boys are
present in the rapid-response force in Nyala. So our
question is whether any eyewitness could precisely
determine the age of the individuals participating.
According to paragraph 184, schools were damaged
or destroyed. Eight attacks were pointed out. But the
report does not detail where those alleged incidents
took place, or whether they were carried out by rebel
groups with which members are familiar and which
were described in detail in the Secretary-General's
latest report on Darfur (S/2015/378).

In order to adopt a comprehensive approach with
respect to children, we urge that the following measures
be taken. First of all, we must help countries affected
by conflict put an end to such conflicts, and we must
convince or force rebel forces to lay down their weapons
and to participate actively and seriously in the political
settlement process. We must also tackle the underlying
causes of the recruitment of children into armed forces
and the various root causes that led to the conflicts
themselves. Secondly, we must deal with causes such as
poverty and climate change, we must end the unilateral
sanctions against certain countries, we must write off
the external debt of developing countries and provide
them with technical assistance, we must ensure capacity-
building in terms of education and health care, and we
must also help such countries to rebuild. Thirdly, it is
not enough for the rebel groups to sign various plans to
combat the recruitment of children. We must condemn
the acts of those rebel groups and force them to disarm
and participate in the negotiation process. Fourthly,
Governments must be able to take part in all efforts to
deal with children and armed conflict, based on respect
for national sovereignty and transparency.

To conclude, the delegation of the Sudan reasserts
its commitment to work with the United Nations
agencies dealing with children and armed conflict, but
we call for the Secretary-General's reports to be based
on verified and true information. They should not use
confusing words with variable geometry. Finally, we
call on all information or allegations to be shared with
the Permanent Mission to the United Nations of the
country concerned and with the Government before
they are included in the Secretary-General's reports
and submitted to the Council.

