Ms. McAskie: Let me thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is
particularly pertinent at this moment, for, thus far, all
diplomatic and military efforts to end what has been
described as "Africa's First World War" have not
shown results, while the humanitarian crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains one of the
worst in the world in terms of both intensity and
magnitude.

The overall situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in our view from the humanitarian side,
continues to deteriorate as military activity occurs with
varying intensity and skirmishes from time to time
develop into full-scale battles. The Council is familiar
with the unfortunate events that occurred in Kisangani
a few months ago, having itself sent a mission to the
region. United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations have been forced repeatedly to suspend
or forgo operations throughout the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In most parts of Orientale
province and parts of Equateur province not under
government control, many areas remain inaccessible as
a result of a dilapidated or non-existent road network
and rampant insecurity. There are recurrent epidemics,
a scarcity of medicines and a collapsed health-care
system.

The figures of people affected by this conflict are
staggering. In three years of protracted civil war, the
number of conflict-affected from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has soared to around 16 million
people - a full 33 per cent of the population. Council
members are familiar with a study issued earlier this
year by the International Rescue Committee, which
concluded that up to 1.7 million people -
approximately 600,000 of them children under five -
are likely to have died as a result of the war in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
alone. About one third of those deaths are actually
attributable to violence. The rest are due mainly to
preventable diseases and malnutrition caused by the
lack of access, the lack of assistance and the sheer
inability of people to live a normal life. The study
suggests that child mortality rates in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are among the highest in the
world and, tragically, this is likely to increase even
further.

Flagrant human rights violations prevail
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
occur in an atmosphere of total impunity. In terms of
displaced persons, civilians in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are afforded no protection, but are, on the
contrary, systematically targeted by all parties to the
conflict. We have provided a series of briefing maps to
the Council from which members will see that over two
million people have been displaced.

Of particular concern is the situation of the Kivus
and Orientale province, where insurgencies, counter-
insurgencies and ethnic tensions have led to some
950,000 civilians being displaced. This is further
complicated by the presence of armed groups, which
use random violence against civilians as a strategy of
war.

Of particular concern is the situation of large
numbers of people who have opted for refuge in the
rainforest - around 200,000 in all. Many of them have
suffered repeat displacements; they have fled to remote
areas, subsisting mainly on wild berries and raw food,
with little or no access to health care. We also continue
to learn of internally displaced persons who are
systematically subjected to forced labour, finding
themselves in the hands of the military or various
militia groups as prisoners or hostages. Children suffer
an equally terrible fate and we continue to hear reports
of recruitment of Congolese children, some of them
being taken to neighbouring countries.

As far as refugees are concerned, there are
currently over 300,000 in neighbouring countries, with
a rapid and recent exodus from Equateur province into
the Republic of Congo - a tragic situation for a
country that has recently been coming out of a war of
its own, now to suffer the double burden of a
tremendous inflow of refugees; 100,000 have fled to
the Republic of Congo alone and another 10,000 to the
Central African Republic. In the past two weeks, 5,000
more people have fled from Katanga into Zambia. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo, however, is also,
conversely, host to over 330,000 refugees who have
fled civil strife in the neighbouring countries of
Rwanda, Burundi, Angola, Uganda and the Sudan.

What does this mean for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo? It means that the economy has all but
crumbled, leaving the vast majority of the country's
population to face dire financial hardship. The war,
compounded by deep-rooted economic and social
problems, mismanagement and neglect, has rendered
food shortages commonplace and has sparked a
devastating increase in malnutrition. There are extreme
food deficits ranging from 20 per cent to 55 per cent of
demand in some parts of the country. The foreign
exchange rate is at twice its previous valuation; there is
a standing ban on the use of foreign currency, and the
already limited resources available for humanitarian
activities have depreciated seriously, putting at risk
those who are most in need of assistance.
Humanitarian agencies find it increasingly
difficult to operate in this environment and to provide
the level of assistance needed to save lives. The war
has had the twin effects of creating new populations in
need and at the same time creating untenable security
environments that impede access to those same
populations. This is further exacerbated by logistical
constraints which render the delivery of assistance to
many remote areas extremely difficult, if not
impossible.

These problems are encountered both in
Government-controlled regions of the country and in
areas controlled by all three rebel entities: the Rally for
Democracy (RCD), the Movement for the Liberation of
the Congo (MLC) and the Rally for Democracy-
Liberation Movement (RCD-ML). In Government
areas, the problems stem from strict administrative
procedures surrounding the granting of access, while in
rebel-held areas lack of access derives from the
prevailing lack of security. In one notable instance
where obstacles prevented access, an estimated
300,000 displaced persons in southern Equateur and
another 150,000 internally displaced persons in
northern Katanga were left without desperately needed
humanitarian assistance despite the fact that the
humanitarian agencies had both the means and the
capacity to undertake delivery; they were prevented
from entering.

Despite those problems, the United Nations
agencies on the ground continuously work hard to
respond to the situation at hand. That has resulted, for
instance, in a number of breakthrough operations in
some of the most critical conflict-affected areas,
including Kasai, northern Katanga, Equateur, Ituri and
South Kivu. The United Nations maintains a country-
wide presence in all 11 provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The United Nations agencies
and the Humanitarian Coordinator enjoy the extremely
close and useful collaboration of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), and the comprehensive support
of Mr. Kamel Morjane, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. I would say that this is one of
the best examples of political and humanitarian
cooperation in the realm of United Nations exercises.

This year, significant success was achieved-
and we have indeed had some success - through the
implementation of a nationwide polio eradication
campaign that reached more than 10 million children
under the age of five, and through other country-wide
and cross-front-line initiatives. For example, this year's
State examination campaign included 28,000 students.
It is hard to tell how many children are in school in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo these days;
estimates range from 35 per cent to 50 per cent of
school-age children receiving primary education.

Against that backdrop, the consolidated appeals
for funds for the year 2000 requested $71.4 million.
The response to date has been 61 per cent:
$43.6 million. However, more than 80 per cent of the
funding provided was for food assistance and food
security programmes, with critically low funding
received for primary health, epidemics control, child
protection, human rights and confidence-building
sectors. Because of the magnitude of the crisis, the net
impact of the humanitarian assistance provided in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can only be
described as minimal. In 2000, of the 16 million
war-affected people, less than 50 per cent received
humanitarian assistance, and even that on a sporadic
basis.

Earlier today, the Secretary-General launched the
appeals for 2001. The 2001 appeal for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo articulates a humanitarian
strategy with the following elements: immediate
provision of life-saving support; enhancing survival
strategies and coping mechanisms of war-affected
populations; facilitation and promotion of free
circulation of persons and goods across the front line;
and support to community-based self-recovery
initiatives.

Members of the Council will see from the
information package provided that this coming year's
consolidated appeal includes projects that target
different levels of intervention, from household food
security and health interventions at the local level, to
wider assistance programmes requiring participation
from all parts of the country. To prevent an even larger
humanitarian catastrophe, this is one of the few appeals
in which we have vastly increased the amount of
money requested, but to a relatively modest
$139.5 million- modest, that is, in relation to the
need. A keystone of humanitarian response will be the
emergency humanitarian intervention mechanism that
we have created, which provides funds for rapid
emergency response to situations such as those that
arose in Kisangani last June and most recently in
Equateur province. It makes funds available locally
through donations from our donors, funds we can
access immediately to respond to an on-the-spot crisis.

As the humanitarian situation becomes
increasingly grave for growing numbers of Congolese,
the efforts of the United Nations and its implementing
partners are being hampered by the lack of security,
limited access to affected populations and critically
few resources for life-saving interventions. What is
needed now is a genuine commitment by all parties to
ensure that access for humanitarian agencies is
improved. I would urge Council members to impress
upon all parties to the conflict the need for cooperation
to ensure full humanitarian access across the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It would be of paramount importance for all
parties to the conflict fully to respect international
humanitarian law, human rights law and the principles
of engagement for humanitarian assistance in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo drawn up by the
humanitarian agencies, in order to ensure that civilians
will not be targeted by violence or forced to flee their
homes, and that humanitarian personnel will be
provided with the necessary guarantees of safety and
security.

Moreover, the world community must realize that
the means currently available to the relief community
are not commensurate with the magnitude of what is
certainly one of the world's gravest humanitarian
crises.

We would like to draw the attention of the
international donor community to what we see as the
crucial symbiosis between peace and humanitarian
assistance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that increased donor assistance can reinforce
common objectives of life-saving, rebuilding
livelihoods and promoting peace and security.

Particular attention could be given to the security
of aid workers operating in highly insecure and volatile
areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A
particular request is made in the consolidated appeal
for support for the security element.

I would say that this past year has been a year
that signified the departure from a passive to a more
challenging and result-oriented approach to tackling
the devastating effects of war. The achievements could
be rated as significant despite the enormous
difficulties. But the low level of funding means that
humanitarian operations remain on a hand-to-mouth
basis.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is under
political, social and economic stress, and its problems
are deeply interconnected with those of its neighbours.
The people of the Congo are becoming exhausted, no
longer able to cope with the violence and
impoverishment to which they are subjected on a daily
basis. The failure to sustain any semblance of normalcy
must be recognized as the result of decades of poor
government and an absence of governance. Ironically,
it is that absence of governance that has taught the
people of the Congo how to survive and that has
sparked their resilience.

We recognize that a commitment from the
international community to address the humanitarian
situation will not by itself solve the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We fully support
the efforts of the Security Council to continue to seek
lasting solutions to address the military and political
issues, in concert with humanitarian efforts. While the
humanitarian situation is extremely grave, we know
that a humanitarian response is not viewed as a
substitute; nor should it preclude the search for a long-
term solution.

