Mr. Motoc (Romania): I warmly welcome you,
Sir, and congratulate you and your country, Germany,
on your assumption of the presidency. I also pay tribute
to Ambassador de La Sabliere and his team for the
outstanding performance of their duties during France's
presidency in the month of March.

I would like to join other delegations in thanking
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
excellent opening briefing.

I would like to convey my gratitude and
congratulations to the German Government for having
organized, with dedication and great professionalism,
the Berlin conference on Afghanistan. Our thanks also
go to the co-Chairs of the meeting: the high-level
representatives of Afghanistan, Japan and the United
Nations.
Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the Permanent Representative of Ireland
on behalf of the European Union. I would also like to
make a few specific comments.

Let me begin by hailing the successful outcome
of the Berlin conference. In Berlin, as, previously, in
Bonn and Tokyo, the international community
conveyed a strong message of commitment to and
solidarity with a valued friend, Afghanistan. In Berlin,
Afghanistan made clear its interest, ability and
commitment to continue and successfully to complete
its transition towards prosperity, stability and
democracy.

The conference took place at a significant
moment - only a few months before presidential and
parliamentary elections. It was successful in providing
a vision and an agenda for the future. It tailored a solid
political, security and reconstruction framework to the
expectations of the Afghan people.

Romania welcomes in particular the work plan
adopted by the Afghan Government. The concrete steps
envisaged in that respect should be regarded as part of
a wider strategy of overall reform for Afghan society.
If it is to be successful, the implementation of the work
plan should evolve gradually into a useful, practical
tool for the Afghan administration. We strongly
encourage the Afghan authorities to closely monitor the
implementation of the objectives and the observance of
the deadlines that have been set. In this way,
coordination among national institutions will be
enhanced, self-assessment capabilities improved and
the ability to match aspirations and resources
increased.

With regard to drug trafficking in Afghanistan,
Romania has stated repeatedly that counter-narcotics
efforts at the national level should be accompanied by
coordinated actions undertaken at the regional and even
the global levels. The adoption by Afghanistan and its
neighbours of the Declaration on Counter-Narcotics is
therefore highly commendable.

Translating the Berlin declaration into tangible
results requires not only steady political commitment
but, equally, substantial financial support. In this
context, we welcome the significant multi-year
financial contributions pledged by international donors
in Berlin.

It was with great pride that Romanian Foreign
Minister, Mr. Mircea Geoana, reiterated, in Berlin,
Romania's commitment to a long-term, solid and multi-
dimensional contribution to Afghanistan.

We are committed to the success of the NATO
mission in Afghanistan. In our view, improving
security remains the key prerequisite for the
benchmarks ahead, including the conduct of free, fair
and credible elections in September.

Romania will continue to demonstrate its
commitment and cooperate with all the States
participating in the reconstruction process of
Afghanistan in order to reach the common goal of
security and stability.

Additional military personnel will be deployed in
Afghanistan as part of the reinforcement of our
participation in the International Security Assistance
Force. Romania will participate, starting this summer,
with representatives in the Kunduz Provincial
Reconstruction Team. We will continue to actively
consider taking part in additional Provincial
Reconstruction Teams. At the same time, Romania will
continue contributing to the capacity-building of the
national armed forces of Afghanistan.

In Berlin, Romania also stated its readiness to
invest in the soft side of reconstruction - in areas
capable of making a difference on the ground, such as
institutional reconstruction, education, health and
agriculture. Recently, Romania hosted an Afghan
delegation in order to explore jointly additional means
and areas of assistance and cooperation. We are
determined to assist the Afghan authorities, together
with other countries, in a matter of great concern -
namely, fighting drug production and trafficking. To
this effect, we are considering a pilot project aimed at
providing Afghan farmers with alternative crops to the
poppy fields.

Let me conclude by pointing out Romania's
confidence in Afghanistan's future. The people and
Government of Afghanistan must be proud of what
they have accomplished so far. They should confidently
look forward to the moment when their country will
assume its rightful place among free, prosperous and
democratic nations. The Berlin conference has
succeeded in bringing that moment closer.

