Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this very interesting meeting, and to congratulate you
on the way in which you have conducted the business
of the Council over the past 30 days.

(spoke in English)

The United Nations has been effective and even
indispensable in post-conflict developments in
Mozambique, Guatemala, Afghanistan, the Balkans and
many other places. It has guided and monitored
political change, including democracy and governance,
in Bosnia, Kosovo and East Timor. It has kept women's
issues and interests on the agenda of change, when they
risked being set aside for a later that would never
come, in places such as Afghanistan, Kosovo and East
Timor. It has protected children in conflict and in post-
conflict stress, as United States Fund for the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) reminded us
recently.

The United Nations has brought justice to the
repressed through the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda and in the
emerging Sierra Leone court. In each case, the role and
the centrality of the United Nations has been different.
As Secretary-General Annan said this morning, every
conflict is different, every post-conflict situation is
different, and each model of intervention by the
international community will be different.

In Iraq, we have an immediate post-conflict
humanitarian and reconstruction challenge before us. It
is in everyone's interests, especially in the interests of
the Iraqi people, to ensure that Iraq becomes an
economically functional, politically stable and entirely
self-governing State, respectful of the rule of law, of
democratic principles and of international norms.

The coalition nations currently controlling Iraqi
territory have distinct responsibilities as occupying
Powers to maintain public order and safety, protect
civilians and provide essential services. The wider
international community - especially the United
Nations and the international financial institutions -
also has an indispensable role to play.

While systems are in place for humanitarian
assistance, a framework is needed to facilitate greater
engagement and support in the stabilization and
reconstruction of Iraq. The United Nations has
extensive expertise that can and should be brought to
bear under these circumstances. The United Nations
and its agencies have been heavily involved in Iraq
since the first Gulf war and have an in-depth
understanding of the circumstances that Iraq faces and
of the challenges that it will have to surmount. The
United Nations is fully engaged through its agencies
and resources on the ground, providing much-needed
humanitarian assistance. The United Nations Children's
Fund, the United Nations Development Programme, the
World Food Programme - those institutions know
Iraq. We need to build on the strength of their
engagement and to determine how best we can make
further use of their experience and their expertise.

In Iraq, as in all post-conflict situations, our
common overarching goals must be to meet the needs
of the people and to support them in their course
towards stability, recovery and reconstruction. To those
ends, our approach needs to be flexible and pragmatic.
Canada will put the interests of the Iraqi people at the
heart of its decision-making. Canada has allocated
approximately $75 million to humanitarian relief and
reconstruction, of which about $45 million has already
been spent. Prime Minister Chretien announced
yesterday that Canada will expand the role of its three
transport aircraft in the region to support immediate
humanitarian and reconstruction efforts. Canada is also
prepared to make police, corrections and legal officers
available to provide assistance and advice on
governance and security sector reform, and we are also
prepared to draw on select units of Canada's Disaster
Assistance Response Team if that is needed.

We would be remiss if we did not make two
further points. The first point is something that we
could draw from Kosovo: do not draw lessons learned
too early; wait for the dust to settle. And secondly, do
not forget the crises in Africa. Poverty, HIV/AIDS and
drought are killing people there, far from the eyes of
the media. The people there need us as urgently today
as they did on 19 March: the war in Iraq has made them
no less vulnerable. Let us make sure that it makes them
no more vulnerable.

