Mr. Yusuf (Somalia): Allow me first of all to
express to you, Madam President, the satisfaction of the
delegation of Somalia at seeing your country preside
over the Security Council this month. The United
States, to which we wish every success and pledge
our full cooperation during its presidency, is a key
partner of Somalia. I would also like to congratulate the
delegation of the United Kingdom on the able manner
in which it guided the work of the Council last month.

Somalia extends is deep gratitude to the members
of the Security Council for their valuable support in
Somalia in all areas, including addressing piracy and
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia. The robust
commitment of the Somali Government and the
international community has resulted in a massive
reduction in piracy in recent years. However, piracy
off the coast of Somalia must be put in the context of
the political security and economic challenges facing
my country on land. As the most recent report of the
Secretary-General notes,

"Piracy offthe coast of Somalia remains suppressed
but still not eradicated; it will not be eradicated
until the root causes of piracy, including the lack
of alternative livelihoods, insecurity and weak
governance structures, are addressed." (S/2019/867, para. 65)

In that regard, we ask Member States and international

organizations for their continued support for the Somali

Government to address the root causes of piracy,
while maintaining the required pressure at sea against
perpetrators of piracy.

According to the Secretary-General's report, piracy
is only one of the many threats to maritime security
off the coast of Somalia, and the persistence of illegal,
unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing in Somalia's
exclusive economic zone remains a major concern.
We welcome the acknowledgement in resolution 2500
(2019), which was just adopted, of the complex link
between IUU fishing and piracy, and of the fact that
the phenomenon of illegal unreported and unregulated
fishing in Somalia's exclusive economic zone results
in a loss of revenue and can lead to destabilization in
coastal communities.

In that regard, we urge Member States to abide by
domestic and international regulations and to take all
necessary measures to ensure compliance and prevent
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing off the
coast of Somalia. The Somali Government has taken
several steps to counter the threat of piracy, as well as
the root causes of IUU fishing in Somalia, including by
strengthening the national legal and policy framework
and building the capacity of the Maritime Police Unit
and its coordination with all federal member states.

We remain concerned about the abuse of the
process of piracy-related prosecution taking place
outside Somalia. In some cases, we have observed that
defendants who were illiterate were not offered proper
interpretation. Moreover, the defendants were required
to sign away their right of appeal, with the facilitation
of the United Nations. That is unconstitutional in
Somalia and in the foreign prosecuting State in this
case. Neither the courts of the foreign prosecuting
State nor the United Nations has any jurisdiction over
Somalia to enforce such a decision.

We will continue to work on safeguarding our
territorial water and land and welcome the cooperation
of Member States in fighting piracy, in line with
domestic and international law. The Somali Government
welcomes the safe release of the long-held Iranian
hostage in September, and we will spare no effort to
ensure the swift release of the remaining hostages.

My last comment is an expression of gratitude to the
five outgoing non-permanent Council members that will

leave this organ at the end of the month - Equatorial
Guinea, Cote d'Ivoire, Kuwait, Peru and Poland - for
their valuable contribution and cooperation during
their two-year terms. In particular, I wish to deliver a
message of appreciation from the Somali Government
and people to the brotherly State of Kuwait for not only
playing an active role in sustaining peace in Somalia,
but also for serving as a contributor and partner in the
country's socioeconomic development, especially in

the area of education.

I also wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
and emphasize our deep gratitude to Ambassador
Mansour Alotaibi and his dedicated team for the
exemplary, active and effective work that brought
to fruition the sheer political will to assist and help
Somalia's Government and people to stand together in
a united well-functioning nation.

(spoke in Arabic)
I thank them.

The meeting rose at10.15 a.rn.
