Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the President of the
International Residual Mechanism of the Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Carmel Agius, and Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz, for their enlightening and detailed
briefings to the Security Council today.

Aware of the ongoing budgetary challenges faced
by the Mechanism as a result of the budget reductions
approved by the General Assembly in July 2018, we
applaud the continued efforts made by the Mechanism
to carefully fulfil its mandate in the most efficient and
effective manner, bearing in mind the need to ensure
respect for due process and the fundamental rights of
accused and convicted persons subject to itsjurisdiction.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea takes
strong note of the significant progress of the work
of the Mechanism in relation to judicial activities,
administration, enforcement of sentences, protection
of victims and witnesses, and management of archives
during the reporting period. We are encouraged by
the innovative strategies presented in the report of
the President of the Mechanism (S/2019/888, annex I),
to increase efficiency and harmonize practices and
procedures between branches, such as having launched
a unified filing system and a judicial records and
archives database for both branches, and the creation
of a Judicial Records and Court Operations Unit in
Arusha to operate alongside its existing counterpart of
the branch in The Hague, among important initiatives.
Given the importance that we attach to these issues,
we welcome the Mechanism's adoption of the Code
of Conduct to Prevent Harassment, Including Sexual
Harassment, at United Nations System Events.

With regard to the Practice Direction on the
Procedure for the Determination of Applications for
Pardon, Commutation of Sentence and Early Release
of Persons Convicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia or the Mechanism, we are pleased to
learn that the President of the Mechanism is continuing
consultations with other parties concerned and
considering putting in place conditions on early release
in accordance with resolution 2422 (2018). We hope
that the work he is doing to introduce improvements
to these procedures will be successful because of the
relevance that these decisions have for the victims.

We also note the Prosecutor's unstinting work with
and ongoing support for national authorities, which is
reflected in the large volume of requests for assistance
that the Office receives, as well as its provision of
assistance in specific cases and the intensive training
that its judicial authorities continue to undertake. It is
our hope that despite the challenges facing the Office of
the Prosecutor, the remaining eight fugitives indicted
by the International Criminal Tribunal in Rwanda will
be located and arrested.

The successful work of the Mechanism and its
ability to render justice to the victims depends to a
large extent on the efforts and cooperation of States,
especially with regard to operations for the location,
apprehension and surrender of fugitives and the
relocation of released persons. In this regard, we call
for the full cooperation of the States Members of
the United Nations to strengthen the much-needed
assistance to the Mechanism, as mandated in resolution
2422 (2018). Providing the Mechanism with the
resources that it requires is another way to ensure the
success of its mandate, which is why we hope that its
budget proposal for the coming year will be approved.
We must not forget that the Mechanism stands among
the international criminal justice institutions that
combat impunity, which can contribute to deterring
and preventing the most serious crimes of international
significance and to maintaining the peace and security
that we seek.

In conclusion, and bearing in mind that this will
be our last statement on this issue, we wish to clearly
reaffirm that the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, in its
unwavering commitment to strengthening the rule of
law and promoting justice, supports the Mechanism
in all aspects of its work as an instrument mandated
by the Security Council to administer justice and end
impunity to achieve the international peace and security
that we seek. We would also like to thank and commend
the Mission of Peru for transparently, efficiently and
dynamically chairing the Council's Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals.

