Mr. Cabral (Portugal): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Jan Kubis for his briefing. I also welcome to
the Security Council Ambassador Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, and I thank him for his
statement.

Portugal also aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered in the name of the European Union.

Next Thursday, the Security Council will be
called upon to adopt a draft resolution renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). Portugal agrees with the basic
proposals contained in that mandate. In it, the Security
Council builds upon the enhanced role of the Afghan
Government and, overall, of the national institutions in
the process of transition and increased Afghan
leadership and ownership. Such emphasis is a
recognition of the fact that Afghan institutions are on
the way to an increased capacity to undertake their
constitutional mandate for the Afghan people in all
aspects of the country's activity. At the same time, the
proposed renewed mandate aims at striking a balance
between the growing fulfilment of that objective and
the need for an active, strong and secure presence of
the United Nations throughout Afghanistan. UNAMA's
leadership and coordination role is thus strengthened
by such a balance, and by the clear priorities and
objectives laid out in the draft resolution.

A significant part of the transition to full Afghan
leadership and ownership is clearly the consolidation
of the rule of law and human rights sector in the
country. That is an area where the action of the State is
perhaps more visible to foreign partners and more
keenly felt by the population. In that regard, the action
undertaken to address serious problems in the
correctional system is encouraging despite the serious
challenges that still exist. It is important that UNAMA
and humanitarian actors are able to work on those
issues with relevant Government interlocutors.

On the same note, we are encouraged by the care
put into the mandate of UNAMA regarding human
rights, notably the human rights of women and girls.
The Mission's capacity in this area will continue to
rank high in its priorities and in ours. The Mission will
continue to support the efforts undertaken by the
Afghan authorities, such as the full implementation of
the law on the elimination of violence against women.
The Mission will also continue to assess the situation
of civilians, notably children, and the participation of
women in political life and processes in Afghanistan,
and to play a relevant role in humanitarian action. The
relevance of this task, particularly during the coming
months, cannot be overstated.

Secondly, in discharging their mission,
international forces and international assistance face a
deteriorating environment in Afghanistan. The current
situation is the product of deeply regrettable actions,
some of them mutually avoidable, some unpredictable.
These events have had a strong impact on the
population, as indeed they had on all of us friends and
partners of Afghanistan. Apologies have been made
and responsibilities accepted. It is now fundamental
that the achievements already attained by international
assistance in Afghanistan, both civil and military, are
not endangered by these events. This is an undertaking
for all stakeholders in Afghanistan, including the
national authorities.

In these circumstances, it is clear that the coming
summits and conferences will have increased
importance, namely, the NATO summit in Chicago, in
May, the conference on refugees in May in
Switzerland, the follow-up ministerial meeting of the
Istanbul conference in June and the Tokyo summit next
July. The rapid sequence of these major events is a
good measure of the commitment of the international
community to Afghanistan and the Afghan people, and
of its interest in seizing the opportunity to consolidate
the foundations of security, social and economic
development and the regional integration of
Afghanistan.

Portugal, as a partner of Afghanistan, is working
towards, and looking forward to, outcomes from those
meetings that may prove successful for the people of
Afghanistan. Broad national consensus in Afghanistan
regarding governance, development and the rule of law,
as well as on development strategies and initiatives, is
vital for a sustainable transition and, ultimately, for the
success of the peace and reconciliation process.

Recent developments in the relations between
State institutions, such as the National Assembly and
the Government, are signs to be welcomed. UNAMA's

role in the national political sphere, namely, by
working for the strengthening of national electoral
institutions at the request of Afghan authorities,
deserves the Security Council's full support.

I conclude by reiterating my country's support for
the mandate that we are preparing to approve. It is an
ambitious mandate for UNAMA, and rightly so, given
the priorities identified by the Afghan national
authorities and the United Nations. International
assistance to Afghanistan must adapt as new necessities
arise and the situation on the ground changes. I wish
the best to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Kubis in the implementation of the mandate,
and I assure him that we in the Security Council will
continue to be ready to support the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan as required.

