Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Iceland; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Albania;
as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.

I join other speakers in welcoming the High
Representative, my good friend Valentin Inzko, back
to the Council, and would like to reassure him of our
continued support.

The lack of progress in implementing necessary
political and economic reforms, the continued use of
divisive rhetoric, and deeply rooted divisions among
political parties continue to create considerable
headwinds for the efforts ofthose who want to see Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a united, stable, viable, multi-ethnic
and prosperous State, cooperating peacefully with its
neighbours and irreversibly on track towards European
Union membership. We therefore encourage Council
members to urge Bosnia and Herzegovina's political
leadership to overcome the political stalemate and to
undertake the reforms necessary to move the country
forward in its European perspective.
Political deadlock in Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to burden the process of further stabilization
and development. At the entity level, particularly in
the Federation, the political climate remains tense
and difficult. Several attempts at reshuffling the
Federation Government have failed due to political and
constitutional challenges. Regrettably, this struggle
for political control compromises the ability of local
political parties to constructively engage in important
reform agendas. The stakes were raised further when
Federation President Budimir was apprehended at the
end of April on charges of involvement in organized
crime and corruption.

There are only remote prospects for the resolution
of this stalemate in the near future. Moreover, we have
noted some important signs of premature pre-election
positioning by the parties ahead of the October 2014
general elections. There is therefore a serious risk of
a prolonged period marked by political deadlock in
the Federation. This would further negatively affect
an already serious economic situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is already dependent on the
macrofinancial support of the International Monetary
Fund and the European Union.

In Republika Srpska, the Government was
reshuffled on 12 March in response to the results of
municipal elections in October last year. The leadership
in Banja Luka nonetheless continued to challenge the
effectiveness and functionality of State structures,
as well as the international presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This is unacceptable, complicates the
political processes in the country, and makes it more
difficult to establish sustained positive momentum.

Difficulties at the entity level are translated into
the weakened ability of the State-level institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to address in particular the
fight against corruption and organized crime. They
also complicate efforts to strengthen the judiciary and
implement reforms in the area of defence, including the
necessity to resolve the problem of unstable stockpiles
of surplus arms and ammunition in the country.

The European Union has been engaged for many
years in efforts to anchor Bosnia and Herzegovina on its
European Union path. We believe that it is critical that
Bosnia and Herzegovina fulfil as a matter of priority
its obligations under the Interim Stabilization and
Association Agreement. If it fails to do so, the country
will not be in a position to make progress on the path
towards European integration that its citizens rightly
expect. In particular, Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to
urgently bring its Constitution into compliance with the
European Convention of Human Rights and implement
the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights
ruling in the Sejdie-Finci vs. Bosnia and Herzegovina
case. This ruling embodies the principle of ethnic
non-discrimination, which is at the core of the values
promoted by both the European Union and the United
Nations. The implementation of the ruling would allow
the European Union to decide on the entry into force
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement with
Bosnia and Herzegovina, paving the way for further
steps forward, including a credible EU membership
application.

A new round of European Union facilitation efforts
in this regard started in early 2013 and was led by EU
Special Representative and Head of Delegation Peter
Sarensen and Commissioner Stefan Fiile. Despite the
significant time, efforts and resources devoted by the
EU, political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina again
failed to agree on a solution, leading to the cancellation
of the 11 April meeting of the EU High-Level Dialogue.

Both EU High Representative Catherine Ashton
and Commissioner Stefan Fule recently visited Bosnia
and Herzegovina and urged its leaders to continue to
seek compromise and move the country forward on its
European Union path, including by implementing the
ruling of the European Court of Human Rights. By
not bringing its Constitution into line with European
standards, Bosnia and Herzegovina risks the legitimacy
and credibility of its future leaders to be selected in
the 2014 general elections. High Representative Ashton
and Commissioner Fiile also reaffirmed once again
the European Union's commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's European future.

Recent progress towards the European Union by
the rest of the region, in particular the beginning of the
normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo,
as well as the upcoming accession of Croatia to the
European Union, should help encourage progress in
Bosnia and Herzegovina as well.

Since September 2011, the European Union has
strengthened its political presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to facilitate progress towards
European integration. The single European Union
presence on the ground, with a single EU Special
Representative and Head ofDelegation, is fully engaged
in supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in all European
Union-related matters. The Eureopean Union increased
its regional presence in 2012, with new offices in
Mostar and Brcko and a larger office in Banja Luka. The
Special Representative and Head of Delegation is also
offering the EU Force Commander political guidance
on military issues with a local political dimension, in
particular concerning sensitive operations and relations
with local authorities and with the local media.

The European Union also continues to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress in the security field.
The overall security situation has remained calm and
stable, and Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have so
far proved capable of dealing with threats to the security
environment. The European Union will therefore keep
the European Union Force-Operation Althea (EUFOR- Althea) focused on capacity-building and training.
However, EUFOR Althea will retain an executive
military role to support Bosnia and Herzegovina's
efforts to maintain a safe and secure environment under
a United Nations mandate. It therefore remains able to
contribute to the deterrence capacity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's authorities, if the situation so requires.
The European Union will also continue to provide
considerable pre-accession assistance.

In the context of the overall European Union
strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina, we look forward
to continuing the discussion with the international
community on the reconfiguration of the international
presence, in the appropriate forum. We call on the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet the
outstanding objectives and conditions for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative.

In conclusion, the European Union reiterates its
unequivocal commitment to the territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and united
country. We remain ready to provide the necessary
assistance to support progress towards Bosnia and
Herzegovina's European integration. It is that approach
that will take the country forward on its reform agenda
towards stability and development, on its path to the
European Union.

