Mr. Ali (Kazakhstan): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's meeting. I join
others in congratulating the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sable-Work Zewde, on
her new assignment and assure her and her staff of
our full support for the United Nations Office to the
African Union. I thank her and African Union (AU)
Commissioner Sma'i'l Chergui for their insightful
briefings on enhancing African capacities for peace
and security.

My delegation fully supports the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report on
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and
security in Africa, including on the work of the United
Nations Office to the African Union (S/2018/678), and
would like to make the following observations.

First, with regard to institutional partnerships,
we are encouraged to see strengthened cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU in an effort to
support Africa's steady pursuit of peace, stability and
sustainable development. We welcome the progress
made to capitalize on the United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security and the African Union-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We, the
international community, should support to the fullest
efforts to implement the Frameworks through joint
field Visits to conflict areas, joint briefings, meetings
of the United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force
on Peace and Security and other initiatives. At the same
time, further technical work is needed to develop the
modalities for joint analysis, planning and assessment,
as well as reporting to the relevant intergovernmental
bodies. Both the United Nations and the AU must revise
their internal administrative processes, policies and
procedures and strengthen common synergies.

Secondly, with regard to the peacekeeping
partnership, AU-led peace support operations are
recognized as being absolutely essential to the
Security Council's responsibility to maintain peace and
security. This is particularly relevant,considering the
limitations of United Nations peacekeeping operations
in countering terrorism. AU forces have also proven to
be very effective because they are familiar with their
own terrain, local conditions and the tactics of armed
and militia groups. Good examples of such partnership
are the AU-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the African Union Mission in Somalia.
Similarly, the Multinational Joint Task Force and
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel are
exemplary reinforcements as part of our global counter-
terrorism action.

My delegation commends the AU for its continued
efforts to operationalize the African Peace Fund and
its commitment to covering 25 per cent of the cost of
its peace-support operations. We encourage the AU
to pursue with greater determination the creation of
the African Standby Force and strengthen a robust
compliance framework. However, it is clear that
without sufficient financial and capacity-building
support, the ability of AU peace operations to deliver
will not match expectations. My delegation therefore
calls on the Security Council to consider practical steps
to develop a mechanism to ensure the sustainable and
predictable joint financing of AU peace operations.
The four financing options, identified in last year's
reports of the Secretary-General' (S/2017/744), should
be explored for optimal results, beyond the use of
voluntary contributions through trust funds. We must
also find a way to understand and harmonize the
varying differences in the orientation, structures and
bureaucracies of the two organizations for a smoother
and more effective partnership.
Thirdly, we should prioritize conflict prevention
and mediation by improving the efficiency of United
Nations-AU preventive diplomacy and developing
a comprehensive approach, while strengthening the
security-development nexus. We need more coordinated
actions in order to adopt what the Secretary-General
calls a whole new approach - one of preventing
conflicts rather than spending time and resources on
resolving them. Currently, we spend 10 times more funds
on peacekeeping than on peacebuilding and addressing
the root causes of instability. We must therefore invest
more in human development, including education,
employment, social services, State institutions and
good governance, rule of law, security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
At the same time, attention must be paid to climate
mitigation, disaster risk reduction, resilience-building
and infrastructure development to foster trade and
agriculture, as well as water, food and energy security,
so as to develop a holistic concept of human security.

Lastly, we underscore that only collective action,
with the engagement of all relevant actors, will be the
most effective in achieving peace and stability in Africa.
We must listen carefully to the guidance given by the
three African non-permanent members of the Council
on all the issues related to Africa. We also encourage the
United Nations to leverage the comparative advantage of
regional economic communities and mechanisms, such
as the Economic Community of West African States
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
They, in particular, possess a better understanding ofthe
dynamics and root causes of conflicts and can mobilize
local financial and human resources. Parliamentarians,
religious leaders and civil society are also assets in our
efforts. Last but not least, it is important to ensure that
women and youth are integrated into every stage related
to peace and security.

Kazakhstan, as an observer to the AU, is strongly
committed to further strengthening the capacity of
that organization and all subregional structures to help
African countries fulfil their vision for peace, progress
and prosperity.

