The President: The Council joins you in this. I
have not said it individually, but let me convey to all of
you my very sincere thanks on my behalf and on behalf
of the Bangladesh Security Council team, and convey
how grateful we are for your very gracious words. I
think they were overwhelming. We in the Bangladesh
team are immensely grateful to all of you for
facilitating the discharge of our responsibility of the
Council presidency. We do not know how to thank you
for all the trust, support and cooperation you have
given us in the discharge of our responsibility.

From the comments that have been made, we will
prepare a compendium, gleaned from the statements
made today, and perhaps circulate it to all of you. It
will be a point for future work, in order to carry
forward the very valuable comments we have received
here. I look forward to the important presidency of
Ambassador Wang, coming up next month. I believe all
of you will join in conveying to him our best wishes
and our full commitment of support to him and his
team in the discharge of the responsibility for the
month of July. Since this will be the last public meeting
under the Bangladesh presidency, I take this
opportunity to express my sincere thanks. If we have
an oil-for-food resolution tomorrow, we can adopt it. I
take this opportunity to express my sincerest thanks to
the Secretariat, Mr. Stephanides and his team, to the
Conference Services, who have been very effective and
very supportive, to the interpreters, very sincerely, for
bearing with us, and to all the men and women who
worked day and night, supporting the work of the
Council.

I will also add a special word of thanks to the
security team, who worked with us throughout the
period. With those words, I would like to thank all of
you again, and I promise my friends from the broader
membership of the United Nations that the next debate
here for the wrap-up will include an opportunity for the
others to speak as well. I think I can express that hope
on behalf of all of us.

The meeting rose at 2:00 pm.
