Mr. Arnault: Thank you for this new opportunity
to brief the Council on the situation in Afghanistan.
Members have before them the report of the Secretary-
General (5/2005/525), which describes developments
since March 2005 and also attempts to provide a
preliminary assessment of the implementation of the
Bonn Agreement so far. With a little more than three
weeks' time before polling day, let me begin by
providing the Council with an update on the election
preparations and a number of related developments.

The electoral campaign was officially launched
last week, on 17 August, and candidates have begun
canvassing support throughout the country with
posters, rallies and media announcements. The
campaign period is governed by the electoral law and
regulations from the Joint Electoral Management Body
(JEMB), which protect freedom of speech and freedom
of assembly but also place restrictions on speeches and
materials that incite violence or religious or ethnic
hatred. The campaign is monitored by international
observers from the European Union and by other
international and Afghan electoral observers. For their
part, the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will continue to
verify the exercise of political rights by candidates and
citizens throughout the period.

Providing a level playing field for candidates has
been a permanent concern since last year's presidential
election and is a particularly difficult undertaking this
year in a competition involving 5,800 candidates. The
completion of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) has helped, and so has the
disqualification of a number of candidates with
linkages to armed groups. The latest report of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission and
UNAMA shows improvement with regard to the
conduct of Government officials but also a lingering
fear of intimidation among the citizenry.

A sponsored advertisement programme is being
implemented through the newly reconvened Media
Commission; it provides candidates with free and equal
access to pre-approved radio and television outlets. In
addition, candidates have received information
packages from the JEMB secretariat to assist them in
understanding their campaign rights. For civic
education purposes, 1 million sample ballots have been
produced in the format of the actual ballot. They will
allow voters throughout the country to familiarize
themselves with what is often a very crowded ballot,
with up to 300-plus names in Kabul province.

The final preparations for polling day are
ongoing. Some 40 million ballots for the 69 different
elections have been produced and are ready for
distribution throughout the country. So far, the ballots
of 11 provinces have been delivered, and the rest will
reach the provincial offices by 2 September.
Contingency plans are in place, with enough surplus
materials to address any shortages at the polling
stations.

The JEMB secretariat is in the process of
recruiting more than 160,000 polling station officials,
many of whom are being selected from the pool of staff
that worked during the presidential election last year.
The training of 130 trainers was just completed two
days ago in Kabul. Cascade training will now be
implemented for more than 6,000 district field
coordinators, who in turn will train polling station
officials. In order to ensure equitable access by various
minority groups, the recruitment and training account
specifically for women, nomads and disabled groups.

The secretariat of the JEMB has been working
with national and international security bodies to
establish the final security and force deployment plan
for polling day. With more than 6,300 polling centres
identified, some 30,000 members of the Afghan
National Police will be required to secure the first ring
around polling sites, counting centres and JEMB
compounds and to allow for a quick-reaction force. An
international military force surge capacity has arrived
in Afghanistan with contingents from Spain, Romania,
the Netherlands and the United States and will be
deployed as a backup to national forces.

In that respect, I would like to pay a special
tribute to the 17 soldiers of the Spanish contingent who
died in a helicopter accident on 16 August and also to
express our gratitude to the Spanish Government,
which is sending new troops and aircraft in order to
secure the electoral process.

The day-to-day management of field operations
and security coordination is taking place in the Joint
Electoral Operations Centre, which commenced
operations last week, with the participation of the
Ministries of Defence and the Interior, the national
security directorate, the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) and the coalition forces.

I would now like to provide the Council with a
preview of key electoral events that will take place
immediately after polling day.

On 20 September, the JEMB will begin the
counting of ballots, which is expected to be completed
by 4 October, before the start of Ramadan. Dedicated
counting centres have been identified in the provincial
centres; they provide better security conditions and
allow for a broad presence of international and
domestic observers. The JEMB transport plan will
ensure that the transfer of ballots from the polling
places to the counting centres is protected in the best
possible manner from manipulation and fraud. Partial
results will be announced by province on a rolling
basis as the counting progresses.

It is expected that provisional results for all
provinces will have been declared by 4 October. That
will be followed by a two-week period during which
complaints relating to the process and the provisional
results will be adjudicated by the Electoral Complaints
Commission. Final results of the elections for the
Wolesi Jirga and the provincial councils should be
certified towards the end of October.

Following this certification, most likely in the
first half of November, each provincial council will, in
turn, elect its representative to the upper house. This
will be done by secret ballot on a single day throughout
the country. The President will also have to appoint 17
members of the upper house based upon nominations
from social organizations, political parties and the
general public. The timetable that I have just outlined
would culminate with the inauguration of the new
National Assembly before the end of the year.

In anticipation of the first meetings of the
National Assembly, the recruitment and training of 120
staff of the National Assembly secretariat has been
completed and the staff have been placed at foreign
parliaments in Italy, Sri Lanka, India, Indonesia,
Turkey, Morocco, Australia, the Netherlands, Germany
and France.

With regard to provincial councils, last week the
Government adopted the legislation that grants the
councils an essentially advisory role in relation to the
provincial administration, including with regard to
Government expenditure in the provinces.
I should like to take this opportunity to brief the
Council on an important and necessary adjustment to
the earlier indicative electoral budget. In the past few
days, the JEMB secretariat, in consultation with us, has
stated that the originally projected resource
requirements of $149 million had to be revised to $159
million. That increase of $10 million is largely
attributable to an increase in polling and counting costs
due to higher ballot production and transportation
requirements. After various ballot designs were tested
to ensure their suitability for an electorate with a very
low literacy rate, the option eventually adopted was a
large tabloid-like ballot, with up to seven pages in the
case of Kabul province. That, in turn, implied highly
complex and expensive ballot printing requirements;
the format and size of the ballots also require much
larger ballot boxes than those used in 2004. Finally, the
sheer weight and volume of those supplies has resulted
in a tenfold increase in requirements in terms of
transportation and distribution. I should be grateful if
the Security Council would join us in urgently
requesting the international community to fill the
funding gap, which now stands at $29.6 million.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2005/525)
addresses in detail our concerns regarding the
deteriorating security situation in the months of June
and July - a topic that I also emphasized in my
briefing on 24 June (see S/PV.5215). Those concerns
have not abated since the report was completed.
Indeed, quite the contrary: after a drop in the number
of incidents in late July and early August, attacks have
resumed with increased intensity in the south,
south-east and east, with ambushes and the use of
improvised explosive devices remaining the tactics of
choice of the extremists. In recent days, a large number
of improvised explosive devices have been laid in
Kandahar city. In a serious incident on 17 August, an
Afghan National Police (ANP) bus was targeted,
leaving one ANP officer dead and 11 wounded.
Fighting between anti-Government elements and
national and international military forces also
continues to result in high casualties.

Attacks against community leaders - a
phenomenon that was not present last year - have also
resumed, and the killing of two moderate pro-
Government mullahs last week brings to at least eight
the number of clerics who have been killed.

Against that background, the number of attacks
against United Nations staff has decreased compared
with last year, and those targeting the electoral
process- attacks against candidates and electoral
workers - have been, in the main, indirect rather than
direct. That may indicate that extremists, perhaps wiser
after last year's experience with the presidential
election, have decided to target pro-Government and
international forces rather than to try to stop the
parliamentary elections. However, it is too soon to rule
out attempts to cause major disruptions of the election
before, during or after polling day. In addition,
increased insecurity in the provinces along the eastern
border is, in itself, a cause for concern for the elections
in those areas. In the report, published yesterday, of
their findings concerning the exercise of political rights
in the past couple of months, the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission and UNAMA noted:

"Despite the fact that extremists have failed to
derail the process or pressure candidates to
withdraw, the possibility exists that the threat of
violent attacks will have an impact on the
campaign process and on election day, potentially
disenfranchising parts of the Pashtun population".

Those developments on the security front are a
reminder of the hurdles that Afghans face in rebuilding
their country. Nevertheless, we are confident that, by
the end of this year, a representative new National
Assembly will be established and that, with it, the
Bonn process will be successfully completed. Looking
back, as the report of the Secretary-General does, to
the successive stages of the political transition since
2001, this is, indeed, a remarkable achievement. It

illustrates that, against the odds - with failed
institutions, high levels of militarization and violent
extremism - calling upon people to participate,

through traditional mechanisms or modern ones, in
reshaping their society is, indeed, a very powerful tool.
It is not only giving Afghanistan legitimate
institutions; it also serves to drive the process of
disarmament, the retooling of security agencies, the
creation of political parties, new legislation on media
and administrative structures and, more important, the
emergence of a culture of political pluralism that
rejects the use of violence in the search for political
office. This democratic approach is also generating
new popular expectations vis-a-vis the Government
and elected officials, and more demanding criteria by
which they will be judged.

That democratic approach is thus also shaping, to
a large extent, the contents of the post-Bonn agenda.
Security is paramount, and bringing extremist violence
and other forms of insecurity under control will remain
at the top of the agenda for the Government and for
millions of Afghans for whom the most basic dividend
of peace - security - remains a distant goal, even as
the Bonn process draws to a close. The strengthening
of key State institutions - police, justice and civilian
administration - will have to catch up with the progress
that has been made in the creation of the Afghan National
Army and will have to become tangible where it is most
needed: at local level. What has been so far an array of
reconstruction interventions will have to come together
into a comprehensive development strategy that can
maximize the use of Afghanistan's economic assets and
create a reliable revenue base for the State. Finally,
steady progress in the elimination of the narcotics
industry will remain a key goal on which progress in so
many other areas is predicated.

We are encouraged to see that the international
community appears committed to working with the
Government of Afghanistan towards an extended
compact around some key benchmarks and timelines
for the achievement of the objectives to which I have
referred. In the next phase, international financial,
technical and security resources will remain
indispensable complements to the Afghan State's own
political will and fiscal effort. In this respect, the
Government of Afghanistan has approached UNAMA
and other international partners with the proposal that a
high-level conference on the post-Bonn compact be
held during the second half of January, shortly after the
anticipated inauguration of the National Assembly,
which should be adequately involved in that process.

In the meantime, we are particularly keen to see
closer links between Afghanistan and its neighbours in
all fields, including security cooperation, trade,
development and counter-narcotics. We believe that the
proposed conference could play an important role in
that respect. As a landlocked country, Afghanistan's
long-term stability and the sustainability of its
development are inextricably linked to the stability and
the prosperity of the region at large.

For his part, immediately after the election, the
Secretary-General will initiate consultations with
President Karzai and the Government of Afghanistan,
as well as with other concerned stakeholders, with a
view to defining the role of the United Nations in the
post-Bonn period.

