Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I
appreciate the report of the Secretary-General and the
update this morning by Under-Secretary-General
Miyet. I know they have been very involved in this
crisis from the beginning, almost two years ago. We
appreciate the update.

I also want to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for calling this important open meeting,
and we certainly join our colleagues in welcoming the
representatives of Ethiopia and Eritrea to this Chamber.

May I ask our colleagues from Ethiopia and
Eritrea to let this occasion mark a new chapter in their
young bilateral relationship. At last, and following the
payment of a horrific price, the guns have fallen silent.
We implore the Governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea to

fill this silence with the language of compromise,
reconciliation and hope. With the exception of our
island State Members, all of us have neighbours and all
of us share common borders. The challenge to the
people of Ethiopia and Eritrea will be to determine
what kind of border they want. They can easily have a
green line, where concertina wire, backed by military
force, marks a demarcation born of nothing more than a
physical separation. That is not what we, as the
Security Council, must seek. Such a complete division
is certainly better than the resumption of conflict. But
it might also be squandering a unique opportunity.

We urge the Governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea
to aspire to more than the tragic experiences that
produced decades-old lines across the Korean
peninsula, the Middle East and the island of Cyprus.
Instead, we believe that Eritrea and Ethiopia must turn
towards the Southern African Development
Community and Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa model of integration, based on the free
flow of people, goods and ideas. Looking further
afield, perhaps Spain and Portugal provide a useful
model for the necessary interrelationship that must be
developed. Ethiopia and Eritrea are unique national
entities that nonetheless share a range of common
historical experiences. These two countries must
develop a sophisticated bilateral relationship based on
interdependence and a common agenda for prosperity.

Looking at the economic dynamo that is today's
European Union, it is appropriate to point out that the
original impetus for the European Union was the
realization on the part of Germany and France that
economic integration was the key to preventing forever
the return to war.

The Security Council has an institutional concern
here as well. Blue Helmets should not be viewed as
some sort of substitute for a comprehensive peace
agreement. They should be seen as the creators of the
opportunity to achieve a peace based on shared values,
shared cultures, shared borders and shared aspirations.

The growing United Nations presence in Ethiopia
and Eritrea should calm tensions and create an enabling
environment for the search for durable solutions. The
search for better bilateral relations goes on forever, but
the presence of United Nations peacekeepers should
not.

We as a Council must ensure that the
peacekeepers provide the catalyst for progress and not
a justification for inaction on the political front.

What the parties must seek is something infinitely
beyond the mere cessation of hostilities. Instead, we
urge them to work- as President Abraham Lincoln
said - for a just and lasting peace among nations.

We are in broad agreement with the
recommendations contained in the recent Secretary-
General's report on Ethiopia and Eritrea. Just as we did
with Security Council resolution 1312 (2000)
establishing the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea, we are currently drafting a resolution and
hope to move expeditiously to experts' negotiations to
implement the recommendations in the Secretary-
General's report.

In addition, the United States remains deeply
concerned about the humanitarian issues, especially the
renewed deportations, which are exacerbating the
living conditions of many people affected by the
conflict and are threatening to worsen relations
between the two countries at a critical juncture in the
peace process. We call on the Eritrean Government to
allow full access for the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) to detainee and prisoner of war
camps and ensure that any repatriations are done with
the full involvement of the ICRC.

We also call upon the Ethiopian Government to
ensure that appropriate international organizations,
including the ICRC, have full access to Eritrean
civilians in areas of Eritrea currently occupied by
Ethiopia, and call on the Ethiopian Government to
allow access to all Eritrean prisoners of war.

Lastly, we look forward to the rapid naming of a
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the quick deployment of a full United Nations Mission.
That is the Security Council's obligation.

We expect of the parties more than the mere
cessation of hostilities. The Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities signed under the auspices of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) by Ethiopia and
Eritrea makes explicit the commitment of the parties to
determine their common border, including through the
use of an arbitration mechanism, if a quick agreement
cannot otherwise be reached. Indeed, this commitment
appears no fewer than five times in the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement.

We as a Council must press for an agreement on
the delimitation and demarcation of the common
border as a critical component of a comprehensive
peace agreement. This element will be essential if the
peace between these two formerly warring neighbours
is to be self-sustaining and beneficial to the people of
both communities.

Our fondest hope is that both Governments will
turn their attention to the genuine needs of their people:
health, education, food security, jobs and housing. As
we know, there is no peace dividend if the peace is
based on mutual assured destruction, for that is merely
a truce based on the maintenance of arms.

Ethiopia and Eritrea must instead build peace on
mutual prosperity and mutual dependence, for that is a
peace based on shared values and shared aspirations.

