Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): It is
obvious that, despite the vigorous measures undertaken
after 11 September 2001 by the international
community against the far-flung network of terrorist
organizations, terrorism is continuing to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security. The number
of terrorist attacks and the number of victims,
unfortunately, is growing and the number of geographic
sites where such acts are committed is increasing. There is
also a serious danger that weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) might fall into the hands of terrorists and non-
State actors which would lead to unpredictable
consequences. The delegation of Tajikistan finds
extremely timely the convening of the present public
meeting of the Security Council on such a problem
which is so important for peace and security today.

We consider today's discussion as yet one more
consistent step by the Council designed to strengthen
unity and the will of the international community in
combating international terrorism and the growing
global black market in nuclear materials.

Tajikistan is now on the front lines of a struggle
against international terrorism and is an active party to
the anti-terrorist coalition within the framework of the
Commonwealth of Independent States and the
Collective Security Treaty. My Government is
cooperating to combat terrorism, inter alia, regarding
the protection of nuclear materials.

At the same time, we are seriously concerned by
the fact that the remnants of the Taliban and Al Quaeda
movements and other extremist forces in neighbouring
Afghanistan are once again trying to make themselves
known by means of stepping up their acts of sabotage.

The issue is not merely that these forces are
trying, once again, to plunge a country which is
emerging from under the ashes of a 20-year-long civil
war back into a climate of chaos, strife and inter-ethnic
enmity, although that, in itself is dangerous. Rather,
what is a much more serious danger is that a process is
taking place whereby these dark forces are uniting with
drug cartels acting as a form of creditor/bank/network
of terrorist organizations which is concocting plans to
acquire weapons of mass destruction here.

The adoption by the Security Council of the
relevant resolution will make it possible, in our view,
to strengthen, where necessary, the mechanism of strict
export controls and to ensure full security for secret
materials in the area of weapons of mass destruction.

It is important that the draft resolution not
undermine or replace existing international non-
proliferation and disarmament treaties and that it
explicitly state that it is not changing the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention or the Biological and Toxin
Weapons Convention. As a party to those international
treaties, we will expand our cooperation with other
States parties and with the International Atomic Energy
Agency.

Tajikistan supports the adoption of the draft
Security Council resolution on this issue. We believe
that its implementation would enhance the
effectiveness of the coordination of efforts on all
levels. It would be one further element of a unified
response to today's challenges and threats to
international peace and security.

