Mr. Waxman (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate on counter-
terrorism. I would also like to express my appreciation
to the Chairpersons of the s committees for their
professional work and for their informative briefings
this morning.

Considering the crucial role that the United
Nations plays in coordinating global counter-terrorism
efforts, it is of the utmost importance that there be
close cooperation among all three of its subsidiary
bodies, as well as with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), on this issue. We
welcome the periodic informal briefings for Member
States held by the counter-terrorism committees, and
we encourage them to continue to hold them.

In September, at the second review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, Member
States reaffirmed their collective commitment to
making progress on these issues and resolved to
implement the Strategy. The review also reaffirmed the
important role of the CTITF in enhancing international
cooperation and capacity-building in this field.

Every day, at least one Member State suffers from
some form of a terrorist attack. No matter whether
these attacks are in the form of roadside bombs, letter
bombs, suicide bombers, threats to synagogues or
kidnappings, their objectives remain the same: to instil
fear in the population and advance terrorists' goals
through abhorrent violent means.

We in Israel know first-hand the devastation
caused by terrorism. Hamas and Hizbullah are among
the most dangerous terrorist organizations worldwide,
threatening not just Israel's security but also the
stability of the entire region. The growing arsenal of
missiles and rockets, combined with the continuous
transfer and smuggling of weapons and ammunition to
these organizations, including by Iran and Syria,
represent an imminent threat.

In this regard, it should come as no surprise that
the speaker before me lectured all of us about
terrorism. Syria is the prime sanctuary for terrorists,
hosting the headquarters of numerous terrorist
organizations in Damascus and financing, sponsoring
and training terrorist activities in and from its soil, in
clear Violations of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624
(2005) and 1701 (2006) numerous other resolutions.

An important briefing organized by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in
October closely examined the elements of resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) relating to safe haven for
terrorists. This issue is of particular concern to my
delegation, as in our region, as I said before, several
Member States have granted safe haven to terrorists
who seek to attack Israel by any means.

Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, I would like to commend
Executive Director Mike Smith for his able leadership.
We appreciate his ongoing dialogue with Member
States, as well as his valuable informal briefings. My
delegation fully supports the renewal of CTED's
mandate, which will be considered next month.

Israel continues to strengthen its professional
cooperation with CTED and to share best practices
with other interested parties, including by means of
technical cooperation. For example, Israel was among
the donor States that contributed to the successful
workshop entitled "Challenges to effective border
control facing East African countries", which was held
in Nairobi, Kenya, in June. Our contribution to the
workshop was part of Israel's broader bilateral
cooperation with and technical assistance to States in
the Horn ofAfrica.

In a similar vein, Israel has taken a keen interest
in supporting other initiatives in West Africa, Asia and
South America in the multilateral, regional and
bilateral spheres. Among the particular areas of Israel's
bilateral cooperation are those relating to preventing
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism,
public safety, security aviation, and the protection and
security of borders.

In this regard, earlier this month the Israel Export
and International Cooperation Institute convened its
first Israeli Homeland Security Conference on Security
Technology Operations Policies. Among the highlights
addressed in the Conference were airport security and
innovative methods and technologies for the protection
and safety of cities. Over 500 homeland security
experts from around the world participated and
contributed to its success.

In September 2010, the International Institute for
Counter-Terrorism held its tenth annual international
conference, in Herzliya, Israel. The conference
addressed numerous aspects of counter-terrorism,
including aviation terrorism and security, the processes
of de-radicalization and the challenges of asymmetric
warfare.
Both those conferences served as platforms for
enhancing international and bilateral cooperation in
that field by providing the essential opportunity for
high-profile experts from a wide range of disciplines to
establish professional relationships.

Furthermore, Israel's counter-terrorism agencies
cooperate with a large number of regional
organizations, including NATO, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Inter-
American Committee against Terrorism and the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia, including in the context of assisting
third countries. Israel also closely cooperates with and
contributes to the work of the Terrorism Prevention
Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and
Taliban and associated individuals and entities remains
an important part of the effort to isolate terrorists and
their means to inflict harm. Israel welcomes the
considerable progress made towards promoting clear
and fair procedures concerning the inclusion of
individuals and entities on the consolidated list. In that
regard, we welcome the appointment in June 2010 of
Judge Kimberly Prost as Ombudsperson to address key
aspects of due process and human rights concerns. We
also welcome the recent completion of the review of
the consolidated list, following the dedicated work of
the Chair of the Committee and its members.

Finally, we believe that it is critical to continue to
develop international standards against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and dual-
use items. The international community must continue
to seek and implement measures that keep the world's
most dangerous weapons out of the hands of its most
dangerous individuals, especially in our region.
In that regard, I wish to reiterate Israel's full
support for resolution 1540 (2004). Israel believes that,
in order to enhance the dialogue between Member
States and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), it would be very
helpful to receive periodic briefings by the Expert
Coordinator on the work of the Committee.

The struggle against terrorism requires our joint
will, effort and action. We appreciate this opportunity
for dialogue, and will continue to actively engage in
and support the important work of the Council's
counter-terrorism Committees.

