Mr. Mano Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): Since this is the first time my delegation has
spoken at a formal meeting of the Council, allow me, Sir,
to express our sincere congratulations on your accession to
the presidency of the Council for this busy month of
January. Your presidency coincides with the beginning of
the term of my country, Guinea-Bissau, as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council for the first time in its
history. Your competence and experience are strong
guarantees for the success of our work.

Allow me also to thank Ambassador Lavrov of the
Russian Federation for his excellent work during the
month of December.
The situation in Georgia continues to deserve the
Council's special attention. My delegation therefore
wishes to express its gratitude to the Secretary-General
for the report he has submitted. However, we note that
despite the efforts made by his Special Envoy and his
Deputy to bring Georgia and Abkhazia closer together,
the peace process remains deadlocked. We note with
regret that resurgent violence, looting and torture in the
region of the Gali canal have greatly contributed to the
deterioration of the situation of refugees and displaced
persons.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, we note that
nothing has changed since October 1995 and that, on the
contrary, the situation could well worsen. Human rights
and the dignity of the human person are constantly being
violated. The most recent act of barbarism, in which nine
people were brutally murdered, took place on 5 January,
again in the Gali region.

Despite the seriousness of the situation, my country,
Guinea-Bissau, reaffirms its dedication to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Georgia and congratulates the
Georgian authorities on the holding of presidential and
parliamentary elections last November, which it hopes
will facilitate a political settlement of the conflict. We
also wish to express our support for the six-month
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), given the very important
role that the Mission continues to play.

Since the draft resolution before us fully responds to
our concerns, my delegation will vote in favour of it in
the hope that it will provide new impetus for
strengthening the peace process in that region of the
world.

In conclusion, I wish, with your permission, Mr.
President, to express our gratitude to the Russian
Federation as facilitator and to France as the coordinator
of the Friends of Georgia.

