Mr. Cohen (United States): I am glad to be the first
to be subjected to the hourglass test.

We would like to thank Foreign Minister Edmond
forjoining us in the Security Council today.

The United States welcomes this opportunity
to address human rights, not only in Haiti but in the
broader context of peacekeeping operations. Promoting
respect for human rights, as embodied in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, is a central goal of
our foreign policy. The protection of human rights
helps secure peace, deter aggression, promote the
rule of law, combat crime and corruption, strengthen
democracies and prevent humanitarian crises. Human
rights are inextricably linked to both the mission of the
Security Council and to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We rely on the information gathered by the
human rights teams of various peacekeeping operations
and honour the courage of peacekeepers on display as
they carry out their task.

The United States has just released its annual
country reports on human rights for 2018. When we
document human rights issues, we shine a spotlight
on the plight of victims and show our commitment to
exposing perpetrators. Through ongoing monitoring
and exposure of human rights challenges, we use our
influence and power to help promote human rights
and fundamental freedoms and effect change by
Governments and societies.

We have seen positive change in Haiti. The
Haitian National Police (HNP) has taken steps to
impose systematic discipline on officers found to have
committed abuses or fraud. As we have stated on several
occasions, the HNP can further enhance its effectiveness
by increasing accountability and transparency. As
we note in our human rights report, there have been
improvements in the still very problematic prison and
detention conditions. We also not the progress made in
filling positions in Haiti's judiciary.
The United States welcomes Haiti's progress in
promoting respect for human rights. We commit to
continuing to work with the Government of Haiti to
further address the country's significant challenges,
which include isolated allegations of unlawful killings
by police, the excessive use of force by police, arbitrary
detention, harsh and life-threatening prison conditions,
ajudiciary subject to corruption and outside influence,
physical attacks on journalists, widespread corruption
and impunity and human trafficking, including forced
labour. The United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) has a central role in promoting
human rights. Its task to strengthen national human
rights institutions is essential to promoting the rule
of law, democratic institution-building and security
in Haiti. It contributes to ensuring accountability as
well as respect for human rights, including of women
and children.

Last month, the Secretary-General provided
an assessment (S/2019/198) of where the United
Nations and Haiti stand with achieving the goals and
benchmarks of MINUJUSTH. The dashboard is always
a very helpful tool in seeing that. We agree with his
assessment that Haiti is on a positive trajectory, with
improvements in the professionalism and efficiency
of rule-of-law and security institutions, as well as in
the protection of human rights. We also agree that the
HNP has been increasingly self-sufficient in providing
security across the country.

That brings me to the upcoming transition, as
we prepare for the final renewal of the MINUJUSTH
mandate. We look forward to continued updates from
the Secretariat regarding the Secretary-General's
recommended follow-on special political mission, so that
the Council can establish the special political mission
in a timely manner and ensure a smooth transition. The
mission should include a human rights pillar that can
further advance progress achieved by MINUJUSTH on
human rights benchmarks. In the interim, we expect
the Government of Haiti, together with MINUJUSTH,
to keep working to achieve the benchmarks until the
drawdown of the Mission and beyond.

We expect a renewal of the MINUJUSTH mandate
for six months, until 15 October. This timetable is
consistent with the two-year exit strategy and the
assessment of the Secretary-General. As his 1 March
report states, unless there are mounting challenges to
the Government's capacity to respond to the crisis, the
HNP will be able to fully assume responsibility for the
security and protection of Haiti by 15 October. The
United States shares this assessment and notes that it
reflects the will of the Government of Haiti to conclude
the peacekeeping operation by that time.

We do not believe that the Council should link
MINUJUSTH's scheduled transition to legislative and
local elections in Haiti, scheduled for October. Rather,
the United States encourages the Government ofHaiti in
support of its election planning. In this broader context,
we encourage the President and elected representatives
of Haiti to work together in accordance with Haiti's
Constitution to form a new Government to serve the
Haitian people as soon as possible. We continue to
support a constructive and inclusive dialogue among
Government leaders from across the Haitian political
spectrum, civil society, faith-based organizations and
the private sector to find lasting solutions to the current
political and economic crisis.

We are convinced that genuine dialogue and
compromise leading to a transparent and accountable
Government can best serve the needs and the aspirations
of the Haitian people.

