Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA); Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC);
and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for
their briefings.

Chad welcomes the role played by UNAMA in
supporting the transition process in Afghanistan, in
accordance with its mandate. That has contributed to
the preparation of free and fair presidential elections
with broad voter participation. We also welcome the
efforts of the International Security Assistance Force
in Afghanistan. Despite threats by terrorists and other
armed groups, the elections had a large number of female
candidates. We therefore commend the courage of the
Afghan people and encourage it to continue to fight for
change. We call on the candidates to show restraint,
maintain the calm atmosphere that prevailed during
the electoral campaign, apply the remedies provided
for by the laws in force for those filing objections and
complaints and accept the verdict of the polls following
the proclamation of the results.

Chad welcomes UNAMA's approach to resolving
the post-election crisis by encouraging dialogue
between candidate Abdullah Abdullah's camp, the
members of the Independent Election Commission
and the other candidates. We note with satisfaction the
involvement of all components of Afghan society, in
particular the political parties, traditional and religious
authorities and civil society for their willingness to
resolve the crisis by direct, inclusive dialogue, which is
the sole guarantee for preserving peace in Afghanistan.

We deplore the fact that the security and human
rights situation deteriorated during and after the vote as
a result of acts of violence and intimidation perpetrated
by the Taliban in association with Al-Qaida and other
armed groups against voters, including the cutting off
of fingers of persons who had voted. Those cruel and
criminal acts constitute serious violations of human
rights; the perpetrators should be prosecuted and held
to account.

We wish to express our sympathy with the
Afghan people, the families and staff of the accredited
diplomatic missions in Afghanistan for the victims of
the deadly attacks. We wish a speedy recovery to the
injured. Chad believes that terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations is criminal and unjust, whatever the
purpose, the time, the place and the perpetrators.

We welcome the political and diplomatic efforts
deployed at the regional level for the strengthening
peace and security in Afghanistan. We encourage
those promoting peace and security to continue in that
direction. We are worried, however, by the increase in
drug and narcotics trafficking, which adversely affects
the population of the region and farbeyond. In that regard,
we welcome the Government's work to eradicate the
cultivation of opium and its related enforcement efforts.
We invite and encourage Afghanistan's neighbouring
States to continue to work towards coordination and
the cross-border fight against trafficking in drugs and
weapons and we call on international community to
support those efforts.

We deplore the fact that the humanitarian situation
has deteriorated as a result of natural disasters bringing
suffering to vulnerable populations in the northern
part of Afghanistan, in particular women, children and
the elderly. We support the Secretary-General's call
to increase humanitarian assistance in Afghanistan.
We condemn all armed groups that are attacking
humanitarian personnel in order to prevent them from
bringing assistance to those in need. We also condemn
the recruitment of child soldiers and violence against
women and girls.

In conclusion, we call on the international
community and the future Afghan Government to
take all relevant measures to strengthen the country's
security after the withdrawal of the International
Security Assistance Force. We offer our heartfelt
support to all United Nations personnel working in
difficult and dangerous conditions in order to maintain
peace and security in Afghanistan.

