Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (Spoke in Arabic): I
should like, at the outset, to take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over the Security
Council this month. I wish your friendly country and
you personally every success.

I should also like to extend to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
our congratulations on his wise leadership of the
Council last month.

I thank the Secretary-General for the report before
the Council in document S/2016/864.

As we extend the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) for a
further six months, I am pleased to note the positive
roles played by the Force since it was established, in
addition to the efforts deployed by the community and
the Government, which have started to bear fruit as
reflected in the onset of a stable security situation in
Abyei and the remarkable progress made in asserting
the notion of peaceful coexistence between the
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities, as indicated
in the Secretary-General's report.

I would like to reaffirm to the Security Council
that the Government of the Republic of the Sudan will
cooperate fully and comprehensively with UNISFA
so that it can implement its mandate. That has been
the consistent approach of the Sudanese Government
towards UNISFA since its establishment, and will
contribute to achieving security and stability in Abyei.
It is also of the utmost importance that UNISFA be
committed to the limits of its mandate, as identified
in resolution 1990 (2011), which established the Force
and provides an environment conducive to achieving
the desired outcome.

The Government of the Sudan reaffirms its
commitment to all the agreements signed with South
Sudan, starting with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement that led to the founding of the Republic of
South Sudan in 2011; the 2005 Abyei Protocol and the
Agreement between the Government of the Sudan and
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement on temporary
arrangements for the administration and security of
the Abyei Area, of 20 June 2011; and the Cooperation
Agreement between the Republic of the Sudan and the
Republic of South Sudan of 27 September 2012. I call
on my brothers and sisters in the Government of South
Sudan to engage in a positive manner with the Sudanese
Government and the African Union in order to quickly
establish insitutions in Abyei, as stipulated by the
Agreement of 20 June 2011, with a view to determining
the final status of Abyei, which remains the exclusive
right of the Presidents of the Sudan and South Sudan in
accordance with the signed agreements.

We would like to stress that the Abyei region
is Sudanese territory, and the Republic of the Sudan
has full sovereignty over it in accordance with the
provisions of international law, the decision of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague and
the 2005 Abyei Protocol to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. That status can be amended only through
the Abyei referendum agreed on by the Governments of
the two countries or through any other measure agreed
to bilaterally by the two parties.

My delegation would like to reaffirm that the path to
sustainable peace and stability in the Abyei region and
along the borders between the two countries is based
on two main pillars, namely, the implementation of the
interim administrative and security arrangements for
Abyei and the implementation of all agreements under
the Cooperation Agreement between the Republic of
the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan. The first
agreement includes provisions on the establishment
of the Abyei joint administration, its joint legislative
council and its joint police. Those institutions are
indispensable to managing the Area and providing
the necessary services to its citizens, as well as
establishing the appropriate conditions for resolving
the issue of the final status of Abyei in a way that meets
the expectations of all stakeholders, with a win-win
formula that satisfies everyone.

The Cooperation Agreement laid a solid foundation
for normalizing relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan, enhancing cooperation in all areas between the
two and achieving sustained peace. It covered the areas
of oil resources, trade, borders, security arrangements,
the status of citizens and other themes. However, our
brothers in South Sudan have so far been enthusiastic
only about the implementation of the oil agreement.
They have overlooked the implementation of other
agreements, particularly the Agreement on Security
Arrangements between the Republic of the Sudan and
the Republic of South Sudan, which includes provisions
on ending the support for, and the harbouring of, rebel
movements, the establishment ofthe Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone and the establishment of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM).

In that regard, my delegation hopes that the
Government of the Republic of Sudan will honour
its obligations to implement all of the provisions of
the Agreement on Security Arrangements so as to
encourage cooperation between our countries. That
would create an enabling environment for deciding
on the final status of Abyei. In that connection, we
commend the recent calls on our brothers in South
Sudan by international partners for South Sudan to
practically, fully and clearly end its support for the
armed groups that are active in South Sudan, which
they use as a springboard for sabotage operations in the
Sudan. We also commend the recent announcements to
that effect by the Government of South Sudan and we
hope that those words will be followed by actions.

On the deployment of the oil police in the Diffra
oil complex, my delegation reaffirms the need for
such a step, as the joint Abyei police has not yet been
established. Another reason is that there are Sudanese
rebel movement groups in South Sudan that can target
those vital installations. That force is limited both in
number and equipment.

My delegation agrees with the statement in the
Secretary-General's report concerning the importance
of the resumption of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee (AJOC). We call for the holding of regular
AJOC meetings. In that regard, we also call upon the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and South Sudan, the African Union (AU) High-level
Implementation Panel and other partners to redouble
their efforts to encourage the Government of South
Sudan to hold such meetings and to enable the J BVMM
to work smoothly to remove all obstacles in its path.

The Secretary-General's report refers to the
fact that many citizens of South Sudan have gone to
my country through territories of South Sudan, in
particular to the states of East Darfur, South Darfur
and West Kordofan. That serves to underscore the
special relationship between the peoples of the Sudan
and South Sudan - a unique and valued relationship
that we will continue to foster. We will also continue
to work towards stability in the states of Darfur. That
all goes to show that my country has been right in its
calls for beginning the implementation of a phased
and smooth exit strategy for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

In conclusion, I would like to extend our thanks
and appreciation to all of our partners who make
efforts to facilitate the work of United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei, in particular the Government
of Ethiopia, the African Union Peace and Security
Council, the AU Commission, the AU High-Level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan and South Sudan
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
the Sudan and South Sudan. We also commend the
commitment of the Secretary-General and the positive
elements in his report. We call for concerted efforts to
continue along the positive path that will enable us to
tackle the pending issues and make sure that the process
is in no way hindered.

