Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this important briefing on piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea, which can be described as a serious threat to
peace and stability in West Africa. I should like also to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing as well as
General Mahamane Toure, Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security of the Economic
Community of West African States, as well as Her
Excellency Ms. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, Deputy
Executive Secretary for Political Affairs of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission.
Bosnia and Herzegovina notes with concern that
the pirate attacks in the Gulf of Guinea are a growing
threat that has a negative impact on the security,
stability and economies of West African States. We
note the efforts made by affected countries and
regional organizations to tackle the problem. We
strongly encourage the further continuation and
enhancement of regional efforts to combat this
problem. In that context, we welcome the plan to
organize a summit of Gulf of Guinea heads of State to
discuss a regional response to this matter.

We also underline the importance of international
assistance in combating the challenge of piracy and
armed robbery at sea. We therefore call upon the
international community to continue to extend its
support for that goal, as well as to support the efforts
of States and regional organizations in building the
capacity necessary to address piracy.

Although differences between piracy off the coast
of Somalia and pirate attacks in the Gulf of Guinea are
evident, lessons learned should be used to prevent the
escalation of this negative trend. We share the view of
other members that root causes must be addressed
along the coast, starting with poverty and the lack of
opportunities for young people.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the decision
of the Secretary-General to deploy an assessment
mission in November to gather more information
regarding piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and to
investigate further possibilities for collaboration with
regional organizations and States concerned to address
the problem. Bearing in mind the linkage between
piracy, organized crime and drug trafficking - which
have a direct negative impact on peace and stability -
we share the view that there is a need for a
comprehensive strategy. Of course, an important part
of such a strategy is bringing to justice those who
finance, plan, organize and execute pirate attacks and
armed robbery at sea. In that regard, information
sharing is essential.
Finally, we would like to emphasize the
importance of close cooperation among the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, the United
Nations Office for West Africa, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the International
Maritime Organization, within the framework of their
current respective mandates on this issue.

