Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
expresses its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
Portugal's Minister for Foreign Affairs, for presiding
over this debate. We also extend our appreciation to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ameerah Haq for her briefing on the situation in
Timor-Leste, to Mr. Zacarias da Costa, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, to Mrs. Vera Crivano
Machado, Vice-Minister for Political Affairs of the
Ministry of External Relations of Brazil, and to the
Core Group for Timor-Leste for their presence at this
important debate.

My delegation wishes to commend the
Government and people of Timor-Leste for their
continued commitment to the consolidation of peace,
unity, stability and development in their country.

South Africa associates itself with the views
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/201l/641) that the conduct of credible and peaceful
elections, for the second time since the 2006 crisis, will
be a critical milestone for Timor-Leste. Those elections
will see the participation of the largest numbers of
young people, between the ages of 17 and 24, who will
be first-time voters. The successful holding of the
elections will be a positive sign in efforts to
consolidate democracy in Timor-Leste. In that regard,
South Africa calls upon the international community to
assist Timor-Leste with its preparations for the election
process.

South Africa commends the work that has been
and that continues to be done by the United Nations
country team and the Secretary-General's Special
Representative in Timor-Leste. During the period under
review, the Special Representative continued to deal
with, among other things, issues related to governance,
accountability and broader security sector issues.

In September we received a report from Deputy
Prime Minister Guterres on progress attained in the
implementation of the joint strategic plans. Special
Representative Haq has alluded to progress in that area
with regard to the various working groups and the
continued high-level engagement with the President,
the Prime Minister and senior Government officials.

My delegation also welcomes the effort of the
Government of Timor-Leste to develop legislation to
promote the advancement of gender equality. We also
welcome its efforts to promote outstanding legislation,
most notably the electoral laws, as well as the 2011
State budget and the Timor-Leste Strategic
Development Plan for 2011-2030.
South Africa applauds the transfer of command
and control of policing operations to the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) and the PNTL's
resumption of those operations as an important step for
national law enforcement. We call upon the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to
continue supporting capacity-building and institutional
development of the national police. That
notwithstanding, the continuing skirmishes among
martial arts and religious groups remain a source of
concern. My delegation appeals to all parties to refrain
from the use of violence and to instead seek peaceful
means to resolve the situation.

In closing, South Africa would like to wish the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste every
success in the planning and preparations for the
presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for
the first half of 2012. We are encouraged by the
ongoing planning being carried out by the Government
through the High-level Committee on Transition, in
consultation with UNMIT, in considering how
capacity-building activities can be taken forward in the
post-UNMIT phase. South Africa encourages the
careful calibration of drawdown after the 2012
elections, taking into account the material conditions
on the ground.

We wish to express our satisfaction with the
successes achieved by the United Nations in Timor-
Leste. We encourage this Council to stay the remaining
course and to support the country in the finalization of
the transition.

