Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I thank and commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, our friend
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his excellent presentation
of the report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2017/95/Rev.l)
and reassure him once again of the full support of the
Senegalese delegation in his mission. I also welcome
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolie,
President of the Republic of Serbia, and of Ambassador
Vlora Citaku of Kosovo, and thank them for their
statements, which have certainly elucidated our
understanding of the situation under review.

Just last week in this very Chamber, we discussed
the conflicts that are currently taking place in Europe
(see S/PV.7886), which was an occasion for Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres to remind us that what are
known as frozen conflicts will continue to threaten
international peace and security only until they are
peacefully and definitively settled. In the opinion
of the Senegalese delegation, the Kosovo conflict is
emblematic of such conflicts. My delegation is therefore
concerned by the recent and persistent tensions cited
in the Secretary-General's report, which are somewhat
undermining the significant progress that has been
made since the end of the conflict by the stakeholders
from both sides.

Accordingly, with a view to relaunching a dynamic
that will promote building and durably sustaining
stability, not only for Kosovo but for the entire Balkan
region, the Senegalese delegation strongly encourages,
on the one hand, the Kosovar political stakeholders to
work to maintaining a peaceful political environment,
which largely depends on the quality of the political
dialogue with Belgrade; and, on the other hand, the
Serbian authorities to maintain and strengthen their
commitment in a constructive and calm dialogue with
Pristina. In that regard, Senegal welcomes the progress
that the two parties have made, in particular within
the framework of the dialogue conducted under the
auspices of the European Union, and encourages those
partners with influence on both sides to continue to use
it to promote and guide talks.

In order to consolidate the results that have been
achieved in that framework, we believe that the
agreements reached to date must be implemented and
that the political leaders of both parties must fully
commit in a consultative manner to resuming talks.
Everyone here has said that that is only path towards
resolving the crisis.

The recent developments described in the report
of the Secretary-General - in particular the slowness
in establishing the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities, the arrest of the former Prime
Minister and the current leader of the main opposition
party in Kosovo, Mr. Ramush Haradinaj, on 4 Jaunuary
in Paris, and the diplomatic incident provoked by trains
originating in Serbia - recall the absolute necessity for
the Council to continue to support talks at the highest
levels within a dynamic of cooperation at the United
Nations and subregional organizations.
My delegation believes that those difficulties can
be overcome and that they must in no way slow the
progress that has been made - it must be noted - such
as the assignment of an international dialling code for
Kosovo as well as the implementation of the agreement
allowing that country to host a special tribunal to
investigate crimes committed during the conflict in
Kosovo. In that same vein, we welcome the high-level
meeting that took place in Brussels on 24 January and
was organized by Ms. Mogherini, High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, in which the Presidents of Serbia and Kosovo
participated. During that meeting, commitments
were made to resume talks under the auspices of the
European Union.

The Senegalese delegation agrees with the
Secretary-General that we must pursue our efforts in the
context of the humanitarian situation and human rights,
as Ms. Karima Bennoune, the Special Rapporteur in
the field of cultural rights, stated following her visit
to Serbia and Kosovo in October 2016. We believe
that the activities carried out within the framework of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
the mandate of which has been extended to 14 June,
are helpful because they contribute to enhancing
achievements related to defending and promoting the
rule of law and human rights, as well as the fight against
terrorism and organized crime.

Furthermore, the Senegalese delegation welcomes
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo in promoting
reconciliation, transitional justice, human rights and
support for the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina. In addition to encouraging
dialogue, Senegal urges stakeholders to redouble and
strengthen confidence-building measures by laying the
groundwork for the easing of tensions and development,
notably by promoting the implementation of the
agreements of 25 August 2015 in northern Kosovo.

The Senegalese delegation therefore reiterates its
full support for the joint European Union-United Nations
programme aimed at strengthening trust between
communities, in particular through the protection of
cultural heritage, and calls for the strengthening of
cooperation on information sharing with a view to
resolving the painful question of missing persons.

