Mr. Zarif: The report before the Council
(8/2013/72) details the key events and the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) that occurred between 16 October
2012 and 15 January 2013.

Since I last addressed the Council, on 27 November
(S/PV.6872), we have seen some important positive
developments, thanks to the direct Belgrade-Pristina
engagement in the high-level political dialogue
facilitated by the European Union (EU). Since October,
Prime Ministers Ivica Dacie and Hashim Thaci, who
are present in the Chamber today, have met for a total
of seven rounds of dialogue in Brussels. In addition,
Presidents Tomislav Nikolie and Atifete Jahjaga met
for the first time on 6 February as part of that same
process, signaling the full political engagement of
both sides. Together, these meetings have marked an
essential - indeed, historic - new chapter in the
collective effort to overcome the legacy of the past
conflict. The leaders involved have demonstrated
political courage as well as foresight by their
participation, and they deserve strong recognition for
having embarked on such a difficult yet indispensable
process.

Progress has emerged from these meetings, in
particular the most recent, the last of which took
place only two days ago. Accordingly, I am very
pleased that today the Council has the opportunity to
take stock of the achievements made so far. Detailed
discussions on the further implementation of the
agreement on the integrated management of crossing
points have addressed more complex questions, such
as the management of fees and duties at those points.
The parties' liaison officers are expected to begin
work soon within the European Commission offices in
Belgrade and Pristina.

More recently, discussions have shifted to
addressing the matter of Serbian institutions operating
within Kosovo, as well as a range of difficult issues
specific to the situation of northern Kosovo. It is my
hope that the parties will remain steadfast in their
determination to reach acceptable compromises on
such highly sensitive issues, and find viable solutions
that can better serve the interests and aspirations of all
communities living in Kosovo.

During this period of encouraging political
progress, there have also been significant challenges to
face on the ground, including adverse security incidents
and frequent instances of inflammatory rhetoric and
posturing from various quarters. The latter have not
only put unhelpful strains on the atmosphere around the
political process, but in some cases have also threatened
efforts to ensure that agreements are translated into
practice. In the face of such developments, we have
joined others in continuing to urge both sides not simply
to remain committed to the dialogue, but also to exert

more active leadership in order to temper the emotions
and reactions of their constituencies.

In that light, I wish to stress today that if this vital
political engagement is to fulfil its maximum potential,
it needs to be accompanied by strenuous, constant and
coherent work on the ground on the part of both the
mandated international presences and local leaders. For
its part, UNMIK continues to implement a broad-based
strategic review of all its activities and to enhance
functional coordination with its international partners.
Our goal is to help ensure that the political process is
reflected in the realities we face daily in Kosovo as
much as it is reflective of them.

I wish now to briefly highlight some key ongoing
issues, where continued attention and action must
accompany and complement he steps being taken by
those directly engaged in the political dialogue.

There have been episodes of increased tension
in northern Kosovo both during the reporting period
and in the two months since. Some of these have been
motivated, at least in part, by local confusion and
misunderstanding about the substance of the political
talks in Brussels. Unfortunately, that uncertainty was
aggravated at times by very ill-considered statements
from some local leaders. We and our partners continue
to urge Belgrade and Pristina to significantly enhance
their communication with the population living in the
north. At the same time, we are urging local political
leaders to act more responsibly, in a manner that will help
to protect the long-term interests oftheir constituencies.
With all interlocutors, we have stressed how important
it is that they base their public assessments strictly on
reliable information and renounce the chronic practices
of inflammatory rhetoric and short-term point-scoring.

In northern Mitrovica, there has been a very
troubling and extended series of incidents involving
the use of explosive devices, most of them apparently
targeting properties. Sadly, however, on 4 February
one such incident, in Mitrovica's mixed Three Towers
neighbourhood, resulted in light shrapnel injuries to
two children at play in their home. Their family has
since moved away from the city permanently.

An ongoing lack of consensus about municipal
authority in northern Mitrovica has also continued
to cause volatility in the mixed areas. Competing
assertions of authority by the administrative office in
northern Mitrovica and the parallel Kosovska Mitrovica
municipality continue to produce persistent tension
and occasional confrontation on the ground. I am
concerned that a stand-off over housing construction
and reconstruction works, spearheaded by the southern
Mitrovica municipality in the Kroi i Vitakut/Brdani
neighbourhood of Zvecan/Zvecan municipality, may
continue during the coming spring.
As I have detailed in previous briefings, ending
budget allocations to the UNMIK administrative office
in Mitrovica has undermined the most functional
channel available to address such problems through
consensus. Despite that development, my international
staff continue to carry out the important non-executive
functions of the United Nations administration in
the areas of local facilitation, conflict prevention
and mediation. Coordinated preparations are under
way - involving the EU Special Representative,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation, the
International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR),
ourselves and other mandated actors - to respond
appropriately and collectively so as to prevent any
adverse developments in that area. It is very unfortunate
and unacceptable that the personnel of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX)
continue to be constrained in their access to all areas
necessary to fully discharge their mandate, particularly
given that EULEX is now intensifying its focus on
improved investigative practices.

We were deeply distressed by the wave of
vandalism and destruction that took place across
Kosovo between 13 and 22 January, during which
around 200 gravestones in several Serbian Orthodox
cemeteries were damaged or destroyed, in some cases
by use of explosives or firearms. During this same
period, a monument dedicated to Kosovo Serbs and
Kosovo Albanians killed during the Second World War
was destroyed by earthmover in broad daylight before
an applauding crowd. These reprehensible actions were
unbefitting Kosovo, as were some imprudent efforts to
justify them in the press by making reference to actions
undertaken elsewhere.

In this respect, however, I was gratified by an
unambiguous and timely statement issued by the Kosovo
police. Representatives of the international community
unanimously condemned such wanton acts and, together
with UNMIK staff, were instrumental in encouraging
more proactive public responses from local and central
political authorities. Further appropriate and welcome
actions have been taken by the Kosovo authorities,

including the allocation of public funds for the repair
and reconstruction of the graves and monuments.

Understandably, the Serb community and the
Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo remain deeply
concerned by the expressions of hatred and intolerance
that accompanied these and other acts targeting
Orthodox sites and symbols. Regrettably, the level of
attendance at Orthodox Christmas services in some
parts of Kosovo fell significantly following public
threats and a few protests organized by some radical
groups in Kosovo.

The international community is particularly
concerned over the continuing rejection by the
municipal leadership in Deeani of a decision taken by
the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court of Kosovo
on 27 December. The decision rejected the claims over
a parcel of land by two socially owned enterprises
against Serbia and the Visoki Decani Monastery. After
summarily suspending relations with the monastic
community, municipal leaders not only did far too
little to restrain aggressive reactions against the
court's decision, but also effectively condoned them.
Such reactions included an attempt by a handful of
demonstrators to enter the grounds of Visoki Deeani on
8 February, as well as several attempts to place offensive
placards on its walls. Supported by KFOR, the Kosovo
police have so far been able to prevent harm coming to
the monastery; however, much stronger leadership from
politicians and public officials is needed to demonstrate
that universal values and respect for the rule of law will
be defended in practice.

Too many serious crimes in northern Kosovo,
as well as those affecting communities in the rest of
Kosovo, continue to go unsolved and remain a matter
of very sober concern. Judicial performance in Kosovo
continues to be another significant stumbling block,
aside from the political disputes. These issues were
amply highlighted in the most recent report of the
European Commission to the European Parliament and
Council on progress in fulfilling requirements for a
visa liberalization road map. Unsolved cases inevitably
become subject to political manipulation and lead to the
build-up of public frustration.

The political dialogue is now at a critical stage, and
the parties are poised to make fundamental progress.
Alongside this, stability on the ground remains fragile
and is likely to remain so while these talks delve into
topics that are both the most sensitive and the most
essential. I trust that the progress being achieved will
be welcomed by the membership of the Council, and
that they will moreover offer unequivocal support to the
parties to remain steadfast, regardless of the inevitable
challenges and setbacks along the way. Likewise, the
international community should be well prepared
to place its collective weight and support behind all
agreements reached mutually by the parties, and to
fully support their implementation.

As I have outlined today, and as also detailed in the
report, incidents and tensions continue to arise on the
ground, underscoring the need for energy and effort to
be rededicated by all international presences, alongside
the negotiations. Simply put, it is imperative that the
inevitable problems and setbacks on the ground,
however difficult they may be for those affected, not
be permitted to undermine the atmosphere and the
potential for progress in the vital political talks.

I ask that the Council pursue opportunities to make
use of its authority and influence with political leaders
on all sides in order to send clear and unified signals
regarding its high expectations and of its readiness to
support and reward constructive actions. Far too much
is at stake to permit short-term political challenges,
anxieties and setbacks to put at risk the fundamental
and historic opportunity that now stands before the
parties. Effective, efficient and coherent work by
all international presences is needed to promote and
sustain the conditions in which political talks may
achieve their true potential.

I wish to conclude my remarks today by thanking
you, Sir, and all members of the Security Council
for your close attention and support for the work of
UNMIK, including for our efforts to correctly tailor
our contributions to the evolving circumstances on the
ground.

