Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In honour of
your presidency, Sir, let me try to say this in Ukrainian:
"I thank you very much, Mr. President". I also thank
you for being here at this late hour in our proceedings.

I should like to begin by offering our deepest
condolences on the sad demise of Ambassador Churkin
yesterday and through you, Sir, especially to his wife
and children. He was an important interlocutor for the
Kingdom of the Netherlands during his mandate on the
Security Council, and he will be sorely missed.

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate on the international maintenance of peace and
security, with a special focus on conflicts in Europe.

The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and supports the statement made on behalf of Italy
in the context of the two countries' split term in the
Security Council for this and the coming year.

I will read out a shortened version of my statement,
and the full text will be made available on my Twitter
account.

We see three issues that are essential to any
discussion on peace, security, stability, conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. We will add to our discussion today our views
on how those issues relate to the European experience.

On the first point concerning conflict prevention,
we feel very strongly that multilateral cooperation
lies at the heart of peace and security in Europe. Over
the past 60 years, the European Union has shown its
ability to bring peace where there was once conflict.
Not once since the inception of the European Union
has violent conflict erupted between any of its member
States. Generations have grown up in the European
Union without war. Along similar lines, other regional
organizations such as NATO, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Council of Europe continue to play an important role
in maintaining peace and security in Europe - all
by addressing various aspects of conflict prevention,
such as military protection, economic and political
cooperation, assistance in democracy-building and
strengthening the rule of law. And, of course, all are
operating in the wider context of the global multilateral
organizations, first and foremost the United Nations.

With respect to my second point, on peacekeeping,
Secretary-General Guterres reminded us in January
that prevention is best served by strong, sovereign
States acting for the good of their people. But also in
Europe, peacekeeping has been necessary when the
basic tenets of international law have been violated.
However, while peacekeeping missions can be critical
to stabilizing conflict situations, they cannot resolve
them. Ultimately, Europe's conflicts can be resolved
only politically, not militarily. The current negotiations
in Cyprus, on which we have just heard our colleague
speak, underscore that point.

United Nations-mandated missions have played a
constructive role in Cyprus and Kosovo, for instance.
The United Nations does not need to carry the burden
of resolving each and every conflict alone. Regional
organizations like the EU, NATO, the OSCE and the
Council of Europe all play essential roles in stabilizing
conflicts zones in Europe and in brokering political
solutions. We strongly believe that under the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
the United Nations should seek to reinforce cooperation
with regional organizations wherever it can. United
Nations support for the work of the OSCE in monitoring
the implementation of the Minsk agreements, for
example, sends a clear signal to the conflicting parties.

This brings me to my third point, the peaceful
settlement of conflicts. Over the years, a number of
European States sadly have seen their sovereignty
challenged, their territorial integrity compromised. We
witnessed this most recently in Georgia and Ukraine.
This is something the United Nations should not
condone or abide. The European security order is firmly
based on the principles of sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity, the inviolability of borders, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the free choice of
countries to decide their own future.

Too often we see conflict management replacing
conflict resolution. We see conflicts turning from hot
to frozen. We see stalemates instead of sustainable
peace. But, as the Balkan wars in the nineties have
demonstrated, simmering conflicts can easily reignite.
It is better to settle disputes peacefully, through the
international court system, than by military means. Let
me underline the importance of the International Court
of Justice in The Hague and the Permanent Court of
Arbitration in that regard. Courts also have a role to
play when it comes to conflict resolution, reconciliation
and accountability. We are convinced that, ultimately,
there can be no lasting peace without justice.

The European experiences teach us that when
States focus on mutual benefits and respect for
international law, conflicts need not occur. The United
Nations is not there only to oversee the cessation of
hostilities in conflict zones.We should focus much more
on prevention, as the Secretary-General has indicated.
And when conflicts do occur, the United Nations should
pursue political resolutions vigorously and create an
environment in which reconciliation can occur.

To that end, the United Nations should seek to
cooperate with regional organizations and strengthen
them. This holds as true in Europe as anywhere else in
the world, so all nations may reap the benefits of peace
and stability fully. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
will continue to be a partner for peace, justice and
development in that endeavour.

