Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, and to wish
every measure of success for the very effective presidency
of the Gambia. I should also like to acknowledge the
important contribution made by Gabon and to hail the
presence among us at this meeting of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

In times of change and reform, when principles such
as transparency and democracy would appear to be the aim
of the major negotiations taking place in this Organization,
the holding of formal and open Security Council meetings
to debate any item on its agenda should constitute a normal
and daily practice. Therefore we are glad that the
unjustified obstacles initially placed in the way of this
meeting have indeed been overcome.

We began this meeting with a minute of silence. We
interpret that to mean, above and beyond a way of
honouring the memory of the victims of the case before us
today - which we endorse - that we are also honouring
the memory of all victims of terrorism, quite apart from
who they were and whence they came.

On this occasion Cuba endorses the support offered
by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
response given by the African Group and the Arab Group
to the request submitted by Libya that the Security
Council hold a formal meeting to consider all aspects of
the enforcement of Council resolution 748 (1992),
whereby a sanctions regime was established against that
country.

In the opinion of Cuba, the convening of this formal
Council meeting, supported also by other countries, is of
extraordinary importance. It reflects a dimension which
goes beyond the particular purpose for which it was
convened, because it comprises a number of aspects each
of which is valid and has its own merits.

The request by Libya embodies the exercise of the
right that all Member States of the United Nations have
to request a formal meeting of the Security Council to
consider matters they deem to be in their interest. It also
reflects the discharging of the Council's duty to gather to
hear the concerns of a Member State and to deal with the
causes that warrant a request to hold a formal meeting of
this body.

In the case of Libya, we are dealing with the request
of a Member State which is the target of sanctions
applied under a Council resolution the enforcement of
which is being prolonged, resulting in serious
consequences and having both economic and social
impact on Libya as well as other Member States of the
United Nations, which under the Charter have had to
support the implementation of the sanctions adopted by
the Council.

We are also talking about the new situation
emerging in the specific case of the sanctions imposed
against Libya as a result of the recent Judgment handed
down by the International Court of Justice.

Cuba welcomes the two Judgments handed down by
the Court, which confirmed the jurisdiction of the chief
juridical body of the United Nations in the Lockerbie
case, the tragic incident of the Pan Am aircraft in 1988.
These jurisdictional Judgments place the dispute in its
proper perspective.

The Security Council and the sanctions Committee
against Libya have periodically reviewed the sanctions
regime imposed by resolution 748 (1992). However, at
the conclusion of such analyses, both the Security Council
and the sanctions Committee determined that there was no

 

agreement to eliminate the sanctions regime imposed
against that country. The interests of certain permanent
members of the Security Council have prevailed, and as a
result the sanctions regime imposed against Libya remains
unchanged.

The failure to resolve this dispute has many causes.
One of them is the Council's failure to recognize either the
solutions proposed by the Government of Libya or the
efforts made by the various regional organizations,
Governments, international figures and groups of States to
shed light on the incident and to further the quest for a just
solution acceptable to all parties.

The lifting of the sanctions against Libya has been
held hostage to decisions and unilateral conditions imposed
by some permanent members of the Security Council,
which have arrogated to themselves the right to determine
that other sovereign States do not have the right to try their
own nationals. And certain States, which perhaps consider
themselves more sovereign than the rest, appear to enjoy
competency enough to judge and try the citizens of any
country of the world.

The sanctions imposed over all these years by the
Security Council against Libya represent an example of the
actions this body should be eschewing and one of the
phenomena justifying the in-depth reform of this principal
body of the United Nations.

Cuba takes the view that the sanctions imposed against
Libya must be lifted. We reject the imposition of sanctions
that reflect political interests and that ignore the real means
of peacefully resolving controversies among States, as
stipulated by the Charter of the United Nations.

Cuba agrees that the incident involving the Pan Am
flight must be clarified in order to respond to the concerns
and legitimate desire for justice of the international
community as a whole. However, for that same reason, we
reject and always will reject the double standard and dual
morality of those who insist on clarifying the causes of that
incident while acting from positions that further their
political interests, which are not always legitimate.

Our country has been the victim of, and witness to, the
lack of consistency in the actions and resolutions of the
Security Council. Still fresh in our minds and in the
institutional memory of this Organization is the
denunciation reiterated by Cuba in 1992 before the Council
with respect to the 1976 downing in mid-flight of a
commercial Cubana de Aviacion airliner as a result of a
terrorist attack in Barbados that took the lives of 73
people, in the face of the flexibility shown on the territory
of a permanent member of the Security Council with
regard to the self-confessed mastermind of that barbaric
deed.

On that occasion, the Council did not take a stand,
and there was no shortage of statements by certain
important permanent members urging that that
denunciation not be considered because the incident has
occurred many years previously. If the humanitarian
concerns that some permanent members of the Security
Council profess were in earnest, and if the same interest
in seeing justice done were shown in all cases, then at
that time the dimensions alone of the deed would have
sufficed for the Council to take a stand against one of the
most repugnant and vile crimes in the history of the acts
of aggression committed against the people of Cuba.

Cuba supports the request submitted by Libya and is
in favour of an open debate, in the context of the Security
Council, on all aspects of resolution 748 (1992) and of
the sanctions imposed against that country. The role of
the United Nations and that of the Security Council is not
to serve as a tool for the powerful to further their political
agendas. The real objective of the United Nations and the
Security Council is to see to it that justice and fairness in
international relations are applied to all sovereign States
equally, and that the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity, sovereign equality and non-interference in the
domestic affairs of States are respected without limitations
or restrictions.

