The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Liechtenstein ,
Malaysia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Pakistan, South Africa,
the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 13 October
2009 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2009/53l and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite His Excellency Mr. Riad
Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Palestinian National Authority, to participate in
the meeting of the Security Council that will be
held on Wednesday, 14 October 2009, regarding
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite Mr. Al-Malki to participate in the meeting, in
2
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Malki
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 12 October 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations, in which he requests
that the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item in accordance with rule 39 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure. If I hear
no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 8 October 2009 from His
Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, Permanent Representative
of Senegal, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Paul Badji.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
09-55731
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, to whom I give the floor.


