The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Chile.

We agree with the Secretary-General that it would
be advisable to postpone for a short time the withdrawal
from Angola of United Nations military units, and with
his recommendation to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) for a
further three months, until 30 January 1998. We shall
vote in favour of the draft resolution.

We recall that in accordance with resolution 1130
(1997), tomorrow is the date for the entry into force of
measures applicable to UNITA, agreed to by the Council
in resolution 1127 (1997). We regret that this action is
necessary and that UNITA has not taken the necessary
steps to comply with the obligations set out in that
resolution.

Nevertheless, we wish to note a matter of
importance with regard to the Security Council's own
work. With this group of resolutions - 1127 (1997),
1130 (1997) and the one that we are about to adopt

 
and as in the earlier cases of Burundi and Sierra Leone,
we are affirming in the Council a new and positive trend
with regard to the application of sanctions.

Sanctions are being aimed at the leaders responsible
for situations of conflict or crisis, thereby avoiding their
negative impact on innocent civilian populations.

 

Sanctions aimed at those who bear responsibility should
become the mechanism to which the Security Council has
recourse whenever the need arises for such measures to be
adopted.

At the same time, those in positions of responsibility
at whom such sanctions are directed - in this case the
leadership of UNITA - know that the Security Council
will be prepared to review the measures adopted as soon as
they act in conformity with the agreements they have made
and with what the international community asks of them.
Necessary measures have also been taken with respect to
humanitarian issues.

In conclusion, the delegation of Chile appeals to the
Government of Angola, but most particularly to UNITA, to
complete without further delay the outstanding aspects of
the peace process and to refrain from any act that might
lead to renewed hostilities.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/1997/823.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President (interpretation from Spanish): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1135 (1997).

The Security Council expresses its grave concern
regarding the presence of Angolan armed elements in the
Republic of the Congo, as reported by the Secretariat.

The Security Council reaffirms the statement of its
President of 16 October 1997 (S/PRST/1997/47). It
condemns all external interference in the Republic of the
Congo, calls on all foreign forces, including mercenaries,
to withdraw immediately from that country, and stresses
the importance of a political settlement, national
reconciliation and transitional arrangements leading to the
holding of democratic and free and fair elections with the
participation of all parties as soon as possible.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.35 pm.

