The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Serbia and Montenegro, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Vojislav Kostunica.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kostanica
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the comprehensive
review of the situation in Kosovo.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Eide to take a seat at the Council
table,

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Jessen-Petersen to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before
them document S/2005/635, which contains a letter
dated 7 October 2005 from the Secretary-General
transmitting a comprehensive review of the situation in
Kosovo (Serbia and Montenegro).


The President: I welcome the presence at this
meeting of the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Kofi Annan.

I now give the floor to the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide.


