Mr. Pildegovics (Latvia): I would like to thank the
Indonesian presidency for organizing a debate on this
important topic. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2019/373) and the representatives of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the Center
for Civilians in Conflict for their respective briefings.

Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.

As we reflect today on the progress made over the
past 20 years since the protection of civilians in armed
conflict was prioritized by the United Nations, Latvia
agrees with the previous speakers that there have been
important advancements, especially in the normative
framework. The protection of civilians during armed
conflict is a cornerstone of international humanitarian
law, which is binding for all parties to armed conflict,
State and non-State alike. International humanitarian
law also identifies and protects particularly vulnerable
civilian groups, such as women, children and
displaced persons.

The Security Council has strengthened the
framework for the protection of civilians through
its relevant resolutions, including prioritizing the
issue in peacekeeping mandates. We believe that the
international community has grown more aware of
the need to prevent and stop violations against civilian
populations during conflicts, especially owing to the
nature and media coverage of contemporary conflicts.
It must be noted that the Council has heard many
moving testimonies by survivors of conflicts.

The legal framework is solid and relevant. Yet,
despite those developments, civilian protection in armed
conflicts has not been sufficient. The latest report of
the Secretary-General once again confirms that far
too many civilians continue to be robbed of their lives,
health, future prospects and homes. Challenges remain
to the protection of civilians in diverse conflict-affected
areas, including Syria, Yemen, Libya and Ukraine, to
name but a few. It is extremely worrisome when parties
to a conflict fail to spare the civilian population and
civilian objects in the conduct of military operations, as
required under international humanitarian law.

Latvia is deeply concerned that the civilian
population is often deliberately targeted by parties to
an armed conflict, illegal armed groups and terrorist
organizations. The use of air-launched, explosive
and - more deplorable - chemical weapons in
populated urban areas, forced displacement, sexual
and gender-based violence, starvation, sieges and the
denial of much-needed humanitarian assistance have
become frequently used methods of warfare. Latvia
strongly condemns attacks on civilian objects, as well
as on humanitarian and health-care infrastructure
and personnel in armed conflict, which unfortunately
continued at a high rate last year. We welcome all
efforts by the Security Council to address that serious
issue. Regrettably, increasing humanitarian needs
will likely continue, including conflict-related forced
displacement. In that regard, Latvia emphasizes the
need to allow safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian
access to populations in need.

The facts on the ground show that greater
compliance with international humanitarian law by
all parties to armed conflicts in protecting civilians is
necessary. We therefore support the recommendations
of the Secretary-General contained in his latest report
on how to strengthen the practical impact of the
protection agenda. Those recommendations should be
addressed with a sense of urgency.

As the current President of the fifth Conference
of States Parties of the Arms Trade Treaty, Latvia is
pleased to see that the report also addresses the context
of arms exports and transfers, and encourages all States
to become parties to the Arms Trade Treaty and similar
regional instruments without delay.

Latvia believes that promoting the protection of
civilians in all United Nations activities is essential.
The Security Council must view this matter as a
priority when addressing situations of concern, and it
must remain an important component of United Nations
peacekeeping mandates. We reiterate our call on the
permanent members of the Security Council to refrain
from the use of the veto in situations of atrocity crimes.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
fundamental legal obligation and our common interest to
promote and ensure the effective protection of civilians
from the devastating consequences of armed conflict.
Impunity for disregarding humanitarian principles in
present-day conflicts must not become the new normal.
In the absence of accountability for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law, such violations will only continue to proliferate.

