Ms. Keita (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to express my gratitude to the United States, in
its capacity as President of the Security Council, for
convening today's meeting on Haiti. I would also like
to take this opportunity to welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Haiti.

I am happy to present to the Security Council
the second of four reports (S/2018/795) requested
by the Security Council during the current mandate
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which ends on 15 April 2019,
in accordance with resolution 2410 (2018). I will also
provide an update on developments in Haiti since the
report was published, on 30 August.

(spoke in English)

The report reviews the Mission's work with
the Government, the United Nations country team
and external partners to prepare, in accordance
with resolution 2410 (2028), the transition to a
non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in the
country beginning no sooner than 15 October 2019. The
focus of MINUJUSTH remains centred on mandate
implementation, particularly in the priority areas
identified by the benchmarked exit strategy, which
weaves together a framework of the evolving conditions
under which the current United Nations configuration
can confidently transform into a non-peacekeeping
presence in the country. Following the report of the
Secretary-General of June 2018 (S/2018/527), which
presented the 11 benchmarks to the Council, this report
provides a measure of their implementation through
an assessment of 46 distinct indicators. To that end,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Mission have jointly engaged in an exercise to set up a
more comprehensive data-collection mechanism and to
track the progress of each indicator since the Council
took note of the benchmarks three months ago.

The visual infographics that are being distributed
to Council members are the result of that exercise. The
dashboard, which presents a diverse and representative
sample of the main areas covered by the benchmarks,
is not meant to replace the comprehensive overview
that the benchmarks in their entirety reflect, but rather
gives a quick, general overview of the progress made
thus far.

The traffic-light matrix included in annex I to
the report provides a more comprehensive picture
depicting the trend in the realization of each of the 46
indicators. Both visual aids tell the same story - there
has been some progress, albeit uneven, in most areas.
Nonetheless, several challenges remain and dedicated
intervention to spur progress is required for all targets
to be achieved by October 2019. Constant efforts
must be undertaken, for example, to ensure that the
development plan ofthe Haitian National Police is fully
implemented, so that both the professionalism and the
number of police officers continue to improve. As the
dashboard shows, the rate of officers per 1,000 citizens
has slightly dropped, to 1.32, for several reasons,
including resignations. Members can see the three
elements reflected on the visual aid, with regard to the
police. I mentioned the first element as an example.

The indicators are also a useful tool for the
Mission and highlight the areas in which more
focused strategies and renewed efforts are necessary
to address the thornier issues. Many of those will
require political, rather than technical, work to make
a difference. In that regard, it is important to point
out that, in consultation with the Haitian authorities,
MINUJUSTH has developed a political strategy that
seeks to help build momentum and strengthen political
buy-in from Haitian stakeholders, through a concrete
course of action within a clear timeline, in support of
efforts by the Haitian authorities to achieve key targets
under the benchmarks and in close cooperation with
other international partners.

One such critical area on which progress on several
benchmarks hinges is the adoption and promulgation
of key rule-of-law legislation. While the Mission
is engaged in providing support to Parliament to
implement a road map towards the adoption of the draft
penal code and the draft code of criminal procedure,
and is encouraging legislators to finalize and adopt
the draft law on legal aid, the drafting of legislation to
enhance police work and improve the functioning of the
penitentiary administration has yet to commence. I am
referring to the first visual aid pertaining to legislation,
covered in benchmark 1 and indicator 1.

Similarly, indicators, such as the availability of the
national action plan for human rights and human rights
obligations, shown on the previous slide, are covered
in benchmark 9 and indicator 1. The nomination of the
nine members of a Permanent Electoral Council, which
is the last visual aid on the dashboard, is covered in
benchmark 11 and indicator 1. The representation of
women in key State institutions, such as the Court of
Cassation and the Superior Council of the Judiciary,
have not been achieved. That slide refers to judicial
appointments, with three methods to monitor the
gender situation, covered in benchmarks 2 (a), 2 (b) and
2 (c). Targets on oversight and accountability bodies
are also lagging, especially those pertaining to judicial
inspection, covered in benchmark 5 and indicator 1.
They are critical to the strengthening of the judiciary,
and, once achieved, would ensure a speedier reduction
in the length of prolonged pretrial detention, on which
progress is so badly needed. It is covered in benchmark
l and indicator 8.

(spoke in French)

With regard to security, while the number of
murders fell during the period under review, covered
in benchmark 6 and indicator 3, significant threats
persist, including an increase in gang-related crimes.
Armed gangs in Martissant and other areas south
of Port-au-Prince - covered in benchmark 6 and
indicator 5 - seeking to expand their illegal operations
and areas of influence in order to generate greater
resources and position themselves before the next
legislative elections, in 2019, remain a challenge for the
Haitian National Police. Regrettably, armed gangs are
still well known for the pressure they exert on politicians
to negotiate access to areas under their control during
the election campaign period, and, in many cases, even
their attempts to influence elections in their favour.

The successful implementation of the Haitian
National Police 2017-2021 development plan, with
the support of MINUJUSTH, will enable the Haitian
Government to gradually continue to assume its
security responsibilities. Although an evaluation of the
first year ofimplementation of the plan, to be presented
to donors on 10 September, shows encouraging signs
of progress, it also reveals gaps that must be addressed
quickly to ensure that progress continues. They include
the lack of sustained efforts by national authorities
and international partners to provide the necessary
financial resources to support the full implementation
of the plan. In that regard, the ongoing commitment of
the country's leaders and the international community
will be essential as the transition progresses.

In close consultation with its national counterparts,
MINUJUSTH has developed an integrated security
transition plan, as requested by the Council. The
plan will guide the first phase of a responsible and
effective withdrawal of the United Nations police
presence in Haiti, in accordance with resolution 2410
(2018) - from seven to five formed police units
(FPUs), between 15 October and 15 April 2019. One
unit, with special weapons and tactics capacity, will
be transferred to Port-au-Prince, while two formed
police units will cease operations by early March 2019
in anticipation of the repatriation of their personnel
and equipment by the end of the same month. The
regions from which the FPUs will be withdrawn have
been selected on the basis of their respective levels of
stability, improved security situation, progress made
in achieving target indicators and the need to ensure
the smooth functioning of MINUJUSTH operations
until October 2019. Mitigation measures are being put
in place to accompany the withdrawal, in consultation
with the Haitian authorities.

Above and beyond clear, well-crafted plans, the
situation on the ground must be closely monitored.
Today marks exactly two months after the beginning of
the violence that broke out on the streets of Haiti amid
protests against the abolition of long-standing subsidies
for oil products, which has led to an increase of 38 per
cent in the price of petrol and diesel and 51 per cent in
that of kerosene. Such a flare-up in violence, not seen
in Haiti for several years, highlights the volatility of
the current security situation. Since the July unrest, the
authorities have not sought to address the root causes
of the unstable social conditions, while the process by
Parliament to ratify the policy statement of the appointed
Prime Minister and the assumption of office by the
new Government remain pending. Resentment among
the people is fuelled by a steady stream of revelations
about the alleged benefits of State officials and the
debate surrounding the questionable use of PetroCaribe
funds over the past 10 years. The risk of major unrest
remains at a heightened level, given the combination
of political and socioeconomic triggers without losing
sight of the possibility of natural disasters during the
current hurricane season.

(spoke in English)

Time is of the essence to make concrete progress
on MINUJUSTH's mandate implementation through
the 11 benchmarks acknowledged by the Council.
Together, MINUJUSTH, the country team, the
Government of Haiti and other partners will need to
redouble efforts to make up for the time lost because of
the challenges resulting from the events of 6 to 8 July,
given the time-bound nature of the mandate and the
transition process. Those are all challenges that must
be addressed by a fully functioning Government,
the forthcoming establishment of which presents an
invaluable opportunity to reset the dynamics among
national actors, reinvigorate the national sector-based
dialogue and catalyse the devising and adoption of a
new governance and stability pact. In that regard,
we welcome the announcement by Prime Minister-
designate Jean-Henri Ce'ant of the proposed members
of his ministerial Cabinet. A new Government and the
leadership of the newly appointed Head of MINUJ USTH
and Special Representative of the Secretary General for
Haiti, Ms. Helen La Lime, who is here with us today,
should create renewed momentum in our partnership
with Haiti, the strength of which is essential to the
achievement of our transition targets. Ms. La Lime,
who assumed her functions and began her in-briefing
in New York this week, will deploy to Port-au-Prince
next week. We hope that the Security Council and the
friends of Haiti will continue to provide strong support
for their endeavours.

