Mr. Fernandez de Soto Valderrama (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to congratulate Cote
d'Ivoire on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I would also like to highlight the importance
of the holding of this open debate for my country and
region. We welcome all efforts aimed at improving
communication between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, as posited by
the Security Council in resolution 1631 (2005).

History reminds us, day after day, that the solidity
of the global institutions that ensure the effective
maintenance of international peace and security
emanates from the commitment of all States to
multilateralism. Colombia has always placed its trust
in the search for diplomatic and peaceful multilateral
solutions. That constant is reflected in our foreign
policy, which led to our becoming a founding member
of the United Nations and of the Organization of
American States (OAS).

It is undeniable that the characteristics and
dynamics of the threats to international peace and
security that we face today have changed. Currently,
most conflicts are of a domestic nature and require
States to respond to attacks on democratic structures
and principles, and they often trigger various kinds
of humanitarian crises. That all has repercussions on
entire regions, extending beyond the country affected,
and requiring various forms of global cooperation.
Reality has shown us without a doubt that such threats
cannot be addressed unilaterally - whether they
involve mass migration resulting from the breakdown
of the democratic system, the shortage of medicines or
food in the community of the affected country; or the
challenges of facing effectively, and from a perspective
of shared responsibility, phenomena such as the global
problem of illicit drugs and transnational crimes, which
know no borders or profit from weakened borders; or
when the institutional order of a country breaks down,
which leads to disregard for constitutional and legal
principles to the detriment of the population and the
commission of clear and serious violations of the human
rights that are recognized by international instruments.

The conclusion is clear. It is essential to strengthen
the multilateral system and to implement all established
or defined mechanisms so that multilateralism can
fulfil the purposes of its existence. In that sense, in our
region the Organization of American States has legal,
significant tools for building consensus and defining
strategies that provide access to States and in-depth
knowledge ofthe specific conditions of situations on the
ground, making that regional organization a decisive
interlocutor in the success of the objectives proposed by
the United Nations to prevent the escalation of conflicts
and restore democratic order.

Regional and subregional organizations, owing to
their proximity, knowledge and shared historical and
cultural links, are called on to play a more relevant
role in prevention and peacebuilding activities, some
of which we have witnessed in initiatives such as
the OAS Electoral Observation Mission in Haiti or
our regional body's Electoral Observation Mission,
among others. In that context, the African Union is
another tangible example. On many occasions, as has
been pointed out here, the African Union, thanks to
its geographical proximity and direct knowledge, has
responded in times of crisis and has carried out actions
that have subsequently garnered consensus within
the international community. The added value of the
involvement of regional organizations in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts should not be seen as a
substitute for national ownership, which is a sine qua
non requirement for the achievement of positive and
effective results in such situations.

I would like to conclude by referring to the remarks
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, made
in the context of the seventy-third anniversary of the
United Nations and in the presence of the country team
in Colombia, which with 23 agencies and programmes
is one of the Organization's largest in the world. On
that occasion Foreign Minister Trujillo Garcia stated
that Colombia has a multilateralist Government.
Colombia has been a friend of multilateralism, and
it will continue to strengthen multilateralism. We
understand multilateralism to be the natural space
within which to share concerns in order to develop
common solutions - even more so in today's world
where global problems require global solutions. The
United Nations can count on Colombia.

