Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, I would
like to thank those countries that bravely and with great
integrity did not vote for this draft resolution. We are
gratified that this draft resolution was not adopted. This
draft resolution should never even have been
considered. A draft resolution mentioning Sheikh
Yassin without mentioning Hamas is shameless and
hypocritical. Describing Sheikh Yassin as an innocent
bystander leaving prayers, without identifying him as
the arch-terrorist that he was, makes a mockery of this
Council. I was especially dismayed by those Council
members who described Sheikh Yassin as the spiritual
leader of the Islamic movement Hamas. This is sad and
alarming, especially coming from countries which have
themselves suffered from terrorism and continue to do
so.

Ignoring the leaders of terror will not make terror
go away and sends a dangerous message worldwide. I
would also like to ask those Council members which
were recently victims of horrendous terror the
following question: If you knew, before the bloody
massacre of your citizens, who was going to carry out
that horrendous act, would you have sat still and let it
happen?

Sheikh Yassin stood at the head of an
organization that was committed to destroying Israel
and to destroying the road map and every other peace
initiative through the cold-blooded murder of innocent
civilians. He was the head of an organization that has
been recognized and declared as a terrorist organization
by most of the world's freedom-loving countries,
including the whole of the European Union. In fact, it
has been recognized as such in most parts of the world,
with the exception of this Chamber.

The Security Council, which has endorsed the
road map and is charged with the maintenance of
international peace and with pursuing the global war on
terrorism, would have committed an unforgivable act
of hypocrisy had it come to the defence of a man
whose life's work and legacy was the eradication of
peace, a man who was nothing less than a mass
murderer and the godfather of terrorism. We are indeed
grateful to those members of the Council that
recognized this fact and voted accordingly.

Two weeks ago, Ahmed Yassin proudly -
gloatingly - took responsibility for a double suicide
bombing at the Ashdod port, which killed 10 innocent
people. The bombers were in fact planning a mega-
attack targeting chemical storage tanks at the port. Had
they been successful, there would likely have been
fatalities in the multiple hundreds. I wonder whether
the reaction to Israel's defensive operation would have
been the same had, by a cruel twist of fate, the Ashdod
attack achieved its objective. After the Ashdod attack,
the Council was silent, in the same way that it has been
silent after the hundreds of other terrorist attacks that
Yassin orchestrated and proudly claimed as his own.
Yet the sponsors of this draft resolution would have
had the Council break that silence to defend the very
man responsible for those attacks. There is simply no
way to justify this double standard.

We hope that those Council members that were
prepared to support this distorted text that was
presented to them will have the decency in the future to
support draft resolutions that focus on the kind of
horrific acts of Palestinian terrorism for which Yassin
and his co-conspirators have been responsible.

The fight against terrorism and for peace
continues. Only yesterday, we all witnessed, with
horror and disbelief, the abyss into which the
Palestinian strategy of terrorism and murder has
descended. Not for the first time, a young Palestinian
boy no older than 14 years old was used as a suicide
bomber. This proves once again, sadly, that there will
probably not be peace until the Palestinians learn to
love their children more than they hate us.

If the international community is serious about
advancing the peace process for both Israelis and
Palestinians, we must stop tolerating initiatives that
pretend that the defensive response to terrorism is
worse than terrorism itself. We cannot send the
message that terrorists will be immune and satisfy
ourselves with routine condemnations.

The Security Council has a responsibility to the
victims of terrorism and to the cause of peace. It cannot
meet that responsibility by devoting meeting after
meeting to pandering to Arab Group initiatives that
seek to demonize Israel and ignore Palestinian
obligations. The Council can only meet its
responsibility by addressing the reality that those
Palestinian terrorist organizations and the regimes and
leaders sponsoring them are the true enemies of peace.
Unless and until they are confronted and defeated,
progress towards a two-State solution under the road
map will be held hostage.

