Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing on the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). We appreciate his excellent leadership as
Committee Chair for the past two years. We also thank
the Panel of Experts for the valuable support they have
provided to the Committee.

The Republic of Korea has been closely following
the talks between Iran and the P5+l, as well as between
Iran and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), on resolving the Iranian nuclear issue. We
reaffirm our support for the continuing diplomatic
efforts and look forward to the achievement of a
comprehensive solution within the newly extended time
frame. In that regard, we welcome the decision of the
P5+1 to resume the negotiations in Geneva yesterday.
At the same time, we emphasize that Iran's cooperation
with the IAEA is essential in order to clarify current and
past unresolved issues, including the possible military
dimension of the nuclear programme. A comprehensive
agreement would strengthen the regime of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and send
a positive signal on other non-proliferation issues.

Regarding the Committee's work, as the Chair
highlighted, the measures imposed in the relevant
resolutions remain in full effect and States' obligations
to implement them are unchanged. We expect the
Committee and the Panel of Experts to continue to assist
Member States in implementing those obligations.
We welcome the submission of the midterm report
of the Panel of Experts. It provides a useful point of
reference on the status of the Panel's activities and the
implementation of the relevant resolutions, and reminds
us that we should be vigilant about continued activities
prohibited under those resolutions.

Lastly, we note that Iran has yet to respond to
letters from the Committee, including two sent this
year relating to a carbon fibre interdiction and an
interdiction of a cargo of conventional arms in the Red
Sea. We urge Iran to cooperate constructively with the
Committee, since that is crucial if we are all to move
forward. Once again, we commend the work over the
past two years of the Chair and his team, as well as that
of the Panel of Experts and the Secretariat. Though the
Republic of Korea is also soon to leave the Council,
we will continue to support its work and that of the
Committee.

