Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer, for the information
he provided on the situation in South Sudan. We pay
due tribute to our colleagues from the Secretariat, who
have yet again presented a balanced assessment of the
situation in their monthly report.

We note the deployment of the advance team of the
Regional Protection Force (RPF), which began in May.
It is our understanding that the general timetable for
deployment is being adjusted, but that is not the fault
of the South Sudanese. Juba has remained constructive
regarding the matter of the RPF, as demonstrated by the
Government's decision to provide land parcels for the
deployment of the force. We call upon the Secretariat
to continue to engage with Juba so as to resolve all
pending issues in connection with the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), including the
creation of mechanisms for the swift resolution of
visa issues and the definition of arrangements for
the deployment of the RPF while upholding the basic
principles of peacekeeping.

We share the concern of colleagues regarding the
disastrous humanitarian situation in the country and note
the efforts made by the United Nations to improve it. We
appeal to all sides in South Sudan to ensure conditions
conducive to the provision of humanitarian assistance
to those in need, and we welcome the measures taken
by the Government to provide humanitarian access to
food-insecure regions.

We would be remiss were we not to note the
assistance provided to South Sudan by neighbouring
countries, in particular the Sudan, which has opened
border crossing points, and Uganda, which is hosting
a significant number of refugees from South Sudan.
We would like also to emphasize that the root causes
of the famine in a number of provinces in South Sudan
are not just human-induced. In some areas, just like
in neighbouring Somalia and Kenya, famine is due
to adverse weather conditions. Representatives of
international humanitarian organizations have spoken
about this issue as well.

We share the view that stabilization in South
Sudan is possible only if a full cessation of hostilities
is ensured and an inclusive political process launched.
In this regard, we welcome Salva Kiir's announcement,
in the framework of the implementation of the peace
agreement, to conduct nationwide dialogue. We also
welcomed the recent oath-taking by members of the
executive committee. It is our hope that the Government
and the opposition will take measures to make this
process more inclusive.

We welcome Salva Kiir's declaration ofa cessation
of hostilities. We hope that this decision will be
implemented and call upon the opposition to take
analogous measures. We note the personal efforts of the
Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, to find a solution
in South Sudan. We support the African Union-United
Nations-Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) coordination initiative aimed at ensuring
peace, stability and security in South Sudan. It is our
hope that in the near future this cooperation will take
shape on the ground.

It is encouraging to note that more active and
coordinated efforts are being made by regional players
for a settlement in South Sudan. We hope that the
UNMISS working group on hate speech will continue
to work effectively. We would like to remind colleagues
of the relevant provisions of resolution 2327 (2016),
namely, on the need to curb such incitement on their
territories through the use of social networks.

Given the general situation in the country, the
Russian delegation today supported the adoption of
Security Council resolution 2353 (2017), which extends
the sanctions regime against South Sudan. Our position
regarding a hardening of sanctions measures has not
changed. Solid peace in South Sudan is not going to
be brought about by a Security Council arms embargo
but, rather, by progress towards a political solution
as well as by targeted measures for the disarmament
of civilians and the demobilization and reintegration
of combatants. We also believe that there is a need to
heed the views of regional leaders to the effect that
discussions on the levying of additional restrictions on
Juba would be untimely.

Against this backdrop, we call attention to the
duplicity ofthe approaches of certain colleagues who in
this Chamber loudly champion an arms embargo, but,
outside of it, bring pressure to bear on the independent
experts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan who are investigating their possible involvement
in providing weapons to South Sudan.

