We would like to thank Germany, in its capacity as President of the Security Council this month, and the Dominican Republic for convening this open debate on the issue of conflict-related sexual violence, under the women and peace and security agenda, to which Peru attaches great importance. We especially welcome the participation of His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany. We would also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for her important briefing, as well as the representatives of civil society for their briefings. We welcome and celebrate, in particular, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, which was an essential milestone in the defence and advancement of the role of women in our societies, developing an agenda for women's empowerment and gender equality while envisioning a world in which women can exercise their freedoms and choices and realize their rights. We also celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), an important event for the women and peace and security agenda, which recognizes women as key players in building international peace and security. For Peru, the gender equality and women's empowerment agenda is crucial. That is why, in recent years, we have made great efforts to improve the enjoyment and exercise of the rights of all women, adolescents and girls. Within this framework, Peru is committed to the women and peace and security agenda, which includes the key element of combating sexual violence in armed conflict. This commitment was expressed in the work we carried out during our recent participation in the Security Council within the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, which Peru had the honour of co-chairing with Germany. We also wish to stress our support for multilateralism and the rule of law as essential elements of the international community. On this basis, we condemn in the strongest terms sexual assaults, including those committed during armed conflicts, whose systematic use, whether as a tactic of war, to spread terror or attack collective identities, must be understood and confronted as a threat to international peace and security. We are concerned about the magnitude and seriousness of the problem. The most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487) confirms the link between sexual violence, trafficking in persons and terrorism. It also reports alarming trends, such as sexual violence perpetrated against girls and boys, which cannot be justified under any circumstances and must be categorically rejected by the international community as a whole. In this regard, we wish to emphasize that the prohibition and condemnation of this type of violation during an armed conflict is established in international humanitarian law, international criminal law and international human rights law. Actions aimed at combating these crimes must include not only the protection of victims and their rehabilitation, but also bringing those responsible to justice and addressing the root causes that make their perpetration possible, in order to prevent further repetition of these atrocities. We are convinced that the United Nations, and in particular the Security Council, have a very important role to play in this task, and therefore urgent action must be taken. Despite increased attention of the international community to the need to end impunity for crimes of sexual violence, and commitments to that end, we are concerned that accountability for such crimes remains elusive. In this regard, we consider it important to recall, in line with resolution 1820 (2008), that sexual crimes cannot be subject to amnesty in the context of conflict resolution processes. It also is essential to recognize and combat gender inequality as a fundamental cause and driver of sexual violence in conflict. We therefore believe that equality and empowerment have a direct impact on the maintenance of peace and security. The important role played by women in all areas of our societies is crucial. The coronavirus disease pandemic has demonstrated this, showing that 70 per cent of all health-care and social workers on the front line of the pandemic are women. However, inequalities and gaps are still evident. In that sense, the inclusion of women in the decision-making process is very important, as it gives visibility to their needs and perspectives and thereby also helps to eliminate stereotypes about women's roles. Evidence shows that greater participation of women in decision- making processes reduces the likelihood of conflict. We cannot ignore the stigma and fear of victims or their intimidation by their attackers. Most cases of sexual violence go unreported. This is reflected in the low confidence and trust in national institutions. Therefore, strengthening the capacity of these institutions is essential to ensure accountability for the crimes committed and their prevention in the future. The proper care for and rehabilitation of victims are essential to any sustainable peacebuilding process, including an understanding that their trauma is also psychological and that if it is not addressed through a multidimensional approach, it has the potential to destroy the social fabric of a community. The Security Council must also continue to encourage, support and monitor specific commitments and plans to prevent sexual violence in the conflicts on its agenda, working with local non-governmental organizations and United Nations entities on the ground. In conclusion, we wish to express our appreciation and support for the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and to underscore the priority that the Secretary-General attaches to this issue, in line with the need to build sustainable peace.
