Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
For the first time under your presidency of the Council,
Madam, I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and
Romania, the candidate countries Turkey and Croatia,
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania, Serbia and
Montenegro and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the country of the European Free Trade
Association Iceland, member of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.

At this crucial time for the future of Haiti, the
European Union welcomes the opportunity to discuss
the findings of the recent mission the Security Council
undertook there, on which Ambassador Sardenberg
briefed the Council this morning, in conjunction with
the mission of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of
the Economic and Social Council, whose findings
Ambassador Rock has just presented. We feel that three
areas need our particular attention at this juncture: the
security situation, the upcoming elections and
sustainable economic development.

While the mission is of the view that some
measure of progress has been achieved regarding
security, including through improved cooperation
between the Haitian National Police and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
we note that the overall situation remains fragile. The
Haitian National Police is struggling to maintain law
and order. An adequate and effective demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration programme is still
lacking, and we take note of the mission's concerns
regarding the firm commitment of the Transitional
Government in that regard. The establishment of the
National Commission on Disarmament is a welcome
first step, but substantial and speedy progress is needed
in this field, with the assistance of MINUSTAH, in
advance of the elections in the fall.

The persistence of widespread violence in some
areas of the country would pose a serious risk to the
elections, as a secure environment is essential for
political debate, campaigning and voting. To further
assist the Haitian National Police, a temporary increase
in the civilian police component of MINUSTAH and an
adjustment of its mandate in order to address the
increasing security challenges should be considered for
the period leading up to the elections.

The European Union remains gravely concerned
at the human rights violations which have been and
continue to be committed in Haiti. While a strong
police response is needed to restore law and order, it
must respect human rights standards. There should be
thorough investigations into alleged human rights
violations by the Haitian National Police. We call again
on the Transitional Government to take the measures
necessary to put an end to impunity.

The European Union welcomes the official
launching of the national dialogue by the Interim
President. The Union reaffirms that the ongoing crisis
in Haiti can be resolved only by peaceful means
through a constitutional and inclusive political process.
That process must include national dialogue,
compromise and reconciliation and must lead to free
and fair elections by the end of this year and to the
transfer of power to elected authorities by 7 February
2006. All political forces that have renounced violence
should be actively encouraged to participate in the
national dialogue.

The elections planned for this year will be an
essential building block in a long-term effort to rebuild
the country. To maintain the necessary momentum, the
announced calendar for the elections must be
respected. In that context, we are following very
closely the voter registration effort currently under way
under the supervision of the Organization of American
States. As I indicated to the Council in January (see S/PV.5110), the European Union is examining the
possibility of dispatching an election observer mission
to Haiti. To that end, an assessment mission is planned
for the beginning of the summer, and €20.5 million has
been earmarked to support the elections.

The Haitian people must be provided with the
capacity to ensure the country's long-term stability and
prosperity. The European Union is of the view that
genuine long-term stability in Haiti requires a
strengthened economy and sustainable development.
Excluding bilateral contributions by member States,
the European Union's pledge made at the Washington
donor conference has since been increased to €294
million. The European Union is doing what it can to
accelerate disbursements and programme
implementation, in order to tangibly improve living
conditions and reduce poverty in Haiti. To that end, the
European Commission staff in Haiti has been
reinforced and procedures for project implementation
have been simplified.

This being said, the projects financed through the
European Development Fund require close cooperation
with the Haitian authorities, who must implement those
projects. The lack of an effectively functioning public
administration significantly hampers progress in such
projects. In the meantime, the European Union has
been concentrating on projects in three areas where the
Haitian population will see rapid benefits, including
through job creation: infrastructure, especially road
construction; education, including rehabilitation of
schools; and democratization, in particular through
support for elections and for justice-sector reform.

Security and development are interlinked
elements of a comprehensive solution to the crisis in
Haiti, as illustrated by the fact that the Security
Council mission took place in conjunction with that of
the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic
and Social Council. The European Union supports the
view that a long-term United Nations presence is
required and acknowledges the need for improved
coordination between MINUSTAH and the various
development actors in Haiti.

Let me conclude by reaffirming the European
Union's firm commitment to support Haiti in its
difficult transition process, both in the short term and
in the longer term. At the same time, we share the view
that the Haitian people themselves, including the
Transitional Government, need to shoulder their
responsibilities and take ownership of their own future.

