Mr. Domingos Augusto (Angola): First of all,
we wish to thank the delegation of New Zealand for
organizing this meeting. I take this opportunity to
congratulate New Zealand on the efforts that it has been
making in its presidency of the Security Council to
bridge the gaps between Council members on sensitive
and contentious issues, such as the Syrian conflict.
Today's meeting is an expression of such efforts.

At this critical juncture, it is vital that the entire
international community diligently and constructively
initiate efforts, taking into consideration the fact that
the people of Syria continue to bear the appalling
consequences of the terrible war. Unfortunately,
political differences and strategic interests continue
to obstruct the prospects for negotiations that might
lead to the attainment of a settlement that would end
the conflict and spare millions of Syrian civilians
from Violence, humanitarian catastrophe and an
unprecedented refugee crisis.

We received with optimism the news of the recent
agreement on the cessation of hostilities in Syria
brokered by the Governments of the United States of
America and the Russian Federation as a critical step
towards restarting the political dialogue, improving
the dire humanitarian situation and more effectively
combating the terrorist scourge that has permeated the
Middle East and beyond. The most heinous perpetrators
of terrorist acts and violent extremism - Al-Qaida,
the Taliban, the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
also known as Da'esh - will get stronger if protracted
conflicts, such as the one in Syria, where geopolitical
interests take precedence over people's well-being, are
not resolved.

For more than five years, we have witnessed the
destruction of schools, medical services and other
civilian infrastructure, such as electricity- and water-
distribution facilities, and the erosion of the Syrian
social fabric in general. Despite humanitarian agencies'
efforts to provide assistance to those in need and
the linkage between the provision of humanitarian
assistance and the launching of a meaningful political
process, and even though the official rhetoric on both
sides has been one of de-escalation and the willingness
to resume political negotiations, the reality is that
military gains of strategic importance continue to take
precedence over peace negotiations.

Against the backdrop of this reality, the civilian
population, particularly the younger generation, which
has been forced to flee, has become marginalized,
disenchanted and frustrated and is fertile ground for
an ideology of extremism and hate and an illusionary
sense ofpurpose and belonging in the face of such deep
social and political grievances. It is crucial that regional
and international stakeholders preserve the political
will that led to the ceasefire and that the understanding
reached be sustained. The time has come for all relevant
actors in the region to redouble their efforts to bring the
parties back to the negotiating table and begin the slow
and arduous process of ending hostilities. This will
in turn allow for the free and unimpeded delivery of
humanitarian aid and the re-establishment of a national
dialogue for a political settlement of this irrational
conflict, with the aim of putting an end to the suffering
of the Syrian people. That should be our main priority.

In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge the
personal commitments undertaken by the United States
Secretary of State, Mr. John Kerry, and the Russian
Federation Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey
Lavrov, in brokering the ceasefire agreement, as well
as the tireless efforts of Special Envoy De Mistura to
bridge the existing gaps between the belligerents and
get the Syrian parties and regional and international
stakeholders on the same track, in order to facilitate the
resumption of a more fruitful round of negotiations. It
is our profound wish that the members of the Security
Council, the International Syria Support Group and
other regional stakeholders recognize the long-term
benefits of ending the conflict and exert the necessary
pressure for the resumption of negotiations and for a
more effective and united combat against the ever-
expanding terrorist threat.
The cooperative work of those entities should be
focused on drastically reducing the flow of arms into
Syria, increasing the delivery of humanitarian aid,
establishing as the main priority an end to the conflict
and easing the plight of the innocent civilians trapped
in this bloody war. Hopefully, this debate, together
with our collective endeavours, will galvanize the
international community towards making a more
proactive effort. There is a renewed sense of urgency
to end armed conflicts, as they are at the root of rising
radicalism and extremist ideology in conflict zones and
throughout the world.

