Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her
very informative briefing. On behalf of France, allow
me to reiterate our full support for her commitment at
all levels, as well as that of MONUSCO. I also thank
Ms. Josephine Mbela for her insightful testimony on
the expectations of the Congolese people with regard to
the elections, especially the key role that women must
be able to play. She can rest assured that her important
messages have been and will continue to be heard.

As I had the opportunity to say during the Council's
visit to the Democratic Republic of Congo, we are at a
crucial moment in the history ofthe Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We are all convinced that there is now a
historic opportunity, with the elections on 23 December,
for the first democratic and peaceful transfer of power
in the country. Successful elections - which is to say
free, credible, open and transparent ones, in the context
of a peaceful environment and the results of which are
recognized by all - would undoubtedly give way to
a new chapter in the country's history. It would pave
the way for stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and would contribute significantly to creating
the conditions for its development.

Progress has been made to that end. Electoral
materials are beginning to be distributed throughout
the country, provisional voter rolls have been published
for everyone to review and the Government has once
again begun to contribute to the Independent National
Electoral Commission to enable it to operate fully.
France welcomes the progress.

However, that technical progress will be meaningful
only if all candidates can compete freely in the elections
and if the Congolese people have confidence that their
vote will be fully recorded. Trust is therefore the key
to success. Efforts have been made to reconcile Views
on the use of machines for printing ballots and on the
electoral register, and technical questions have been
raised. It is essential that dialogue among all parties
continue to be pursued to respond to them and so that
agreement is reached quickly on the conditions for
preparing for the elections. All Congolese political
actors involved in the elections, whether in organizing
or competing in them, must rise to the challenge and
heed the people's call for overcoming their differences
and finding the broadest possible consensus.

As the Council has frequently call for, fully and
in good faith implementing the so-called relaxation
measures called for in the Saint-Sylvestre agreement
remains necessary. Through its Commissioner for
Peace and Security, the African Union has called on
all parties

"to ensure calm and arrive at agreement to find
viable solutions to candidate and ballot security,
reach consensual solutions to issues related to the
electoral register and to making the political space
more inclusive, and ensure equitable access to
public media for all actors".
The Saint-Sylvestre agreement provides for the lifting
of the general ban on demonstrations. Although some
political meetings have been held in Kinshasa without
incident, which France welcomes, the lifting is still
awaited. Out in the provinces, we continue to see
frequent instances of political rallies being prohibited,
often on very short notice, with demonstrators being
manhandled and arrested. It is essential that the
lifting of the ban on demonstrations be implemented
throughout the entirety of the territory.

The official campaign begins in 10 days' time.
During the Security Council's visit to the Democratic
Republican Congo, the Government undertook to
ensure that all political activities would be free and
unhindered during the time of the visit. For their
part, the opposition leaders whom we met committed
themselves to carrying out those activities in a peaceful
manner. We call on all parties, both Government and
opposition candidates, to honour their commitments for
the good of the Congolese people.

Finally, we respect the choice of the Congolese
authorities to organize elections without external
assistance. We will remain ready to support the holding
of the elections, in particular through MONUSCO,
should the Congolese Government so request. Similarly,
the African Union has also reiterated its readiness to
pool its resources and coordinate its efforts with those
of MONUSCO in order to provide additional support
for organizing elections. I would also like to briefly
address three points that, although not related to the
elections, remain especially important.

First, regarding the situation in the east of the
country, armed group activities, in particular by the
Allied Democratic Forces, continue to jeopardize
civilians, particularly around the town of Beni. We
are aware of the situation in that particular part of the
country. France encourages MONUSCO, specifically
its Intervention Brigade, to ambitiously neutralize
those groups and restore to the civilian populations of
Beni the peace to which they aspire.

Secondly, the Ebola epidemic is raging in that
same region of the country, while the security situation
has significantly complicated the response. France
commends the courageous commitment of Congolese
health services and international partners, including
MONUSCO, in combating the epidemic. We encourage
the Democratic Republic of the Congo's partners to
respond to the call and fund the regional response
plan. Otherwise, the risk of regional spillover is high.
Along those lines, I would refer to the Council's call in
resolution 2439 (2018) for ensuring access and safety
for humanitarian and medical personnel.

Finally, turning to the humanitarian situation
in the Kasais, the return of thousands of Congolese
people from Angola has significantly complicated the
response to the crisis, in an area already ravaged by
recent tensions. France commends the solidarity shown
by the people of the region who provided assistance to
the returnees, even though most of them are themselves
living in difficult conditions. Also on this point, the
country's partners must rise to the challenge and
provide the necessary assistance to help the people
concerned. On all of those points, you, Mr. President,
may be assured of France's steadfast commitment.

