Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank the delegation of South
Africa for requesting an open meeting of the Council
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. It is not
without significance that this meeting is convened
following a request from the current chair of the Non-
Aligned Movement, which encompasses the majority
of the world's nations in an association whose only
purpose is its declared aspiration to achieve security
and well-being for all peoples of the world.

It is not an overstatement to say that peoples'
eyes are fixed on this Chamber in the hope that signals
of peace will be heard rather than omens of war and
destruction. Above all, it is the Arab peoples who
continue to yearn for an end to external interventions
that persist in the shadow of the long tragedy of the
Palestinian people. It seems that this issue has not
merited the attention of the members of this Council,
despite the scenes of Israeli terrorism and the trail of
destruction and killing left in its wake, as projected by
the mass media before the eyes of the international
community and people all over the world.

In spite of the numerous of areas of conflict and
the gravity of situations in many areas of the world
today, the Security Council has put the question of its
relationship with Iraq as a top priority, ahead of all
others. Certainly, no one can deny the great importance
the Council attaches to this issue. It primarily affects
security and stability in our region and relations among
its member States.

However, confining discussion to the parameters
of military intervention merely to seek justification for
the intervention, while at the same time ruling out all
other options that could ensure Iraq's compliance with
Security Council resolutions, completely contravenes
the sense of responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. This will remain a
bone of contention and will not achieve unanimity, or
even consensus, which constitutes the sole basis for
initiating military action on behalf of the international
community.

We have seen how Iraq responded to Arab and
international political pressures. We have heard Iraq's
recent announcement that it would re-admit the United
Nations weapons inspectors so they could resume their
mission without restrictions or conditions. In fact, Iraq
went further in allowing inspectors to have access to
presidential palaces for this purpose. This in itself is
proof of the positive impact of such pressure. If efforts
are coordinated and guided well by this Council, they
will bear fruit and save the region and the world from
war, the consequences of which only God knows.

For our part, the question is quite clear and needs
no complications. Many peaceful ways and means
could be found to compel the Iraqi Government to
positive cooperation by implementing Security Council
resolutions if some countries abandoned the logic of
force and did not restrict their thinking to war as the
only option. It is only rational that the Council should
adopt the views of wise people and historical
experience. Foremost among such wise people are
Presidents Nelson Mandela and Jimmy Carter, who
called for renouncing the option of war and for giving
peace a chance.

Like many others, we do not concur with those
who call for the use of a pre-emptive strike as the only
way for eliminating Iraq's ability to produce weapons
of mass destruction and to launch aggressive acts
against others in the future. Launching war against
others solely on the basis of reading their intentions
would open the door wide to explode hotbeds of
tension and wars whose roots had been lying dormant.
Undoubtedly, in many cases resorting to force
illustrates a shortcoming more than it provides
evidence of the sensibility and rationality of the
decision to use force. Military intervention by coalition
States against Iraq was justified in 1991, but the
measures taken over a lO-year period after that to
implement relevant Security Council resolutions,
including the sanctions system, resulted only in
humanitarian tragedy suffered by the Iraqi people,
tragedies that multiply day after day. The current calls
for military action present another admission of the
failure of those measures and a consideration of the
same error.

The Republic of Yemen, which rejects any
military action against Iraq, believes that it is not wise
for the Council to adopt new resolutions that would
complicate the issue and would not contribute in any
way to the achievement of a satisfactory solution.

The Republic of Yemen feels that Iraq's invasion
of Kuwait represented a threat to regional and
international peace and security, but at the end of that
invasion Iraq pledged to respect the sovereignty and
independence of the State of Kuwait and gave its
commitment to implement all relevant Security Council
resolutions. In our View, this does not provide any
justification for any new military action against Iraq.
The Republic of Yemen expresses its grave concern
over the current approach to invade Iraq, with all the
military mobilization and political alliances that are
being shaped in earnest. This constitutes a direct threat
to the security and stability of our region.

Yemen adheres to the collective Arab position
that rejects any invasion of Iraq and urges instead all
parties to demonstrate positive cooperation and to give
the United Nations weapons inspectors a chance to
fulfil their task, without any attempt to affect the
completion of their mission - that is, ensuring the full
and simultaneous implementation of all requirements
of relevant Security Council resolutions.
Yemen hopes that the reconciliation that took
place at the recent Arab Summit in Beirut will lead to
implementation of the Summit's resolutions which
regard the resolution of the question of Kuwaiti
prisoners and detainees as being primarily a
humanitarian issue, in addition to being an essential
step that would contribute to confidence-building and
that would be a demonstration of good faith towards
the restoration of normal and brotherly relations
between the brothers in Kuwait and Iraq.

An Arab proverb says: the people of Mecca know
their ravines better than anybody else. We would say
that the States of the region, which are threatened by
the expansionist ambitions of Israel, share the view that
the Israeli arsenal of weapons of mass destruction
represents the real and direct threat to Arab security,
especially under the constant threats made by
successive Israeli Governments.

We wonder how anyone could be convinced that
the right approach is to intervene militarily in Iraq in
order to dismantle its weapons of mass destruction,
given that Iraq has asserted that it has no such weapons
and has, in fact, welcomed the return of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission. That approach is even more questionable
when one considers that Israel is continuing to produce
and stockpile weapons of mass destruction, including
nuclear weapons, without any deterrent action or
accountability.

We trust in the wisdom and sense of
responsibility of the Council. We also wish to highlight
the historical importance of Security Council
resolutions on this subject in the light of the long-term
implications for security and stability in the region, in
particular, and for the future of international relations,
in general.

