Mr. Motoc (Romania): I associate myself with
many of the general remarks that were made by
previous speakers, in particular those by Ambassador
Gaspar Martins. I express the great appreciation and
gratitude of my delegation to High Commissioner
Ruud Lubbers for the very timely and insightful
briefing he just gave the Council. I take this
opportunity to commend Mr. Lubbers and his team for
their overall performance in the discharge of the
crucial responsibilities entrusted to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR).

I would like to direct two questions to the kind
attention of Mr. Lubbers. The first is actually a point of
clarification with respect to the refugee situation in
Darfur, the Sudan. According to our information, the
figures that have been presented by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), there
were recently reported to be 2 million refugees in
connection with that situation. That should be
compared to the reported 1 million in April. If those
figures are accurate, I would really appreciate a
comment on the reasons for the dramatic increase in
the number of refugees in that troubled area.

Secondly, I would like to direct attention to an
area that was not touched on in the otherwise very
comprehensive briefing to the Council - and it might
have been, given the worldwide scope of the UNHCR's
activities. I would like to ask a question with regard to
Kosovo. According to the Secretary-General's report
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) of 30 April (S/2004/348),
UNMIK is working with the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government in supporting the reconstruction
effort after the violent events of last March. To that
end, UNMIK is reported to have formed a
reconstruction support team that includes the UNHCR,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
European Agency for Reconstruction. We would be
very appreciative if the High Commissioner could
kindly give the Council an update on the efforts of
UNHCR as part of that collective effort, in particular
with respect to progress made in the return process for
newly displaced persons.

