Let me start my intervention by picking up where Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, left off. We are at a critical juncture with regard to the Sudan. The transition process could still derail, which makes it necessary that we look seriously at the situation. There are enormous challenges for the Government of Prime Minister Hamdok. At this stage, I would like to once again underline Germany's full support for the Government. We want the Government to succeed, and we will do everything from our side to make that possible. The difficulties of the transitional institutions in meeting their deadlines are depressing to hear once again. With regard to gender equality and women's representation, the transitional bodies are not meeting the expectations that we have voiced repeatedly here in the Security Council. That is really frustrating. We know that peace processes work only when more women are involved. Again and again, we have been let down - but more important, civil society and women have been let down. The situation is very difficult in the Sudan: the floods, the harvest, the coronavirus disease, additional illnesses owing to the floods and 50,000 refugees from the Tigray region. I commend the Government of the Sudan for what it has been doing to accommodate the refugees under difficult circumstances. As if that were not enough, I read the daily press briefing by the Spokesperson of the Secretary-General this morning concerning the report (S/2020/1155) of infighting over the control of gold mines, attacks against Government forces and 27,000 displaced persons. The situation is very difficult. Therefore, we have been a driving force, together with our British friends, in supplying United Nations help and seeing to it that the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) actually takes up its work. I am very encouraged by what I heard from both Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lacroix with regard to the build-up of UNITAMS. I think it is very important that, from the very first day, UNITAMS be able to do the work that we have designed here as it supports the Government. It is very good that it is a fully integrated team. Germany will support it with additional voluntary contributions and personnel. With regard to the drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), Mr. President, you will recall that I recently raised the issue that it is very important that the Council make a decision on the drawdown of UNAMID. We heard that from the three briefers, in particular from Mr. Khare. I would like to thank him again for outlining all the challenges that we face in the immediate drawdown. We therefore have to coordinate with the Sudanese authorities who will take over the protection of civilians. We might see a situation where security incidents occur and our Blue Helmets would not able to intervene if we do not provide them with a legal basis to complete their drawdown. What kind of an impression would we leave on the population if we had Blue Helmets sitting there and not doing anything? Furthermore, we heard that there is resistance from the local authorities against allowing the drawdown. Some months ago, we heard reports about the looting of United Nations premises that were supposed to go to Sudanese educational institutions. We cannot allow that to happen again, because it would tarnish the image of the Government, the United Nations and the Security Council. Therefore, my plea again to you, Mr. President, is to have a serious look at our obligation as the Security Council. We have to make a decision on the drawdown. We have to decide how to cooperate with the Sudanese Government in the most effective way possible in order to cope with all the challenges we face. I like the proposal of Mr. Khare, which is to have a coordination mechanism that looks at all those questions. But we have to mandate it. We have to assume our responsibility. We cannot just let UNAMID go.
