Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): I
should like first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to say how proud Burundi is of the dynamic spirit
and the contribution of Mali to this prestigious body,
which is entrusted with international peace and
security.

Our admiration likewise goes to your
predecessor, Miss Mignonette Patricia Durrant of
Jamaica, for the outstanding manner in which she
guided the work of the Council last month.

The Government of Burundi has read the
additional report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which supplements the first report of that same Panel.
We wish to pay tribute to Ambassador Kassem and his
team for their excellent work. The Government of
Burundi will continue to give them the support and
cooperation necessary to their mission.

Burundi wishes to make the following comments
on the report under consideration.

First, the Government of Burundi welcomes the
conclusions of the addendum to the report, which
completely clears Burundi of any suspicion of
involvement in the illegal exploitation of the resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, in
paragraph 101 of the addendum, it is clearly stated that:

"The Panel found no evidence directly
linking the presence of Burundi in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the exploitation of
resources."

That same paragraph states that the presence of
Burundi's army on the lake frontier with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo

"has been and continues to be directed at

blocking attacks from the Burundi rebel groups,

particularly FDD, which are based in South Kivu
and Katanga."

The addendum thus confirms what the
Government of Burundi has consistently asserted and
what good-faith observers already knew.

During the meeting of the Security Council on the
first report of the Group of Experts, the delegation of
Burundi had questioned the existence of an
International Monetary Fund (IMF) memorandum
reporting that Burundi had been exporting minerals that
it did not produce. The addendum, fortunately, has just
confirmed our misgivings about this matter. In
paragraph 102, the Panel of Experts states that it had
"contacted the Africa Department of IMF, requesting a
copy" of its memorandum, but that "the Panel has not
been able to obtain a copy of it."

While the Government of Burundi is satisfied by
the conclusions of the Panel of Experts concerning
charges pertaining to the alleged involvement of
Burundi in the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
delegation of Burundi is, however, concerned by
information contained in certain paragraphs of the
addendum regarding assistance granted to the armed
groups Forces pour la defense de la democratic (FDD)
and Forces nationales pour la liberation (FNL) in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In paragraph 58 of the report, the Panel of
Experts stated that it

"received credible information, corroborating
reports from independent sources, that Zimbabwe
is supporting the Burundian FDD rebel forces by
supplying them with weapons and expertise.
Many reliable sources have informed the Panel
this regard that the Zimbabwe Defence Forces are
training FDD in Lubumbashi, where the FDD
leadership is based and where Zimbabwean
copper and cobalt investments are located.
Another sign of their loosely structured
coordination with the Burundian rebels is that the
ALIR II forces are based near FDD in South Kivu
and also have a command and liaison presence in
Lubumbashi."

Paragraph 136 of the addendum states that

"Zimbabwe and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo supply arms
to the FDD rebels The officers and non-
commissioned officers are also trained by the
Zimbabwean army in Lubumbashi. In
exchange, FDD forces, acting essentially as
mercenaries, fight alongside the Mayi-Mayi and
ALIR forces".

Further, in paragraph 138, the report states that

"The head of FDD, Jean-Bosco
Ndayikengurukiye, is based in Lubumbashi. He is
rumoured to control or own mining interests in
the Katanga region, the profits from which he
uses to cover some of his senior officers"
expenses."

The Government of Burundi notes that this is not
the first time that a report requested by the Security
Council has reported destabilization of the security of
Burundi, from the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, by a regional coalition of negative
forces. In the August 1998 report of the International
Commission of Inquiry (Rwanda) established by
resolution 1013 (1995), contained in document
S/1998/777, the members of that Commission devoted
an entire chapter to describing the links that exist
between the former Rwandese forces and the Rwanda
Interahamwe with the FDD and FNL of Burundi.

These inquiries were supported by important
documents, contained in the report, indicating
cooperation agreements signed between Rwandan and
Burundian genocidal terrorists. The police of Burundi
are also in possession of information concerning
cooperation between the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) rebels of Uganda of Jamilu Mukulu and the
FDD-FNL Burundian terrorist movements.

The Government of Burundi calls on the Security
Council to follow up on the conclusions of its own
fact-finding missions, especially at this time, when the
United Nations is being called upon to play an
increasingly important role in the peace process in
Burundi. The reports of these fact-finding missions
should lead to consistent action.

It is becoming increasingly clear that the
intransigence of the FDD and FNL armed terrorist
groups is linked to the support that it has now been
confirmed they are receiving from neighbouring
countries. The time has therefore come for the Security
Council and the international community to condemn
these armed groups directly and hold them responsible
for the terrorist acts they are committing against
children, schoolchildren, students, women, the elderly,
travellers, foreigners - and their property - and
humanitarian personnel. The people of Burundi believe
that the savagery of these killers is no different from
that of, say, the Revolutionary United Front in Sierra
Leone or UNITA in Angola - groups against which
the Security Council has imposed sanctions that even
extend to the countries and organizations that support
them. The terrorist groups of Burundi are also acting as
part of a coalition of negative regional forces that use
the same methods of killing, are fuelled by the same
ideology and pursue the same goals.

It would therefore be logical for the FDD and
FNL to be placed on the same list of terrorist
organizations that includes the ALIR of Rwanda and
the ADF and the Lord's Resistance Army of Uganda -
a list that has already been made public by the
Governments of two permanent members of the
Security Council - the United States of America and
the United Kingdom.

The Government of Burundi requests the Security
Council, the region, the facilitators and the entire
international community to focus all their efforts on
what is now the highest priority in Burundi: bringing
about a complete and permanent ceasefire. That can
become a reality only if coercive and firm measures are
taken against the FDD and FNL armed groups, which
have stepped up their violent actions against the
innocent population since the establishment of the
transitional Government, and which no longer have any
political justification for turning a deaf ear to appeals
for negotiation and ceasefire. Similar pressures should
also be exerted on countries that provide recruitment
and training, or serve as transit or assembly areas, for
the FDD or FNL. The Government has made specific
proposals for cooperation and consultation to those
countries, and will continue to do so.

Finally, the Government of Burundi reiterates its
willingness to negotiate a ceasefire with the FDD and
FNL forces and to pursue dialogue with all
neighbouring countries, especially the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Tanzania, with a view to
seeking together the fastest way to bring peace back to
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the whole of the Great Lakes region.

