Mr. Powles (New Zealand): I am grateful for the
opportunity to participate in this meeting. I am
instructed by my Government to speak today because
of its concern over the situation which led to the killing
on Monday this week of a New Zealand soldier
deployed as a United Nations peacekeeper in East
Timor.

As the Council is aware from an earlier briefing
by the Secretariat, Private Manning was a member of a
small reconnaissance patrol sent to follow up reports
by local East Timorese of a militia presence near the
border with West Timor. At 10.30 am. East Timor time
on 24 July, the patrol was engaged by a group of
suspected militia lying in wait in well-defended
positions, and during the action, Private Manning was
killed. When his body was recovered some hours later,
it was found to have been mutilated.

The death of a United Nations peacekeeper on
active service is an all too common event. I think of the
casualties suffered by troop-contributors to the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) only
recently. What singles out Private Manning's death,
perhaps, is the circumstances surrounding it. Only last
month in this Chamber, we spoke of our concern at
recent militia incursions and attacks on United Nations
peacekeepers, including the wounding of an Australian
peacekeeper. While acknowledging the positive actions
taken by Indonesia up to that point, we called in June
for renewed efforts by the Indonesian Government to
rein in the militias in West Timor.

My Government is grateful for the messages of
sympathy from the Security Council expressed in the
statement to the press by you, Madam President, on
behalf of the Council, on Tuesday. It has been passed
on to Private Manning's family. The condolence
messages this morning, including from Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi on behalf of the Secretary-
General, are also very much appreciated and similarly
will be passed to Private Manning's family. Now we
demand that those responsible for his death be brought
to justice. We welcome the undertakings given to this
effect by the Indonesian Government and trust that
there will be the fullest cooperation among the parties
concerned to achieve this outcome.

The dangerous security environment along East
Timor's border with Indonesia has been allowed to
persist for far too long. We again urge the Indonesian
Government to redouble its efforts to put an end to all
militia activity in West Timor. This will require
effective action to disarm and disband the militia
groups. These extremists must be dealt with firmly.

Furthermore, the continued large-scale presence
of refugees in West Timor provides cover for the
militias' existence and activities. We are deeply
concerned that repatriation of refugees to East Timor
has virtually halted. They continue to face threats and
intimidation. The Indonesian authorities must take
effective steps to remove obstacles to the repatriation
or resettlement of the refugees in accordance with their
wishes. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees must be given unimpeded
access to these people, and they and other humanitarian
workers must be given adequate protection. It is
essential that law and order and security in and around
the refugee camps be established as soon as possible.
This is clearly the responsibility of the Indonesian
Government and its armed forces and police.

New Zealand condemns those who threaten East
Timor's stability and the United Nations-sponsored
process of peace and reconciliation for which Private
Manning made the ultimate sacrifice. The Secretary-
General's valuable report makes clear the substantial
progress achieved by UNTAET over the past six
months in the face of enormous challenges. The
increased direct participation of East Timorese people
in the governance of the territory of the period under
review is especially welcomed. But there must be no
further violence against those who have been deployed
in East Timor from so many nations around the world
in the service of peace and under the mandate of this
Council.

