Ms. Hussaini-Suleiman: It is a great honour for
me to appear once more before this body on behalf of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) to update the Council on the
latest developments regarding the political and security
situation in Mali, and the efforts being made by
ECOWAS and its partners to control the situation. First
of all, however, I would like to pay a glowing tribute to
you, Sir, for your excellent handling of the proceedings
and to thank France for sponsoring this interaction. I
wish also to acknowledge all the excellent statement
made by the Secretary-General on the situation.

The reprehensible acts of vandalism, criminality and
gross violations of human rights that have accompanied
the rebellion in the north of Mali since 17 January are
getting worse by the day. This is happening despite

the solemn appeal of ECOWAS and the international
community to the armed groups in the north to respect
the sanctity of the holy month of Ramadan. The latest
addition to the litany of crimes was the stoning to death
of an alleged adulterous couple and the imposition
of a dawn-to-dusk curfew on women in the occupied
territory.

Meanwhile, as tangible progress is being made in
the transitional process, the marginal forces bent on
obstructing the timely execution of the transition have
lately increased their acts of incitement and obstruction.
These disturbing developments, and the ominous threat
that the double crisis in Mali poses to regional and
international peace and security must focus the minds
of the international community. The situation calls for
urgent and decisive measures from us all.

In the light of the active consideration being
accorded by the Security Council to the ECOWAS
request for a United Nations mandate to deploy a
stabilization force to Mali under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter, I intend to provide further
information not only on the political process, but also
on the planned deployment of ECOWAS troops.

It will be recalled that, in paragraph 18 of resolution
2056 (2012), adopted at the 6798th meeting on 5 July,
the Council, among other decisions,

"[e]xpresse[d] its readiness to further examine
the request of ECOWAS [for the United Nations
mandate] once additional information has been
provided regarding the objectives, means and
modalities of the envisaged deployment and other
possible measures, [and] encourage[d] in this regard
a close cooperation between Malian transitional
authorities, the Commission of ECOWAS, the
Commission of the African Union, and countries
in the region".

Since then, ECOWAS has intensified its efforts aimed
at stabilizing the situation in Mali, in close cooperation
with the African Union, the United Nations and other
partners, in the spirit of the resolution.

On 7 July, the ECOWAS mediator in the Malian
crisis, His Excellency Mr. Blaise Compaore, President
of Burkina Faso, and the Regional Contact Group on
Mali composed ofthe Presidents ofBenin, Cote d'Ivoire,
Liberia, Niger, Nigeria and Togo, met in Ouagadougou
with a cross-section of the Malian socio-political
stakeholders with a view to implementing the decisions

taken by ECOWAS at its summit, held in Yamoussoukro
on 28 and 29 June. All the major socio-political groups
in Mali attended the meeting, with the exception of the
marginal parties supporting the military junta, who
declined the invitation.

The Regional Contact Group requested the
stakeholders to make proposals to the interim President
of Mali on the establishment of a Government of
national unity by 31 July. Further, the transitional
Government was tasked, within the same time frame,
to come up with a road map with concrete tasks and
timelines for resolving the crisis, organizing a free, fair
and transparent presidential election, and securing the
territory of Mali.

The decisions met with the full approval of the
vast majority of the Malian stakeholders, including
the transitional Government, the National Assembly,
political parties and civil society organizations.
Since then, the Prime Minister has presented the
Government's road map for the transition to both the
Malian National Assembly and the ECOWAS mediator.
In another positive development, ECOWAS facilitated
the return from France of the interim President,
Mr. Dioncounda Traore, on 27 July. In an address to the
nation on 29 July, Mr. Traore urged the people of Mali
to warmly welcome the assistance being proposed by
ECOWAS, the African Union, the United Nations and
neighbouring countries, and promised to send a formal
request as soon as he forms the Government of national
unity as requested by ECOWAS, which process is
actively under way.

In the efforts to ascertain the current security
situation on the ground and to further assess the
requirements for the eventual deployment of the
Standby Force, the ECOWAS Commission dispatched a
technical assessment mission to Mali from 6 to 19 July.
The mission was also in fulfillment of the request of the
Security Council for greater clarity on the anticipated
deployment. In the spirit of the close cooperation
between ECOWAS and its partners, military and
political experts from the African Union, the United
Nations and other partners joined their counterparts
from ECOWAS on the mission.

The report of the technical assessment mission
was presented to the ECOWAS Chiefs of Defence
Staff at their meeting in Abidjan from 25 to 27 July.
A final planning conference to further refine the
strategic concept, with the participation of ECOWAS,
the African Union, the United Nations, the European
Union and other partners, is scheduled to be held
from 9 to 13 August in Bamako to pave the way for
the deployment as soon as the expected United Nations
mandate is received.

Following the technical assessment mission,
detailed information about the planned deployment in
a report entitled "ECOWAS strategic concept for the
resolution of the crisis in the Republic of Mali", was
submitted on 3 August to the Council through the
Office of the Secretary-General. The report captures,
among others, the following areas: strategic objectives,
the operational concept, military plans and details of
force generation, the political command and control
architecture, timelines for the operation, and the
means available and additional resources required.
It also captures the cooperation modalities with the
Government of Mali and other partners. ECOWAS
anticipates that the report and the outcome of the final
planning conference will clear up all lingering issues
with regard to the deployment intended by ECOWAS
and secure the United Nations mandate requested by
ECOWAS and the AU.

As indicated in previous submissions to the
Council, the ECOWAS strategy in Mali aims to
intensify mediation efforts with all stakeholders
while undertaking a phased deployment process. The
purpose of the ECOWAS stabilization force is to assist
the Government of Mali to achieve the following
objectives: ensure the security of the transition and its
institutions; restructure and reorganize the security
and defence forces of Mali; and restore the territorial
integrity of the country by extending State authority to
the north, combating terrorist and criminal networks
and responding to the humanitarian consequences of
the crisis.

The security and humanitarian situation in the north
of Mali is getting worse by the day. With the eviction
of the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad
(MNLA) from the north by the Movement for Unity
and Jihad in West Africa (MUJAO) and Ansar Dine, at
the end of June 2012, the international community can
today hardly characterize the happenings in the north
as acts of rebellion or expression of self-determination.
The removal of MNLA from the equation has replaced
political demands with outright terrorism and
criminality, which should be combated with all the
means available.

We are running out of time. Every day that we
dither and postpone concrete action in Mali provides the
terrorists and criminal networks yet another opportunity
to consolidate, commit atrocious war crimes and
worsen the plight of the populations in the north. The
objective of those terrorist groups and transnational
organized criminals is clear, namely, to create a safe
haven and a coordinating centre in the north of Mali
for continental terrorist networks, including Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, MUJAO, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab. If that objective is realized, no country in
Africa, or indeed outside the continent, will be safe.
The longer the precarious situation persists, the greater
the danger it poses to regional and international peace
and security. The time to act is now. A Council mandate
to deploy a stabilization force in Mali will constitute
concrete and decisive action.

Finally, may I take this opportunity to express the
sincere appreciation of ECOWAS to the United Nations,
the African Union, the European Union and bilateral
partners for the strong support extended to ECOWAS,
in particular by making available their experts to
participate in the critical final planning conference.

