Mr. Sharma (India): Thank you, Mr. President,
for accommodating me in the forenoon portion of
today's Council meeting. We welcome you to the
Council and convey our deep appreciation of the
contribution of Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby and his
team to the work of the Council. Today's meeting is
timely and, under your presidency, most appropriate, as
Norway has provided valuable assistance for
Afghanistan. We should also like to congratulate
Mexico on last month's presidency and on having
brought greater transparency to the work of the Council
by holding open briefings by the Secretariat on issues
of importance, including Afghanistan.

We convey our heartfelt condolences and
sympathy to the people of Afghanistan and to the
Interim Administration for the terrible loss of life and
devastation in the tragic earthquake that befell their
country yesterday.

On 22 December 2001, when the Interim
Administration of Chairman Karzai took charge, the
challenges confronting Afghanistan were many, and
each was daunting and formidable by itself. Among
those challenges were: to provide security without a
national army or police for a people which had not
known peace for decades; in a landscape of ruin, to
provide some of the bare minimum public services that
any society expects from its Government; to provide
humanitarian assistance to poverty-stricken areas
devastated by war and drought; to reconstruct a country
utterly shattered by decades-long conflict; to heal the
deep wounds of the past; to promote national
reconciliation; and to restore kinship.

The Interim Administration has just completed
100 days. So much was expected of it, and quite
remarkably, it has accomplished so much in so little
time, with so few resources. It is a vindication of the
faith reposed by the international community in the
Interim Administration and in the overwhelming
yearning of the Afghans to break from the recent past
and to move towards a future full of promise and hope.
It is a manifestation of the indomitable spirit for which
the Afghans are justly known.

However, no one is in doubt that the Interim
Administration has only just taken the first steps in a
long and arduous, but fulfilling and rewarding, journey.
The Taliban and Al Qaeda, the twin tormentors of
Afghanistan, are down but not out. As recent events in
Afghanistan have amply demonstrated, those forces of
darkness are still there, hidden in caves and crevasses,
lying low and waiting for an opportunity to strike back.
Collectively, the international community has paid a
very heavy price for allowing those malevolent forces
to seize and dominate Afghanistan. Those forces can
have no place in Afghanistan or anywhere else. They
have to be extirpated at the root in the interest not just
of Afghanistan but also of the countries in its
neighbourhood and of the international community.
This is a collective imperative and obligation from
which we cannot turn away, no matter how long it
takes or how demanding it may become.

As clearly brought out by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2002/278), the security situation,
particularly outside Kabul, remains a cause of concern.
While the Interim Administration is resolutely trying
gradually to re-establish a sense of security, it lacks the
resources, particularly a trained and well-equipped
police and military force. Until such time as the Interim
Administration acquires those resources, it requires and
has requested international assistance. In January, in
this very Chamber, Chairman Karzai appealed to the
Council to expand and extend the mandate of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). While
we recognize that this is a decision first and foremost
of the members participating in ISAF, the Council
should bring its persuasive powers to bear on them, as
must the international community as a whole, to
convince them that this is a calling from which they
cannot, and should not, turn away.

It is encouraging to note the steps being taken by
the Interim Administration, in collaboration with the
international community, to train a national army and a
modern police force for Afghanistan. The importance
of strengthening the capacity of the Interim
Administration to build an indigenous, professionally
trained security apparatus cannot be over-emphasized.
In fact, it is also intrinsic to the exit strategy for the
international security presence in Afghanistan.

The timely nomination of the Special Independent

Commission for the Convening of the Emergency Loya
Jirga and the work it has carried out in the last 50 days,
including its consultations with a cross-section of the
Afghan population - not just in major towns, but also
elsewhere - bodes well for a representative gathering
which reflects the will and the wishes of the Afghan
people. We appreciate and commend the work done so
far by the Commission. However, let me say a word of
caution: fears have been expressed that the Taliban and
its backers are attempting to subvert the process by
insinuating themselves into it. We hope that the
Commission will be alert to this and will ensure that
the Taliban and its sympathizers, in any guise, will
have no place in the emergency Loya Jirga.

The meeting in Tokyo in January of this year
brought significant, although not sufficient,
commitments for the reconstruction and rehabilitation
of Afghanistan. But to create circumstances in which
the billions of dollars pledged can be productively
utilized, millions are required now. The Secretary-
General has eloquently brought out the Interim
Administration's dire need for financial resources to
pay the salaries of civil servants, without which the
Interim Administration can neither extend and maintain
its authority over the entire country nor deliver basic
services, such as education and health care, to the
Afghan people. It is therefore of paramount importance
that the international community extend its unflinching
help. The sense of hope that has been kindled in
Afghanistan should not be allowed to be extinguished
by a tardy or delayed response. Innovative approaches
to cut through bureaucratic procedures are the need of
the day.

Afghanistan's rehabilitation and reconstruction
will take time, will need considerable resources and
will need patience. But, once peace and security have
been restored in Afghanistan, which we hope will soon
be in the case, the arc lights of the media will no longer
find this to be newsworthy. However, the international
community must stay the course and not turn its back
on Afghanistan. On its part, India is committed to
extending assistance to Afghanistan over the long term,
covering not just immediately required humanitarian
assistance in the form of a million tons of wheat and
much-needed medical aid, but also in sectors including
police training, education, housing, human-resource
development, public transport, information technology
and industrial development. India has already extended
a line of credit of $100 million. During Chairman
Karzai's visit to India on 26 and 27 February, bilateral
cooperation was discussed in detail. Our Prime
Minister also announced a grant of $100 million for
immediate utilization by the Afghan Government. We
are ready to do more.

For its developmental efforts to be productive and
lasting, the international community must match
generosity with wisdom. It is therefore important to
listen carefully to what the Afghans need and to respect
their priorities and preferences, as no one knows better
than the Afghan people what is good for them and how
best to bring it about. The temptation to foist on them
solutions or structures not suitable or responsive to the
local environment should be resisted, as these will
serve the cause of neither the donors nor the Afghans.

In determining what will work, sustainability
should be the touchstone. We therefore strongly
recommend that we do not lose sight of the least-
developed-country perspective. We believe that
emphasis on South-South cooperation in meeting the
development needs of Afghanistan should be an
integral part of the international community's strategy.

Women in Afghanistan were particularly
traumatized by the Taliban and its brand of misogyny
and obscurantism. Their role in rebuilding Afghanistan
is central. We appreciate, and fully support, the efforts
to increase the role and participation of women in the
decision-making structures of the Interim
Administration. A continued commitment to this norm
will not just help in overcoming the harsh and inhuman
practices of the Taliban against women, but will be a
significant contribution towards building the bulwark
of a more tolerant, participative democratic and
forward-looking society.

Afghanistan suffered for long at the hands of the
Taliban, which were foisted upon it from outside. The
international community must work together to prevent
such interference in the future and to stop Afghanistan
from becoming a playground for the pursuit of narrow
national interests or for re-enacting the Great Game
with a new cast. The need, therefore, is for greater
ownership, openness and transparency in the actions of
the international community in Afghanistan. Outdated
structures which failed to prevent conflict in
Afghanistan in the past are unlikely to promote peace
in the future. To persist with these may prove to be a
costly triumph of hope over experience. The role of the
Group of 21, which brings together in a cooperative
framework a large number of countries with the ability
to contribute towards peace and prosperity in
Afghanistan, should be strengthened.

The United Nations has made a significant
contribution in assisting the Interim Administration to
address the enormous challenges ahead of it. We
therefore support the Secretary-General's proposal to
establish the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, with a light international footprint, to
continue the engagement of the United Nations in
Afghanistan.

Ambassador Brahimi richly deserves our deep
appreciation and recognition for his outstanding
contribution, first in fostering the Bonn Agreement,
and then in so ably assisting the work of the Interim
Administration. We wish him every success in his
demanding endeavours and assure him of our full
support.

Before concluding, I would like to reiterate our
prime concern. By all evidence, the Interim
Administration is doing all it can to bring peace and
prosperity to Afghanistan. Is the international
community matching this endeavour with the timely
assistance that Afghanistan needs and deserves?

