Mr. Montoya (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, for your
work as President of the Security Council and for your
initiative to convene this debate on an issue to which
my Government ascribes particular importance. We
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his informative briefing. We welcome the
support that the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other bodies of the United
Nations system have provided to Colombia in the tasks
of attending to the civilian population and protecting
their rights.

The Government of Colombia has prioritized,
through our democratic security policy, the objective of
promoting conditions that guarantee the protection and
full enjoyment of the rights of all persons living in our
country. This has allowed for significant progress in
terms of citizens' security, such as the reduction in the
rate of extortive kidnappings to its lowest point in the
past 20 years, the reduction to zero of the number of
towns taken by groups outside the law and the
consolidation of the State presence and security forces
throughout the country. The task of protecting the
population has been carried out through policies and
continuous actions that involve various State entities.

In terms of dealing with displaced persons,
Colombia has continued to strengthen its national
assistance policy. In 2008, 260,000 displaced families
were registered in the Families in Action programme,
which allows resources to be allocated for social
welfare. In addition, 86,000 displaced families were
registered during the same period in income-generating
programmes. The management of the assets earmarked
for the Fund for the Reparation of Victims of Violence
has also begun. The Fund will benefit victims
identified by the judicial authorities through a process
being carried out within the framework of the Peace
and Justice Law.

The Government of Colombia reaffirms its
condemnation of any action aimed against the civilian
population. The protection of the civilian population
and strict compliance with international humanitarian
law and other relevant international norms are matters
of absolute priority.

Ten years after the Security Council first began
holding thematic debates on the protection of civilians
in conflict, there is still no clear conceptual
understanding of this issue. In this regard, the aide-
memoire for the consideration of matters relating to the
protection of civilians, soon to be adopted, is a useful
instrument to guide the work of this body in
formulating and following up on this issue in
peacekeeping operations. We believe that it is
appropriate that the Security Council has adopted an
approach focusing the scope of the aide-memoire on
such operations, looking at one case at a time and
bearing in mind the specific circumstances of each
situation.

From this perspective, it is essential to underline
that the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians rests with each State and that, in turn, States
can request international support when they deem
necessary. In this context, the United Nations and the
international community in general have a supporting
role to play in national protection efforts. Humanitarian
assistance, in order to be reliable and predictable, must
be carried out in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and in conformity with humane
principles and the principles of neutrality, impartiality
and independence.

Colombia supports the operational work of the
United Nations for the protection of civilians. To this
end, adequate cooperation between the Security
Council and other relevant United Nations bodies must
be maintained. In particular, the role of the General
Assembly as the appropriate body for adopting policy
guidelines in the humanitarian field must be
strengthened.

Furthermore, my delegation would like to
highlight the urgent need to establish effective controls
for the illicit traffic of small arms and light weapons as
indispensable to better protection for civilian
populations. For my country, that illicit trade, which is
of an international nature, represents a serious
problem, as it threatens civilian security, increases
crime rates and results in the death or permanent
disability of thousands of persons.

Likewise, the Government of Colombia
highlights the importance of the Convention on Cluster
Munitions, which was mentioned today by the Under-
Secretary-General. Colombia is one of the countries
that signed the Convention at the conference held to
that end in Oslo in December 2008. With this decision,
the Government of Colombia reiterated its commitment
to respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law and its willingness to face the
problem of weapons that have a humanitarian impact.

Colombia supports efforts aimed at providing
protection to civilian population and guaranteeing their
rights, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms of international law, including
international humanitarian law. We will shortly
celebrate the sixtieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Geneva Conventions. In the lead-up to that
commemoration, the Government of Colombia
reaffirms its unwavering commitment to the norms
established in those important instruments.

My delegation will maintain an active
participation in future discussions on this issue and its
ongoing willingness to promote the treatment of this
issue by the various bodies and institutions of the
United Nations.

