Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month and on your presiding over this
very important meeting at a time when the situation in
Palestine is deteriorating in an unprecedented manner. I
would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing, which covered all of
the developments in the Middle East region, including
the question of Palestine. We also back the Secretary-
General's good offices aimed at finding a fair,
lasting solution to spare the Palestinian people more
bloodshed, which has, however, reached such a scale
that the international system bears an unprecedented
responsibility for finding a rapid, fair and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question in order to extricate
the Palestinian people from the current horrendous
situation, including that in occupied East Jerusalem.

The situation in Palestine more generally speaking,
and in Jerusalem more specifically, which is the third
holy site of Islam, has experienced some very alarming
developments. There have been brazen violations
of international law. Moreover, the sensibilities of
Muslims throughout the world have been offended as a
result of the actions of the Israeli army and settlers, who
have killed innocent people and demolished buildings
and homes, and who are systematically attempting to
Judaize the city and change the facts on the ground. Such
acts are fraught with the risk of igniting a religious war,
which will do nothing more than fuel obscurantism and
terrorism, which will, in turn, threaten international
peace and security.

My delegation thanks Spain for responding to the
request by Jordan, the Arab member of the Council, to
convene a meeting to consider the question of Palestine
and to examine the very serious consequences of Israeli
arrogance and its misguided policies, which we entirely
reject because they simply disregard international law
as they attempt to Judaize Jerusalem and change the
status quo through the lynching and massacring of
innocents. His Majesty Mohammed VI of Morocco,
who is the president of the Al-Quds Committee of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, has warned
against the very situation that we are witnessing today.
He rang the alarm bell, and the international community
should have taken up its responsibilities vis-a-vis the
Palestinian people and Jerusalem more specifically.

His Majesty has repeatedly stressed through all the
means available to him, including bilateral meetings
and international forums, the need to put an end to the
settlements and the Judaization of Al-Quds. He warned
against any unilateral actions that could undermine,
even harm, Muslim monuments in Jerusalem. His
Majesty exchanged letters and correspondence with
the relevant international stakeholders regarding the
very serious actions in Jerusalem being carried out by
the Israeli authorities as part of a plan to change the
legal, historical, spiritual and demographic status of
Jerusalem. His Majesty has forged many contacts with
leaders, including President Abbas, aimed at addressing
the very alarming situation in Jerusalem. During the
inauguration of the Al-Quds Committee under his
current chairmanship in Marrakesh in January 2014, His
Majesty stated that we needed to stress that Jerusalem
lies at the very heart of the Palestinian question and
the Palestinian cause, and that there can be no peace
without clarifying the final status and situation of East
Jerusalem as the capital of an independent Palestinian
State.

We need to focus on the statement that resulted
from that meeting, given the fact that the issue of
Jerusalem is crucial for the Umma. It lies at the very
heart of any political solution, and any harm brought
to the Al-Aqsa Mosque will inevitably exacerbate
tensions. In following the instructions of His Majesty,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
organized a meeting of a ministerial contact group on
26 September to consider the international measures that
could be introduced in East Jerusalem and Palestine. At
that meeting the aggression against Jerusalem and the
Al-Aqsa Mosque were both condemned.

A request was addressed to the Security Council
that it assume its responsibilities to ensure that the
Israeli authorities put an end to their practices and
provide security for the Al-Aqsa Mosque, so as to
ensure that those violations are not repeated. The
only solution to the question of Palestine lies through
diplomacy, not war, not the killing of civilians and
not or bloodshed. We need negotiations within the
established frameworks to forge two States, living side
by side in peace and security, two States that cooperate
and that we respect. And we insist on the respect of the
June 1967 borders.

