Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Mr. Nebojsa
Radmanovie, Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Special Representative of the
European Union for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
thank him for his report (see S/2010/575, annex).

Mexico commends Bosnia and Herzegovina's
active participation as an elected member of the
Security Council, demonstrating the progress that this
country has made in recent years in a context that is
not without its difficulties. Its progress in moving
strategically closer to the European Union and in
developing more flexible relations with its neighbours
in a more cooperative atmosphere is an important step
forward in consolidating Bosnia and Herzegovina's
role on the international stage and in promoting
regional stability.

My delegation believes that, in order to
consolidate lasting peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the main political forces of the country
must step up their dialogue and reach an understanding
among themselves. We therefore welcome the fair and
orderly holding of the general elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina on 3 October. We are convinced that this
is the path that must be taken.

We regret, however, the divisive rhetoric
employed by one of the parties, which does not
contribute to the creation of a political climate
conducive to the process of internal integration,
peacebuilding and reconciliation. Nor is it a promising
sign for these efforts that there are those who seek to
challenge the work and the authority of the High
Representative and Special Representative of the
European Union. The political actors involved must
promote negotiation and conciliation as the only way
to overcome differences constructively and to avoid
confrontations that may endanger the country's
stability and constitutional framework. There is no
doubt that a Government of unity is the way to achieve
national reconstruction and eventual integration into
Euro-Atlantic institutions.
I would like to stress the importance of the
international community's ongoing support for the
efforts of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to strengthen the rule of law. That is why we support
the High Representative's recommendation that the
presence of the European Union force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina be maintained in 2011, given its relevant
role in continuing to provide peace and security to the
population through the support of the Office of the
High Representative.

We believe that respect for and the strengthening
of national justice institutions are fundamental
elements of the fight against the impunity of those
responsible for serious crimes committed in the past,
and in order to promote national reconciliation and the
rule of law. We welcome the adoption of the revised
strategy for the implementation of annex 7 of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, concerning the return of
displaced persons and refugees. We are confident that
this step will make an important contribution to the
voluntary and sustainable return of the 113,000 people
who remain internally displaced, more than 7,000 of
whom are living in conditions of poverty.

We reiterate our call on the political leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the countries of the region
to cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, in order to allow it to
effectively fulfil its mandate, particularly by
contributing information to the open cases of war
crimes and crimes against humanity that the Tribunal is
currently investigating, with a view to serving justice
and contributing to post-conflict reconciliation and
stabilization efforts in the region.

In conclusion, we reiterate Mexico's support for
the work of the High Representative, and we hope that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able to overcome its
differences once and for all and consolidate a
democratic, multi-ethnic State in which its citizens,
like all those of the Balkans region, will be able to
enjoy a more stable and prosperous future as an
integral part of Europe.

