Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank you, Sir, for your briefing in your
capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We commend the fact that the
1533 Committee, under your leadership, has worked
very efficiently and produced excellent results. China
will continue to support you in your efforts.

China welcomes the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs ofthe Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mr. Okitundu, to the Security Council.

China was concerned over the murder of members
of the Group of Experts and would like extend its
deepest condolences to the families. The safety of
United Nations personnel must be ensured. Any attack
on United Nations personnel is unacceptable.

So far this year, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has worked to further the
peace process and established the new transitional
Government. It has worked actively to strengthen its
capacity in the areas of governance and security. China
welcomes those efforts. At the same time, however,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to
face various challenges in the political, security and
humanitarian spheres, in particular in the eastern part
of the country, where armed rebel groups are active.
That is one of the main causes of instability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region
as a whole.

Ensuring the stability of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is an important foundation for furthering
the political process and carrying out national
reconstruction. It is a pressing task for the international
community to urge all parties in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular certain opposition
parties, to put an immediate end to the violence,
continue to be committed to the political process
and support the political agreement reached. China
commends the active role played by African regional
and subregional organizations, such as the African
Union and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, as well as by neighbouring countries,
to find a solution to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We encourage parties in the
region to maximize their respective advantages in the
quest for a peaceful solution. The Security Council
must enhance its coordination efforts in order to send a
united and clear message and to forge synergies in the
international community.
In order to help resolve the issues in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the international community
must fully respect the Government's leading role.
Solutions designed by the international community will
be effective only when they respect the Government's
leadership and the choices of the country's people.
To date, the Security Council has adopted various
measures, which focus on the illicit activities of the
armed groups and have garnered a number of results.
At the same time, we must note that sanctions are
not an end in themselves; they are a means to an end.
They should serve to achieve peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

China appreciates the importance that the
Committee attaches to cooperation between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and regional
organizations. We welcome the Chair's plan to visit
the country in October. We hope that the sanctions
Committee will continue its consultations and maintain
contact with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, as the situation evolves,
will examine sanctions measures in a timely manner
and play an active role in helping the Government and
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
achieve peace and stability in the country on their own.

The Chinese Government has always supported
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and, to the extent possible, has provided
assistance to the country. China is ready to work with
the international community in continuing to play a
constructive role for peace, stability and development
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

