Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation
and its two co-Chairs, Finland and Turkey.

I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
organizing this open debate and putting forward several
important questions to guide the discussion. We also
welcome the participation of the Secretary-General, the
Archbishop of Canterbury and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem
in this meeting.

The Group of Friends of Mediation very much
welcomes this timely debate and underlines the
importance of the Security Council remaining actively
engaged in conflict prevention and the peaceful
resolution of conflicts, including through mediation, as
foreseen in the Charter of the United Nations. That role
can be used most effectively when actors are united.

The Group of Friends of Mediation today consists
of48 member States, the United Nations, seven regional
organizations and other international organizations. The
Group promotes and advances the use of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, and generates support for the development
of mediation. The Group of Friends has significantly
contributed to increasing awareness of mediation.
The Group has initiated four General Assembly
resolutions to strengthen the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, one of which encourages the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations to continue
to develop their mediation capacities.

The world has changed since the previous open
debate on mediation and the settlement of disputes (see S/PV.6108), in 2009. Moreover, the United Nations has
changed. We welcome the Secretary-General's strong
commitment to emphasizing the importance of conflict
prevention and resolution, including mediation. In
that regard, we welcome the establishment of the
Secretary-General's High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation, which brings together an unparalleled range
of experience, skills, knowledge and contacts.

In his 2017 report on United Nations activities in
support of mediation (A/72/ 115), the Secretary-General
points out the multiple activities in which the United
Nations is already involved. The list is impressive, but
more can be done. We need to maintain this momentum
and give a further boost to the mediation agenda at the
United Nations. In that respect, we would like to take
this opportunity to encourage the Security Council,
as well as Member States, to explore further ways to
reinforce the promotion of mediation as an important
means for the pacific settlement of disputes.

Conflicts are becoming more and more complex,
as are their prevention and resolution. In order to
achieve lasting peace, we need a comprehensive,
inclusive and coordinated approach in which different
actors of the international community complement
each other. That includes not only the United Nations,
the Security Council and Member States, but also
regional, subregional and local organizations, as well
as civil society. As conflicts have grown more complex
and multilayered, they need to be approached on
many levels, through cooperation among mediation
support actors.

Inclusivity has proven to be one significant
means of achieving the sustainability of peace. All
members of society should play a meaningful role in
peace processes. Women and young people have an
exceptionally important role in that regard. Both groups
have a lot to offer in building peace and resilience
in their societies. It is up to all of us here to ensure
that the commitments of the relevant resolutions on
women and peace and security and on youth and peace
and security are implemented effectively. The United
Nations Guidance on Gender and Inclusive Mediation
Strategies was issued to provide practical guidance
to mediators and parties to conflict on increasing the
meaningful participation of women and gender experts
in applying gender-sensitive approaches to mediation
during all phases of the peace process.

In addition, the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends
of Mediation decided to dedicate this year's annual
ministerial meeting of the Group to the theme of the
inclusion of youth in mediation efforts. The meeting
will be organized as a high-level event, open to all
Member States, on Thursday, 27 September.

Building and strengthening mediation and the
mediation support capacity of mediators, Member
States and societies is one of the key factors for the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, and peacebuilding. It is also important that
the Security Council as well as the entire Organization
strengthen their capacity to undertake prevention and
recalibrate their approach from responding to conflict
towards sustaining peace. Mediation should not be a
closed and competitive field reserved for a few. More
emphasis should be placed on mentoring the next
generation and exchanging experiences with national
and local mediators.

The Group of Friends of Mediation is ready to
support all work and efforts in advancing diplomacy
for peace and the role of mediation in this endeavour.

