Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Today, the Security Council adopted a resolution
reimposing an international embargo on the export of
arms to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. There is no
doubt that this is a step, though it may be regarded as a
step backward with regard to the developments in the area
in general, yet it is a realistic reflection of the recent
deterioration of the situation in Kosovo.

Egypt considers the content of today's resolution as
a preventive message, which we hope that the concerned
parties will fully understand in a way that will prevent the
situation in the area from further deterioration and protect
the lives of the innocent Albanian civilians in the region.
This is especially so since the resolution adopted today
clearly condemns the excessive use of force by the
Serbian police against the civilians of Kosovo and clearly

 

defines the steps that the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia should take in order to open the
way for the Security Council to review the sanctions
imposed on it today.

Our delegation has noted that the Security Council
candidly refers to the fact that this resolution has been
adopted under the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter
without a prior reference to a determination by the Security
Council that there exists a threat to international peace and
security as required by the provisions of Article 39 of the
Charter. Of course, it may be said that the Council is the
master of its own procedures, and this is correct with regard
to procedures. However, in principle, the constitutional
requirements in the Charter should in general be
scrupulously followed and respected. The delegation of
Egypt would like to record this observation with regard to
the future work of the Council.

At the same time, Egypt supports the content of the
resolution, namely its call upon the authorities in Belgrade
and the leadership of the Kosovar Albanian community
urgently to enter without preconditions into a serious
dialogue in order to reach a political settlement of the
situation in Kosovo. Such a settlement should take into
consideration the interests and the aspirations of the
Albanian community, which accounts for 90 per cent of the
population of the region, which has long had a special
status.

The situation in Kosovo represents a source of grave
concern to public opinion the world over. For this reason,
the Foreign Ministers of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference adopted, at their latest meeting in Qatar in
March, a resolution in which they condemned the wide-
ranging acts of suppression, the discriminatory measures
and the human rights violations against the Albanian
inhabitants. They also called on the international
community to take the necessary steps to immediately end
these violations and to set up democratic institutions in
Kosovo. The adoption by the Council today of this
resolution is a step towards the achievement of what the
Foreign Ministers of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference called for two weeks ago.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the parties
concerned would exercise their authority responsibly
through the desired dialogue in order to reach a just
solution that would restore stability, security and peace to
the region.

