Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Mr. President, let me thank you for
convening this meeting.

As Chairman of the Arab Group for this month, I
should like to touch on the following points with
regard to the grave situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

First, the fundamental reason for the tension,
violence, destruction and provocation is the Israeli
military occupation. As the United States Secretary of
State, Mr. Colin Powell, said on 19 November, this
occupation must come to an end. The Security Council
and the international community must understand this
logic and the objective that we all aim to achieve. We
are confident that all of the members of the Council
will realize this truth and appreciate it fully.

Secondly, the draft resolution before the Council
requires that both the Israeli and the Palestinian sides
take the necessary measures to put an end to the
violence, provocation and destruction. It calls upon
them to implement the recommendations of the
Mitchell report, to which they have both agreed.

The international community - including in
particular the United States - has stated that the report
clearly shows the need to return to political
negotiations. We are aware that Israel uses a variety of
pretexts to avoid resuming the political dialogue or
going back to the negotiating table. For that reason, we
are looking to the Security Council to reaffirm that the
implementation of these recommendations, including a
complete halt to the Israeli settlements, represents the
only real way out of the current crisis and that it would
open the way for genuine, sincere and serious
negotiations leading to a just and lasting settlement that
would take into consideration the interests of both
sides and resolve all of the elements of the problem.

This would result, first, of all, in the
establishment of an independent, viable, functioning
Palestinian State on all the territory of the West Bank
and Gaza, with its capital in East Jerusalem. It would
also mean equal security for both the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples and secure relations of good-
neighbourliness and cooperation between both States,
Palestinian and Israeli, thereby opening the way to a
new Middle East.

Thirdly, there can be absolutely no doubt that
targeting and killing civilians, whether Israeli or
Palestinian, is deplorable, and must be condemned
forcefully. At the same time, if we want to ensure true
balance, political assassinations and aerial
bombardments, the destruction of houses and
installations and blockades and economic suffocation
should be condemned just as forcefully. Indeed, such
actions lead to greater tension and confrontation and
result in prompt counter-operations by the Palestinian
people, who resist the forces of occupation and reject
all settlement activities that aim to deprive them of
their territory.

Fourthly, the urgent mission of the international
community, particularly the Security Council, which,
since the beginning of the crisis, has been unable to
adopt a real, critical position with regard to the
deteriorating situation, must be to help the two parties
to control the situation and to stop the violence,
destruction and provocation. In essence, the draft
resolution before the Council clearly contains that
message, and we hope that all countries will support it.

Fifthly, in their meeting on 5 December, the High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
drew up a list of the responsibilities that Israel, as an
occupying Power, has towards the Palestinian civilians
living under occupation. The final document provides
for the obligation of the two parties to guarantee the
security and protection of the people under occupation.
We believe that the recommendations of that important
conference would, if implemented, represent a positive
qualitative step to protect the Palestinian people and
reduce tension and violence until a final political
settlement of the Palestinian question can be achieved.

Destruction of the installations of the Palestinian
Authority will not end the crisis or reduce the level of
violence between the two parties. The opposite is
probably true. The Israeli talk about liquidating or
eliminating Palestinian leaders, or cutting off contacts
with them, only signifies a desire to prolong the
conflict and change the basic facts - indeed, perhaps
it even represents a complete renunciation of all
agreements signed by the two parties, as a prelude to a
new phase of the conflict. This is a very dangerous and
serious gamble, which could destroy the hopes for
peace and stability in our region for years to come.

In this light, we once again call upon the
members of the Council to show an understanding of
the points that in our view are essential. Were the
Council to fail to effectively assume its responsibilities
for the maintenance of international peace and security
or to contain the volatile situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, we fear that, given the inability
of the other parties to achieve concrete progress in
prevailing upon the Israeli Government to accept steps
that would lead to a political solution, the situation
would become yet more tense and would get
completely out of control, having a very negative
impact on the stability of this vital part of our world.

