The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special
Envoy of the African Union for Lord's Resistance Army
Issues, to participate in today's meeting.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.

At present, the Central African region is
experiencing rapid economic growth. The process of
regional integration has made positive progress. The
situation in the Great Lakes Region has visibly improved,
and the fight against the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
has yielded positive results. Regional countries and
organizations have strengthened their willingness and
enhanced their capacity to maintain peace and stability.
China welcomes all those developments.

However, peace and stability in the Central African
region still faces many challenges. China is concerned
about the continued volatility in the Central African
Republic and the serious humanitarian situation
and hopes that the parties concerned in that country
will immediately cease all violence and resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultation.

Recently, the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has made positive progress. We encourage
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the countries

in the Great Lakes region to seize the current positive
momentum, continue to strengthen cooperation and
work together towards restoring durable peace, stability
and development in the region.

China hopes that the international community,
on the basis of respect for the sovereignty of the
countries concerned, fully leverages the leadership and
coordination abilities enjoyed by the United Nations and
the relevant regional organizations, works in synergy
so as to jointly fight piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and
the terrorist and extremist forces in the Sahel region.
Furthermore, the international community should also
pay attention to the effect that the situation in other
parts of Africa might have on the Central African
region, strengthen coordination and adopt a holistic
approach in order to address the situation.

China strongly condemns the LRA, which has
continued to attack and harass civilians in several
countries and calls upon that group to immediately
cease its illegal activities, proceed to disarm and take
part in the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation and resettlement programmes.

We commend the efforts by regional countries
to fight the LRA forces and to support the ongoing
efforts of the African Union to implement the Regional
Cooperation Initiative. We welcome the fact that the
United Nations has taken the initiative to cooperate
with the African Union to fight the LRA and we hope
that the international community will be forthcoming
in providing financial assistance to the United Nations
and the African Union to ensure that the relevant
initiatives can be effectively implemented.

Since its inception approximately two years ago,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) has made tremendous efforts in terms of
coordination and facilitation to maintain regional peace
and stability and to fight the LRA. China expresses
its appreciation in that connection. We stand ready to
continue to support UNOCA and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Abou Moussa to discharge
their mandate and to continue to play a positive and
constructive role in maintaining peace, stability and
development in the Central African region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Madeira.

