The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.

We thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and we
commend her for presenting her thirteenth report on the
situation in Libya pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
We reiterate our full support for the work of the ICC
and for Ms. Bensouda's role in prosecuting those guilty
of serious crimes under article 5 of the Rome Statute.

We urge Members of the United Nations and
Security Council members that have not yet become
parties to the Rome Statute to do so, with a View to
making progress in combating impunity and protecting
all people on the planet from such heinous crimes,
which represent a serious threat to peace and security.
It is important, in that context, to enhance the role
played by the ICC as a mechanism to ensure justice
when national courts cannot do so. Accountability for
the most serious crimes, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, must continue to be a priority goal in the
work of the Security Council.

With regard to Libya, unfortunately the latest report
does not give very encouraging signs. The authority of
the Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord continues to be challenged at the national level,
and the blockade imposed by the Tobruk House of
Representatives has not allowed for the provisions of the
Libyan Political Agreement to be fully implemented.
The multiple challenges facing Libya six years after
the civil war require swift and efficient responses from
its new authorities, which face the threat of Islamist
terrorism, a migrant crisis affecting hundreds of
thousands of people, a humanitarian emergency and a
severe economic crisis, among other serious problems.

In that context, it is necessary to work towards
reunification and reconciliation in the country so as
to prevent major bloodshed among its people and put
an end to the institutional crisis and to the military
conflict that have afflicted the country since 2011. We
must also make progress towards a genuine democratic
transition and lasting peace and stability as a basis for
investigating more effectively the atrocities that were
committed in that country, ensuring that the current
situation of generalized violence and impunity does
not worsen.

We are confident that the new Libyan authorities,
to the extent that they can consolidate their power and
gradually extend their authority to the entire territory,
will fulfil their commitment to ensuring justice for
the victims of these crimes and cooperate with the
Prosecutor of the ICC in identifying those responsible
and facilitating their handover to the Court for trial.

We urge the Government of National Accord
to apply the Court's provisions to Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and ensure a trial with full guarantees to
Abdullah Al-Senussi and other individuals alleged
to have committed war crimes and crimes against
humanity before and during the 2011 civil war.

We are concerned about the fact that the Prosecutor,
despite having on previous occasions cited investigations
in Libya as one of her priorities for 2017, is still facing
budgetary problems in connection therewith.

In particular, and as Ms. Bensouda noted when she
addressed the Council in November 2016 (see S/PV.7806)
and in her most recent report, it is very important that
investigations be launched on attacks against migrants
and refugees in Libya, including acts of sexual violence
and crimes against minors. We therefore support her
request for the resources necessary for her to discharge
her mandate, and we call on all States parties able to do
so to provide the necessary funding.

In conclusion, Uruguay reiterates its recognition
of the work of the Prosecutor in addressing the crimes
committed in Libya, which will no doubt help to
enhance the rule of law and to establish a more just
and inclusive Libya that fully respects all its citizens'
rights, which for many years now have been violated.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

