Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to welcome Her
Excellency Mrs. Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis, Prime
Minister of Haiti, and former President Clinton, who
has just left the Council Chamber. We wish him every
success as United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti and
thank him for his briefing. Allow me to also thank
Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing and his efforts to
stabilize Haiti.
The situation in Haiti has been on the agenda of
the Security Council for a long time, but has recently
attracted increasing international attention, as shown
by the convening of the donors conference in
Washington, D.C., last April, as well as the two visits
there by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his
Special Envoy for Haiti, former President Bill Clinton.
These are certainly positive indications of the attention
being given by the international community to the
stabilization of Haiti.

My delegation believes that Haiti has a historic
opportunity as it traverses a delicate phase in the
strengthening of the peace process and works towards
achieving sustainable development. All parties
involved must reaffirm their commitment to a better
future for Haiti.

In that context, we welcome the ongoing political
cooperation between all parties. We pay tribute to the
progress made in many fields, in particular the holding
of senatorial elections, the adoption of fundamental
legislation and continuing dialogue. My delegation
hopes that efforts towards a more peaceful and stable
environment will continue and register concrete
progress in the political process and strengthened
security in general.

My country notes with satisfaction the
incremental progress in the reform of the rule of law
sector, in particular the extension of State authority and
the strengthening of the police, justice and corrections
systems in accordance with national reform plans. We
hope that these reforms will spur efforts to improve
human rights through the fight against corruption,
organized crime, illicit trafficking and impunity.

Despite these achievements, my country remains
concerned Vis-a-vis the Secretary-General's
observation in his report (S/2009/439) that
collaboration between a number of Haitian institutions
remains fragile

"and subject to reversal, with a potential for
renewed tensions and conflict among and within
the governing institutions of Haiti, and a
continued readiness on the part of influential
forces within the country to inflame public
tensions to further their own interests"
(S/2009/439, para. 2).

In addition, the report notes increased civil unrest
due to the deteriorating economic situation. There is no
doubt that the recurring destructive hurricanes and the
recent food insecurity crisis that have afflicted Haiti
have also worsened living conditions for most Haitians
and increased the socio-economic burden on the State.

Since, security and stability are directly related to
improved economic, social and development
conditions, the efforts of all Haitian authorities,
cooperation between various State institutions and
international assistance are necessary to help Haiti to
continue to address all the security, social and
economic threats it faces.

My country agrees with the Secretary-General's
observations in paragraphs 26 and 27 of the report
concerning the need to adjust the force configuration of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti to
keep pace with developments on the ground in Haiti. In
that context, we welcome the measures recommended
by the Mission as a result of its assessment and hope
that they will lead to a finalized strategy to reconfigure
the Mission.

Finally, we support and welcome the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his
report, in particular those on extending the mandate,
and agree with him that the primary responsibility for
progress falls on the shoulders of the Haitian people.

