Mr. Biagini (Italy): First of all, I wish to thank
the Ethiopian presidency for convening this meeting.
I also thank the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism - Ambassador
Aboulatta - for his briefing. In particular, I thank the
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), Ms. Fang Liu, for the great
accuracy and significance ofthe organization's work in
raising the level of safety in civil aviation. She has the
full support and backing of Italy.

One year has passed since the Security Council
adopted resolution 2309 (2016). In the meantime,
as we have heard, the terrorist threat has evolved. It
has been addressed but is still present. The danger
of terrorists infiltrating into civil aviation passenger
flows has previously been related primarily to foreign
terrorist fighters, as was highlighted in resolution 2178
(2014). Currently, terrorist detection is mainly focused
on returnees and new forms of threats. However, we
must remember that civil aviation is still vulnerable to
that previous kind of threat. Therefore, we call on the
international community to strengthen cooperation,
information-sharing and security measures at,
and within, airports, according to updated and
shared standards.

On 26 May, in the Taormina statement on the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism, the leaders
of the Group of Seven confirmed their commitment
to strengthening cooperation among border agencies
and supporting the expansion of the use of advance
passenger information (API) and passenger name
records in traveller screenings. We acknowledge that
many countries in several regions need capacity-
building projects to enhance the effectiveness of their
fight against terrorism. With specific reference to
aviation security, there are objective constraints for the
technological transition from pre-existing information
systems to the current API system. That transition
takes time and means managing different systems
for a certain period, but the critical importance of
API as an effective tool in the fight against terrorism
is undeniable.

Ensuring the safety of international flights and
passengers, helping to prevent terrorist attacks and
strengthening the effectiveness of law enforcement and
judicial action are the essential goals of resolution 2309
(2016). Implementation is now key. We are dealing with
a global threat, and it is therefore necessary to not only
share international standards but also expertise and
best practices in implementation. In that regard, the
assistance and technical support provided by ICAO
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate are fundamental.

Finally, we look forward to broad agreement among
Member States on the approval of the Global Aviation
Aecurity Plan as a further significant step forward for
the security of civil aviation. Italy will continue to
support the optimal implementation of all the necessary
requirements to enhance effectiveness in preventing
terrorist attacks, bearing in mind that the security of
airports and flights is a civil right and a fundamental
reaffirmation of our collective freedom.

