I cannot help but start with yesterday's horrible shelling by the Syrian regime of villages in the Idlib area. Eight civilians were killed and 13 civilians were injured. Mr. Mark Cutts, United Nations Deputy Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for the Syria Crisis, said: "Today's violence compounds an already dire situation on the ground in Idlib, where millions of civilians remain in urgent need of life-saving assistance. COVID-19 continues to spread in the overcrowded camps, the rains have started again and the bitter winter temperatures will soon set in." The non-governmental organization Save the Children reported that one girl, aged 4, died on her way to school in the town of Ariha, south of Idlib. Two more children were killed in Kafraya and a fourth, a 10-year-old boy, in the city of Idlib. Dozens of other people were wounded. A primary school in Kafraya, run by a partner of Save the Children, was hit by shelling and shrapnel while around 150 children were in their classrooms. As a consequence, Save the Children suspended work in two vaccination centres that it supports in Idlib. As a result, the delivery of vaccines to children will be impacted, requiring more efforts to follow up with children who had appointments. The centres provide vaccination support for 500 children each month. The Syrian regime bears responsibility for yet another brutal murder of civilians. Supporters of the regime also bear a heavy responsibility. Instead of reigning in the regime and preventing it from killing its own civilians, Iran and Russia continue to allow them to do that. By preventing the opening of humanitarian crossing points, Russia and China also make the very dire situation even worse. Let me come back to the intervention of the Russian Federation. When I listened to it, I thought that I was in the wrong movie theatre here. There is no crisis of trust in the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). As the Security Council has just heard, one speaker after another supports the OPCW and its work. The OPCW enjoys the full trust of the international community with the exception of Russia and its cronies. It is Russia that undermines the credibility of the OPCW by continuously shielding the Al-Assad regime. I have not heard one word of regret from the Russian Ambassador for the thousands of people whom the Al-Assad regime has killed with chemical weapons. There is no one who doubts that Al-Assad has done that. Russia continues to protect Al-Assad and tries to continue to undermine the OPCW. I have mentioned here before, and I would highlight again, that Russia was caught red-handed in 2018 when it launched a cyberattack against the OPCW. I think that the Russian Federation should have a serious conversation with its First Committee representative, because my Deputy was in the First Committee and responded to the attacks that were launched against us (see A/C.1/73/PV.15). It is in Russia that Mr. Navalny was poisoned with Novichok. We are waiting for Russia to investigate it and provide the OPCW with the information that we provided to the organization. Let me also say that it is a pity that we seem to have added another layer of discussion and division to this complicated file. In addition to providing cover for the Al-Assad regime whenever possible, our Russian colleagues now also feel the need to put into question the format of our regular meetings. We are always ready to discuss which meeting format is best suited to help us to achieve our goal to hold Syria accountable and ensure compliance with resolution 2118 (2013). But the question of the meeting format and the briefers to invite has become another smokescreen to protect the Al-Assad regime from international scrutiny. In the Russian Federation's intervention, while it was criticized that Mr. Fernando Arias, Director General of the OPCW, did not attend today, it forgot to mention that there was a good reason for him to come next month. At the end of the month, as several speakers have underlined, the Conference of the States Parties will take place, and the meeting after the Conference is the right point in time for Mr. Arias to brief the Council. These are attempts to distract attention from the simple need to get the Syrian regime to stop the use of chemical weapons against its own citizens once and forever, to fully disclose its chemical-weapons programme and to fully cooperate with the OPCW. Unfortunately, Russia is not helping with any of those tasks, and is instead devising ever new distractions to make our work more difficult. Since we last met (see S/PV.8764), we havereceived two official communications from the OPCW. One is the eighty-fifth monthly report on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) (see S/2020/1056, annex). So, for the eighty-fifth time, we have now heard that Syria is stalling and obstructing investigations - full stop. We have also received a letter (see S/2020/1033, annex) on the implementation by Syria of the decision of the OPCW's Executive Council in The Hague in July. Unfortunately, the analysis is the same - there is no progress. Al-Assad has chosen to ignore the Executive Council decision, as he has chosen to ignore resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons Convention. And still, we are hearing time and again from the Syrian regime and those supporting it that Damascus is in compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention. That is simply not true. There are facts, and there are authorities on chemical weapons - and that is the OPCW. I urge Russia to finally use its considerable influence over Damascus - the Syrian regime must stop the use of chemical weapons against its own citizens for good, fully disclose its chemical- weapons programme and fully cooperate with the OPCW. By coming with this text on the OPCW week after week, Russia will not succeed in undermining the winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, a very important stakeholder in international institutions. The Al-Assad regime in Syria has killed its own people using chemical weapons. Russia has shielded Al-Assad, including by ending the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in 2017, the very mechanism that had been set up to examine the use of such weapons. We all have a responsibility to safeguard and support the Chemical Weapons Convention and its guardian, the OPCW - acentral pillar of the global disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation architecture. The re-emergence of chemical weapons, as we have seen in Syria and in other cases, must not be tolerated. The use of those despicable weapons undermines the international non-proliferation architecture, and we will not accept impunity for those who use or develop toxic agents, regardless of where such agents are being used. We will continue our efforts to push for accountability. There can be just and lasting peace in Syria only if the perpetrators of these most heinous crimes are brought to justice. Second statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations, Christoph Heusgen I must say that I just cannot believe my ears. I would recommend that Mr. Vassily Nebenzia, Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation, look at the Caesar photographs of the prisons in Syria. I do not know if he was present in the Security Council when I cited the witness in the Koblenz trial who was responsible for the transport of hundreds of corpses of Syrian civilians (see S/PV.8764). They were buried in mass graves. I am happy to provide that information to him again. Mr. Nebenzia has been very careful in not discussing the fact that the Syrian regime has been caught killing its own civilians with chemical weapons. There is no doubt that Syria has used chemical weapons. Even Russia does not doubt that. With regard to Mr. Navalny, this is a typical Russian reaction. I just recall what I mentioned before - Russia's cyberattack on the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The timing of that, by the way, was in connection with the Skripal case. Coming back to Mr. Navalny, in the spirit of full transparency, Germany shared a shortened version of a classified analysis by the OPCW on the Navalny poisoning (S/1906/2020) with all Member States. That version omits any specific details regarding the structural characteristics of the toxic chemical that was used. That approach has been carefully considered and is guided by non-proliferation concerns. Together with Belgium, Estonia, France and the United Kingdom, we sent a letter (S/2020/960) to the Secretary-General and to the Security Council in which we call on Russia to disclose urgently, fully and in a transparent manner the circumstances of the attack against Mr. Navalny and to inform the Council. Russia has the evidence and medical samples needed for an investigation in its own country. It is therefore upon Russia to launch a full and transparent investigation. Russia does not want to imply that Mr. Navalny was poisoned in Germany, or that he poisoned himself. We therefore take note of the Russian announcement to cooperate with the OPCW. We call on the Russian Federation authorities to fully cooperate with the OPCW to ensure an impartial international investigation. I urge Russia to stop blaming others, to stop undermining the OPCW and to finally acknowledge the reality that the Syrian regime is responsible for mass murder and for killing its own population with chemical weapons. The Syrian regime is responsible for yesterday's killing of eight civilians, four of whom were children.
