Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important debate
today. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General and
Ms. Blakemore for their briefings.
I believe that there has been a huge amount of
progress and important successful outcomes concerning
the peacekeeping agenda over the past 10 years. At the
same time, Sarah Blakemore's testimony reminds us
that there is a long way to go, but I believe that it would
be right to begin by joining my Swedish colleague in
commending the 100,000 United Nations uniformed
peacekeepers and the 14,000 civilian peacekeepers
and their commitment to delivering international
peace and security. The vast majority of these men and
women are courageous and they operate in incredibly
challenging conditions. As the Under-Secretary-
General mentioned, 138 lost their lives last year. We
pay tribute to their sacrifice and we thank their families
for allowing them to carry out the very difficult jobs
they do.

We, the Council, are responsible for their
deployment. We need to do our utmost to improve the
safety and security of all peacekeepers and to make
sure that peacekeeping is as effective and efficient
as possible. That means having high-performing
peacekeeping missions. We need to get the best possible
impact from the $7 billion we spend annual on United
Nations peacekeeping, but I also want to say that we
need to have multidimensional peacekeeping. I do not
agree that missions should not look at human rights
and humanitarian factors. These are conflict drivers;
they are root causes; they need to be fixed. We cannot
turn the clock back, so we need military, political and
development solutions.

The Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
initiative provides the basis for making a reality of
getting more impact for our money. We are proud to have
endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping and we encourage other
Member States to join. I would like to highlight four
particular areas where I think we should concentrate
our efforts to have peacekeeping be more effective.

First, we must get it right from the start. That involves
planning. The Council has an important role to play in
improving performance. That starts with the mandates
we authorize, which need to be realistic, achievable
and developed on the basis of frank advice from the
Secretariat, as well as robust debate by the Council. In
turn, we look to the Secretariat to use our peacekeeping
resources effectively and to match capabilities to
requirements. We often talk about the United Nations
breaking down silos. I would just recall that in Darfur,
there are some 27 different United Nations entities on
the ground. That requires coordination, planning, a
comparative advantage approach and a United Nations-
wide approach.

Secondly, we must make sure that it works. A
number of speakers this morning have drawn attention
to the critical importance of performance. Peacekeepers
on the ground need to be equipped, capable and willing
to do the job we ask of them. That means we need to
strengthen training, both before deployment and as
troops are in the field. We need the light coordination
mechanism on training to be made operational as
quickly as possible. That mechanism needs to enable
better matching-up of those that can provide capacity-
building and equipment with those that need support.

As the Under-Secretary-General mentioned, we
need to do more than pay lip service to the role of
women. We should make this a priority. At the London
Defence Ministerial, some 63 countries, including
many represented in this Chamber, called for the
doubling of the number of women in military and peace
contingents by 2020. I hope that we can all play a part
in making that a reality. For the United Kingdom's
part, we have launched the Women, Peace and Security
Chiefs of Defence Staff Network, and we hope that it
will promote ways to integrate gender perspectives
into military planning and operations, and thereby
improve numbers.

Third is the feedback loop. Checking that we know
what works and continuous improvement requires a
robust and objective evaluation ofmission performance.
As you said, Madam President, processes must be
transparent and we need better accountability. Between
us, we have huge amounts of knowledge to draw on, and
I hope that the Secretariat will be able to speed up the
development of a comprehensive performance policy.

Fourthly, we must recognize when we get it wrong.
The failure to be transparent and maintain a culture
of accountability can lead to shocking abuses, as
Ms. Blakemore was able to outline today. We strongly
support the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance
policy and we look to its implementation. The United
Kingdom has provided about $3 million to support the
Secretary-General's efforts, and our voluntary funding
has improved system-wide coordination and enabled
robust vetting and mandatory predeployment training.
It is also important that we have good communication
so that we can focus on providing redress for victims.

In conclusion, we need to be confident that our
peacekeeping missions are fulfilling their mandates to
protect civilians and we need to be equally confident
that they are fulfilling their duty to protect our own
mission personnel. We therefore need to fulfil our own
duty to ensure that these missions are supported and
given the necessary resources so they can do theirjobs.

