Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the Security Council's support for
renewing the South Sudan sanctions regime, including
the arms embargo. If there is to be any chance for
lasting peace in South Sudan, we must stop the flow
of weapons used to fuel the conflict and terrorize
civilians and take action against those responsible for
undermining the peace.

We are disappointed that resolution 2471 (2019) did
not receive the support of the three African members
of the Security Council. Just three months ago, the
Council adopted resolution 2457 (2019) to silence the
guns in Africa, with strong support from the African
Union. Today we regret that three of the abstentions
show an unwillingness to stop the flow of weapons
to one of the continent's deadliest civil conflicts.
The measures renewed in the resolution are designed
to protect civilians and reduce violence in a country
that has borne witness to unspeakable atrocities. The
United States wants to support Africa's regional and
subregional bodies to take leading roles in resolving
disputes and conflict on the continent. However,
support for that expanded role is difficult to envision
if countries in the region are unwilling to support
measures that incentivize warring parties to choose
peace over war.

Ten months ago, when the Council adopted the
sanctions regime that we renewed today, we were told
that additional sanctions would undermine the peace
process (see S/PV.8310). We were also told that the time
was not right for an arms embargo to prevent the flow
of weapons to a country that had seen an estimated
400,000 conflict-related deaths in the past five years.

Since strengthening the sanctions regime and
imposing an arms embargo, the warring parties signed
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, and there has
been widespread adherence to the ceasefire. While
the United States remains concerned about delays in
implementing key provisions of the peace agreement
and ongoing violence against civilians, it cannot be
denied that some initial progress towards peace took
place immediately following the Council's action on
sanctions 10 months ago.

There are undoubtedly many factors besides a
strengthened sanctions regime that contributed to
that turn of events. Not least, we are encouraged that
regional actors have taken more of a leadership role
to encourage and support peace in South Sudan. We
are counting on the region to maintain pressure on the
parties to implement the peace agreement and to uphold
the United Nations arms embargo to prevent the flow
of weapons into South Sudan, which would further
destabilize the country and the region.

The United States remains ready to consider
adjustments to the sanctions regime, including
strengthening it with additional measures or suspending
existing measures, in the light of progress or lack
thereof. We note that, under the existing sanctions
regime, the parties may request exemptions that would
allow them to successfully Implement disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.

In conclusion, the United States will support
measures that help to protect civilians in South Sudan
against the horrific violence that has become routine in
their daily lives. In doing so, the United States supports
the people of South Sudan and their aspirations for
freedom, peace and prosperity.

