Mrs. Cordova Soria (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the briefing of the Special Representative
ofthe Secretary-General and Head ofthe United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salame. We
reiterate our full support for his ongoing efforts. We
also welcome Ambassador Olof Skoog's briefing on
the activities carried out by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

Bolivia expresses its deep concern at the continued
escalation of violence during the reporting period
throughout Libyan territory, particularly in the city of
Tripoli, which saw the indiscriminate use of rockets,
mortars and explosive ordnance by armed groups in
civilian areas. According to reports of various United
Nations agencies, such attacks significantly damaged
schools, mosques and private residences, as well as
hospitals and medical centres, and in recent weeks alone
have been responsible for at least 69 deaths, including
women and children.

We remind all concerned parties and actors that, in
the framework of international humanitarian law, they
are obligated to ensure the security and physical integrity
of civilians and civilian areas and infrastructure.
They are also responsible for applying the principles
of distinction and proportionality. Otherwise, these
deliberate attacks could be construed as war crimes,
which would then fall under the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court for their investigation and
judgment. We therefore ask them to join and respect
the de-escalation and ceasefire efforts promoted by the
Special Representative.

Moreover, we are alarmed by reports of widespread
violations of the human rights of the 8,000 refugees
and migrants confined to detention centres operated by
the Government and those under the control of armed
groups. The Secretary-General's report (S/2018/780)
attests to the violation of the rights of these people,
who are detained indefinitely in inadequate conditions
and subjected to degrading treatment, torture, forced
labour, sexual violence and the denial of medical aid.

This terrible situation is compounded by the crisis
in the Mediterranean Sea, where in July and August
255 immigrants perished. That figure increases this
year's fatalities to more than 1,500 people. That reality
highlights the urgent necessity of addressing the
situation in a cross-cutting and permanent manner.
We therefore call on the parties to prevent such abuses
of the rights of migrants and refugees, and we remind
them to fulfil their obligations under international law.
We urgently call upon Libyan authorities to launch
the necessary investigations to prevent impunity for
such atrocities.

The acts of violence and the increase in clashes
during the reporting period undoubtedly threaten the
political process and the safety of the population. As
such, my delegation reiterates the importance of the full
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement in
order to definitively put an end to the transition period.
In this regard, and bearing in mind the commitment
undertaken by the parties to hold parliamentary
and presidential elections by the end of this year, it
is imperative to move forward with the necessary
consultations on the new Constitution and to develop the
necessary legislation establishing in a clear and concrete
way the elements and requirements for proceeding with
this process. We therefore call on the parties and on local
actors to refrain from confrontational rhetoric that may
weaken or undermine these efforts and, on the contrary,

to commit unconditionally to engaging in dialogue and
implementing the Libyan Political Agreement.

At the same time, with regard to efforts to support
and assist the strengthening of the Libyan political
process and the action plan supported by the Special
Representative, we underscore the efforts of the
African Union and of countries such as Egypt, Algeria
, Tunisia and Senegal, among others. We would also
like to highlight the activities of the United Nations
Mine Action Service to assist and support the Libyan
authorities in their efforts to monitor the flow of
arms, munitions and explosives, as well as technical
assistance to identify and eliminate explosive remnants
of war - including, for example, the destruction of
200 tonnes of explosives in the city of Misrata - to
guarantee the security of humanitarian assistance and
the dignified return of internally displaced individuals.

My delegation reiterates that there can be no
military solution to this conflict, which is why we call
on all parties to abide by all of the resolutions adopted
by the Security Council, in particular resolution 2259
(2015) and presidential statement S/PRST/2017/26 of
14 December 2017, and to join efforts under way to
pursue ongoing dialogue to pave the way for a peaceful,
orderly and inclusive political transition that will meet
the interests of the Libyan people and enable them
freely and consensually to define their future.

In conclusion, it is important to reiterate and keep in
mind that the impact of the Libyan conflict on security
in the region is a direct consequence of interventionist
practice and regime-change policies that have had a
collateral impact in the Sahel, unleashing an upsurge
in chaos, terrorism and militarization, whose tragic
results reverberate to this very day.

