I thank Sven, the Secretary-General, Mr. Maurer and President Sirleaf for their informative presentations today. This annual briefing is especially timely in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). As the Secretary-General's report on the protection of civilians (S/2020/366) states, the pandemic has the potential to devastate conflict-affected countries and overwhelm already weak health-care systems. It will continue to exacerbate vulnerabilities for women and girls, refugees, displaced persons, and older persons, making conflict mediation more challenging. The United States has already provided over $1 billion in health and humanitarian aid to combat COVID-19. Our foreign assistance is saving lives and helping address economic devastation around the world. Consistent with the United States strategy on women and peace and security, we are working to ensure that our assistance includes local strategies to mitigate COVID-19's acute risks to women and girls, including conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence. The United States strongly believes that all parties to conflict must comply with international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Promoting training and sensitization to these laws, consistent with the United Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy, as applicable, will be critical. The United States has shared and built upon best practices, including bilaterally and during coalition operations. We encourage others to do the same. Globally, attacks on civilians are all-too common. For instance, the Secretary- General's report on the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (S/2020/210) notes that anti-Government elements were responsible for the majority of civilian deaths. In Myanmar, the United Nations Independent International Fact- Finding Mission on Myanmar documented the security forces' long-standing practice of attacking civilians from ethnic and religious minority groups. In Syria, the Al-Assad regime and its military allies, Russia and Iran, continue to put civilians at risk by using barrel bombs and improvised rocket-assisted munitions. These have killed countless children. We applaud the efforts of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which is collecting and preserving evidence of crimes committed in the country, and the United Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry, which recently investigated perpetrators of attacks on civilian infrastructure. In line with resolution 2254 (2015), we call for the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in Syrian political and peace processes. Protecting civilians in armed conflict is a collective effort. We support the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire to enable health officials to address COVID-19, and for unhindered and safe access for human rights and humanitarian workers. It is critical that access be ensured for humanitarians, health- care personnel and supplies to all people in need in order to provide life-saving humanitarian assistance. Civil society, including journalists and human rights defenders, plays an important role in investigating violations and abuses. The Council must help to protect these individuals from reprisals. Member States must also address violations and abuses of international humanitarian and human rights law through relevant national, regional and international legal mechanisms. The United States supports the Secretary-General's call for national protection frameworks to strengthen respect for international humanitarian law and promote monitoring and reporting mechanisms. Leveraging technology for more robust crisis-mapping and data analysis will be needed to establish early-warning systems. Likewise, we support the Department of Peace Operations revised protection of civilians policy. Peacekeeping creates the space for political and peace processes to take shape, enabling host States to find durable solutions to armed conflict. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Security Council has adapted the mandate of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to meet the difficult challenge of protecting civilians in the eastern part of the country. The new mandate enhances and clarifies the role of the Force Intervention Brigade, addressing the concerns of Congolese civilians who wanted a more immediate response to attacks by armed groups. The Security Council's willingness to adapt and refine mandates to meet needs on the ground helps to ensure that missions are fit-for-purpose. To better protect civilians in conflict, the United States and 46 Member States have endorsed the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians. We encourage all Member States to join us so that we can help peacekeepers effectively implement their protection of civilian mandates. While we know that COVID-19 has restricted movement and troop rotations, it is important that peace operations continue to fulfil their protection of civilian mandates while ensuring the safety, security and health of all United Nations personnel. The United States believes that efforts to protect civilians and build peace cannot be achieved without the full, equal and meaningful participation of women. Peace is more durable when women are at the table for peace talks. Additionally, increasing women's meaningful participation in peacekeeping improves operational effectiveness and a mission's ability to fulfil protection of civilian mandates. Today's video-teleconference is an opportunity to discuss how, collectively, we can better protect civilians in conflict. The Security Council cannot accept attacks on children, infrastructure and civilians as normal. Especially amid the COVID-19 pandemic, we are compelled to demonstrate the political will to promote implementation of protection frameworks and pursue accountability for violations of international law. The United States will continue to seek mechanisms to better protect civilians from barbaric acts - the acts that the United Nations was created to prevent.
