The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Canada, Indonesia, Norway,
Pakistan and the Republic of Korea, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Petrella
(Argentina), Mr. Sucharipa (Austria), Mr. Kouliev
(Azerbaijan), Mr. Fowler (Canada), Mr. Pohan
(Indonesia), Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan) and Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Stephen Lewis,
Deputy Executive Director of the United Nations Children' s
Fund, and to Mr. Kofi Asomani, Director of the Liaison
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees at United Nations Headquarters.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council also
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mrs. Sylvie Junod, Head
of the delegation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross to the United Nations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations,
document S/ 1998/883.

It is my pleasure to give the floor to the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Frechette.


