Since this is our first meeting this month, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and express the certitude that, with your capable team, you will do your best to lead us through this difficult time. I am absolutely sure that you will succeed in this. May I also note the excellent work of our Chinese colleagues last month. I think that you made history, and I thank you very much for what you have done. We also thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali, for his briefing. The course of events in Mali over the past three months represents a mixed picture. On the one hand, the situation in the country is gradually stabilizing. Serious progress has been made in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We would like to particularly highlight the launch of the work of the reformed units of the armed forces in Timbuktu, Kidal, Menaka and Gao. We welcome the support provided in this regard by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We hope that, with the passage of time, the deployment of armed forces will be an important step towards the return of the northern regions to normal life. At the political level, we are encouraged by the successful completion of the national dialogue, which outlined the main avenues in the field of State reform. Just several days ago, on 29 March, the parliamentary elections were finally held as scheduled. In addition, the central authorities are stepping up efforts to reduce intercommunal clashes in the central region of Mali. On the other hand, unfortunately, the security situation is not improving. While there were fewer terrorist attacks overall in recent months, the past two weeks have shown that such attacks are quite large-scale and continue to occur both in Mali and in neighbouring countries. All this demonstrates the magnitude and severity of the threats that the country and the region are facing, as well as their vulnerability to destabilizing factors like terrorism, organized crime and extremist ideology. Factors such as inter-ethnic tensions, constant attacks by terrorists and extremists and the delay in restoring a State presence in the central and northern regions of the country may seriously slow down, or even call into question, the emerging positive changes. The humanitarian situation in Mali is also of grave concern. The number of people in need of food is growing from one year to another. Obviously, the coronavirus pandemic is already becoming an additional negative factor that jeopardizes the ability to provide international assistance to the region. In conclusion, we would like to highlight the role of MINUSMA in facilitating the progress on the ground. We are convinced that the Mission needs comprehensive support, especially in a situation where it has to fulfil its mandate on two fronts at once - in the centre and in the north of Mali. It is clear that at the current stage, it is premature to consider its reduction. At the same time, it is our understanding that the adaptation of MINUSMA should be carried out strictly, in accordance with the mandate provided for in resolution 2480 (2019). Last but not least, we would like to express our gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his effective leadership.
