Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Uganda welcomes the
comprehensive briefings by the three Chairmen of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council. Terrorism
and proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery remain a danger
to international peace and security. These are matters
that this Council has continued to handle. Uganda has
given unwavering support to the Council, and will
continue to do so, for all measures aimed at
strengthening its work in this regard.

Uganda commends the three committees and their
expert groups for developing common strategies and
making joint country visits and exchanges of
information on their activities. We encourage them to
continue to assist Member States in submitting timely
responses on implementation of the relevant Council
resolutions. Their common strategy to engage with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
entities and agencies is a step in the right direction and
should be encouraged. However, the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) should be able to make
an in-depth assessment of what it has been able, and
what it has not been able, to achieve and possibly of
what it intends to do in order to realize maximum
output of these interactive initiatives.

The visit to my country by CTED and the
Monitoring Team between 17 and 21 November 2008
was very welcome. It assisted the Team to deepen their
understanding of the intricacies involved in the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions,
particularly the technical aspects essential in such
implementation. My country's experience in handling
terrorist activities can be a point of recall in
understanding the role of the individual State
initiatives, bilateral approaches and regional
interventions in stemming these threats.

Uganda has had to confront terrorist groups of the
Lord's Resistance Army and Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) largely out of these approaches. In the recent
past, we have worked closely with some of our
neighbours in that regard. This approach is consistent
with the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Those initiatives, it must be said, reinforce the efforts
of the Council to achieve its mandate in the fight
against terrorism.
Uganda welcomes the revised technical
assistance strategy of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, which is intended to leverage bilateral,
regional and international partnerships in order to
enhance dialogue with recipient countries and the
further implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

Uganda will continue to support the fight against
terrorism and against the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their means of
delivery, and all other efforts of the Security Council to
achieve international peace and security. We will
continue to support and encourage cooperation at the
bilateral, subregional, regional and international levels
in that regard.

