Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome Prosecutor Bensouda, whom
we thank for the information she has presented to the
Council in her role as Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, and which highlights the great
challenges facing her Office.

We would like to begin by expressing our
satisfaction with the progress made since the last
report. We warmly welcome the signing of the Juba
Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures and
the Preparation for Negotiation. Ensuring the ceasefire
and humanitarian actors' access to the various areas of
conflict in the Sudan is essential if Sudanese society is
to continue advancing towards peace.

We are pleased that the national justice system
is investigating the cases of Mr. Hussein, Mr. Harun
and Mr. Al-Bashir. We welcome the recent conviction
of Mr. Al-Bashir to two years' imprisonment for
corruption. However, we are concerned that the crimes in
question are minor and different from those established
in the International Criminal Court's indictments. We
therefore want to remind the new authorities in the
Sudan of how important it is that States cooperate with
the Court so that it can achieve its objectives.

We regret the loss of life in the Jebel Marra area
resulting from disputes between the Government and
the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid. We urge
the parties to the conflict to ensure the protection of
civilians. We also call on the members ofthe Council to
unite their efforts to reduce crime in the refugee camps
that are home to thousands of people displaced by the
conflict. In the Dominican Republic's view, eliminating
sexual abuse as a war crime is a priority. Such offences
must not be tolerated and their perpetrators must be
brought tojustice. We urge the new Sudanese authorities
to prioritize the fight against sexual abuse and gender-
based violence in their plan for governing. Addressing
such harmful actions is crucial to the healthy and safe
development of Sudanese children and the elimination
of violence against women.

We warmly welcome the news that the buildings
belonging to the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur that were seized by armed
forces will be handed over to the authorities for the
purpose of providing health care, education and other
social services.

Lastly, the Dominican State reaffirms its support
for the International Criminal Court, and we urge the
international community to join the efforts to assist the
courageous people of the Sudan. The new Sudanese
leadership is tasked with strengthening the protection
of human rights and eliminating impunity in order to
promote the resilient advancement of Sudanese society.

