Mr. D'Alema (Italy): First of all, allow me to say
that I am extremely honoured to have the opportunity
to address such an authoritative body today for my
very first time.

I would like to thank the Special Representative
for Afghanistan, Tom Koenigs, and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Antonio Maria Costa, for their comprehensive
briefings.

I express my deepest appreciation for the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan. It is a very appropriate and timely
reminder of the vital importance for the international
community as a whole of attaining full success in
Afghanistan.

The report mentions the progress achieved in
several key areas. It recalls, in particular, the ongoing
reforms of the Ministry of the Interior, the
development of parliamentary institutions as an
independent and active counterweight to the Executive,
the meaningful progress made in the field of
transitional justice.

These are significant achievements. Italy is proud
to have contributed to them, especially through its
leading role in the field of the rule of law and the
justice system.

And yet, this is not the time for complacency. The
findings contained in the report sound a worrisome, but
healthy, wake-up call. We have to recognize that
progress is insufficient in too many sectors, not only in
security but also in governance, socio-economic
development, regional cooperation, human rights
protection, and counter-narcotics. In some of these
sectors, to be absolutely frank, we are even facing
some setbacks.

What does that mean? It means that we can and
we must do more. We must succeed not only for the
sake of the credibility of the international institutions
involved in Afghanistan. But first and foremost we
must succeed for the Afghan people.

The draft resolution aims at emphasizing the
crucial role of the civilian component of the United
Nations mission. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) must be given all
the political support and the resources needed to fulfil
its complex mandate. I firmly believe that UNAMA
should also have a stronger role in humanitarian

coordination and in human rights monitoring functions.
The draft resolution addresses this point in a
satisfactory way.

We are all aware that the adoption of a new
resolution is not enough. Promoting and strengthening
Afghan ownership is an essential prerequisite for success.
President Karzai himself underlined that point during his
recent visit to Rome. Today, I would like to express to
him and to the Afghan institutions all the gratitude of
the Italian Government for the help offered in the
freeing of Italian journalist Daniele Mastrogiacomo.

In order to create better conditions for Afghan
ownership, Italy is organizing, together with the
Afghan Government and in close cooperation with the
United Nations, the Rome conference on the rule of
law. Justice and the rule of law are crucial conditions
for democratic development and internal security in
Afghanistan. Much has been done, but serious
problems remain, including widespread corruption. We
do need additional effort and we need better
coordination through the approval of an action plan in
this strategic sector. A new trust fund will also be needed
to ensure a coherent approach to the whole sector.

Italy also wants to pay special attention to the
linkages between the rule-of-law sector, counter-
narcotics and police reform. We welcome the coming
European security and defence policy mission in the
field of policing, with linkages to the wider rule of law.
Italy is fully committed to the success of a mission
which constitutes an encouraging sign of a growing
assumption of responsibilities by the European Union.
We aim at a growing role for the European Union in
the rule-of-law and justice sector. In this context, we
fully support the statement that will be delivered by the
German presidency of the European Union.

Security provided by the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), in cooperation with the
Afghan army, is an essential precondition for
stabilization - but it cannot be sufficient. I underline
this point as the representative of a Government that
has committed a large number of troops in the country.
Peace and stability will be on shaky ground unless
there is swift and solid progress in people's living
conditions, civilian reconstruction and institution-
building at the national and provincial levels.

There is an absolute need to reduce support for
the insurgency. As the Secretary-General's report
(S/2007/152) states, we should encourage the Action

Plan on Peace, Justice and Reconciliation, launched by
President Karzai. My View is that such encouragement
will be effective only within the regional dimension.
We should therefore consider a process allowing the
full and positive involvement of the neighbouring
countries. We should be open to the possibility of an
international conference, which I conceive as the result
of this process. Let me clarify this.

The draft resolution already stresses the
importance of a stronger role for UNAMA in
supporting regional cooperation. I would like to stress
this point - the regional dimension must be reinforced
if we wish to succeed. We must - and we can - be
ambitious. Italy welcomes the meeting of the Foreign
Ministers of the Group of Eight plus Afghanistan and
Pakistan on 30 May as an important step in the right
direction.

As a follow-up, we believe that an international
conference, in Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board (JCMB) format, is needed in order to deal in a
comprehensive way with regional issues relating to
peace and stability in Afghanistan. Our proposal has
been conceived within the framework of the
Afghanistan Compact as part of a process that started
with the Bonn and London Conferences. According to
the JCMB format, the conference on regional peace
and stability should be co-sponsored by the
Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations.

The objectives of the conference should be very
concrete, and they should be threefold. First, the
conference should state, at a high political level, the
commitment of the main stakeholders to contribute to
the regional dimension of the security and stability of
Afghanistan. I think that that is of absolutely key
importance for peace. Secondly, it should agree on the
need to put in place a series of confidence-building and
cooperation measures between Afghanistan and its
neighbours. Thirdly, it should support the national
reconciliation process, as launched by President
Karzai, through a regional stabilization process
involving neighbouring countries and the international
community. Finally, such an international conference
would also be a consensus-building measure. It would
allow trust and support to be built up among the public
of our countries with regard to the prospects for peace
and democracy in Afghanistan.
UNAMA's role will be crucial in reinforcing
Afghan institutions. Equally important will be the
continuous commitment of each of us in the areas of
security, peace and civil reconstruction. Italy hopes
that, once implemented, the measures foreseen in the
draft resolution will help us to contribute to achieving
the goal of a better Afghanistan - an Afghanistan
which is safe, prosperous and free. We owe that to the
international community. Above all, we owe it to the
Afghan people, who deserve our support more than
ever. Let us try to live up to their expectations.

