Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking Germany for convening this open
debate under its presidency, and also acknowledge the
presence of the Foreign Minister of Germany this
morning. The useful work done by the
Secretary-General's Office, the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, the UNICEF and other associated
agencies will no doubt add substantial value to
addressing this issue so vitally important to our times.

Sri Lanka endorses the three side events that were
organized by the Permanent Mission of Germany in
association with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Permanent
Mission of Canada and the United Nations Programme
on Youth in June. They incrementally advanced our
understanding of these issues. The relevant discussions
underlined the urgency of concerted action at the
national and international levels to contain and halt the
repugnant practice of child recruitment for armed
combat. To deprive a child of his smiles and dreams
and burden him with gore and machine guns is an
appalling indictment of the values of the certain groups
and individuals.

However, Sri Lanka has serious reservations
about the report issued by Conflict Dynamics
International under the auspices of the Permanent
Missions of Canada and Germany. For instance, its
assertion that individuals implicated in crimes against
children in armed conflict continue to hold high
Government positions is sadly incomplete and
misleading. My Government consistently encouraged
former armed groups to denounce violence and to enter
the democratic process as a part of the reconciliation
effort. Following this approach, the Tamil Makkal
Viduthalai Pulighal (TMVP), a breakaway faction of
the terrorist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE),
ceased to be an armed group and entered the political
process as a registered party.
Like in other countries where former terrorist
groups have transformed themselves into legitimate
political parties, the TMVP has also joined the
democratic process. It has released all child combatants
under a tripartite action plan with UNICEF and the
Government. The adult cadres are very much part of
the democratic process, which has had a salutary
impact across the board. It appears that the report will
stoke embers of a bitter past and politicize the issue of
accountability related to child recruitment.
Unfortunately, these complex underlying realities have
been ignored.

This debate takes place against the backdrop of
the increasing frequency and intensity of the identified
six grave violations against children in armed conflict.
Children are the most vulnerable group, and they
therefore require conscious protection. We therefore
welcome the recommendations in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2011/250) on adopting targeted
measures against persistent perpetrators of grave
violations against children. In Sri Lanka, it was clear
that the child soldiers of the LTTE were cannon fodder
for the movement who were sent to early graves.

On the recommendation of filing systematic
information on Violations against children in reports
and recommendations to sanctions committees, we
would like to urge the Council and the Working Group
to ensure that the information so collected is objective,
accurate, reliable and verified by experts, including
forensic experts, and in an open and transparent
manner with all the members represented in the
country task forces where they exist. Paragraph 3 of
resolution 1612 (2005), which clearly states that the
monitoring and reporting mechanism must work in
close consultation with the country concerned, must be
strictly adhered to. We add this note recalling Sri
Lanka's unpleasant experience with the global
horizontal note filed from 1 May to 31 July 2009.
Many reports had been made to the Council without
reference to the country task force. Inaccurate
reporting would cast doubt on the credibility of both
reporting sources and the Secretary-General's report
itself.

The progress made by Sri Lanka in realizing its
policy of zero tolerance in the case of child
recruitment, including the rehabilitation and
reintegration of former child combatants under its
"Bring Back the Child" campaign, is by any standard
salutary.
11-41151

According to a UNICEF report made public
recently, over 60 per cent of the LTTE fighting forces
from 1983 to 2002 consisted of boys and girls under 18
years, including orphans harvested after the tsunami.
UNICEF recorded over 5,700 cases of child
recruitment by the LTTE from 2003 to 2009. Others
have suggested a figure closer to 20,000. Child soldiers
were often deployed to attack villagers with machetes
and used as suicide bombers, especially the girls.
Hundreds of such attacks were launched. In the final
stages of the conflict, children were thrown up in large
numbers as cannon fodder. More than one generation
of children were sacrificed to realize a megalomaniac's
terrorist dream. These are our children.

Tremendous progress is being made in child
tracing and family reunions. According to a recently
released UNICEF study, 64 per cent of the missing
Tamil children had been recruited by the LTTE. Many
may have died in mosquito infested jungles.

In the post-conflict phase, significant attention is
being paid to restoring and rebuilding schools and to
the release of schools to the educational authorities.
Over 135 schools in the north that were abandoned
have now been rehabilitated and are functioning
normally. Sri Lanka provides free education to all its
children without distinction from kindergarten to
university level.

Recognizing that children formerly associated
with armed groups continue to be highly vulnerable,
the monitoring of the reintegrated former combatants
will continue. The Government recognizes that these
children should be placed under the purview of the
Department of Social Services. Children are an asset
and the country will invest heavily in their future, as it
had done in the past.

Unfortunately, despite the progress I have
outlined, Sri Lanka continues to remain on the naming
and shaming list in the annexes to the Secretary-
General's report. The unresolved cases relating to five
children appear to be the reason for this. In comparison
with other situations in the world, this would appear to
be trite and unreasonable. The individual allegedly
responsible for the situation of the aforementioned
children was indicted for criminal intimidation, an
offence under the penal code. He pleaded guilty and
was convicted and sentenced to two years rigorous
imprisonment, suspended for 10 years with a fine of
250,000 Sri Lanka rupees.
11-41151

We call on the Council and the Working Group to
undertake a holistic and fair assessment of the Sri
Lankan case and to de-list Sri Lanka from the naming
and shaming list. Sri Lanka now has a representative
on the Committee on the Rights of the Child, and we
intend to play a very active role there. It is pertinent to
recall in this context a proposal made by a civil society
representative, Ms. Carla Stea, at the meeting convened
on June 30. She proposed that the Council consider
adopting an honours list for countries that have
registered appreciable progress in addressing issues of
former child soldiers, especially those countries that
are also parties to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. The three-tier categorization maintained in the
methodology of the annual United States Trafiicking in
Persons Report is also relevant and instructive in this
context. A corresponding list, we believe, would be
forward-looking and constructive. It would also
encourage more countries with the problem of child
recruitment to be willing partners to action plans.

We also agree with the views expressed by some
representatives during the side event held on 30 June
that the discourse on the issue of children and armed
conflict should involve the wider United Nations
membership if it is to be truly meaningful.
Furthermore, the mandate only covers situations of a
conflict. Limiting the discussion to the Security
Council and allowing the non-Security Council
members to speak on the issue only during open
debates really does not accord the issue the
seriousness, focus and attention it deserves among the
wider membership. Broadening the space of this debate
would bode well for ensuring collective responsibility
and effective monitoring.

