Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): At the outset, let me
commend the leadership of Pakistan in guiding the
work of the Council in January 2013. I applaud the
hard work of your delegation, Sir, in preparing the
informative concept note before us (S/2013/4). We also
thank the Secretary-General for his statement delivered
this morning.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and we welcome today's adoption of
resolution 2086 (2013), on peacekeeping.

We subscribe to the views expressed in the concept
note that United Nations peacekeeping operations are
more effective and cost efficient compared to other
similar operations. Several studies, including by the
Rand Corporation, Oxford University economists,
the United States Accountability Office and others
testify ot the fact that the United Nations can complete
a mission most effectively with lower costs. In fact, it
can accomplish a mission at around 12 per cent of the
total cost that would be incurred by the United States of
America in a unilateral intervention. As members may
be aware, the total United Nations peacekeeping budget
is less than 0.5 per cent of global military expenditure.

The multidimensional aspect of United Nations
peacekeeping demonstrates its commitment to the
broader membership and ensures neutrality, greater
legitimacy, acceptance and effectiveness. Tats
dimension therefore needs to be maintained in the
future, while the base of troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) is expanded.

With limited resources, United Nations
peacekeeping has demonstrated unparalleled success
in its past operations. Since its inception, the United
Nations has undertaken 67 field missions. Among
many other things, those missions have enabled people
in dozens of countries to participate in free and fair
elections, and helped to disarm more than 400,000
ex-combatants in the past decade alone. Despite the
significant achievements, as the Rand Corporation
mentions, the Organization continues to exhibit
weaknesses in operations, which remain under-
manned and under-funded and whose military forces
are often sized not on the basis of actual need. It not
only challenges the achievement of mandates but also
generates potential threats to the safety and security
of peacekeepers. We therefore stress that the mandates
for peacekeeping missions should be clear, specific,
achievable and, most important, adequately funded to
achieve their objectives, while ensuring the safety and
security of peacekeepers themselves.

Modern peacekeeping mandates go far beyond then
traditional roles of truce supervision. Peacekeepers
nowadays address both inter- and infra-State conflicts.
Missions have become diversified, multidimensional
and more complex, engaging military, police and
civilian personnel. They provide support to safety
and security, political processes, electoral assistance,
inclusive dialogue and reconciliation, conflict
management, basic services, economic revitalization
and core Government functions, among other things. In
other words, they are the principal actors in laying the
foundations for peacebuilding.

As their mandates are enhanced, so are their needs
and requirements. In that context, it is important that
TCCs are consulted from the very beginning of a
mission until the end of its last stage, especially when
decisions are being taken about its mandate, human
resources and other requirements.

The concept note has highlighted several issues
regarding the integration of peacebuilding tasks in the
context of multidimensional peacekeeping. In response,
my delegation would like to stress the following points.

First, in the context of multidimensional
peacekeeping, the elements of peacebuilding can be
incorporated at an early stage. In doing so, the views
of the host country, the advice of the Peacebuilding
Commission, where appropriate, and the lessons learned
and best practices of from TCCs may be requested for
determining mission needs. Special emphasis needs
to be given to determining force requirements, taking
into account their future contribution in peacebuilding
efforts.

Secondly, once the requirement are determined,
TCCs may be requested to form composite units for
deployment, including the military, police and civilian
personnel required to address the multidimensional
needs of integrated missions. That will allow us to tap
the benefits of comparative advantages of experienced
peacekeepers. At the same time, that is likely to bridle
cost overruns associated with hiring external experts.
Similarly, the inclusion of civilian experts in related
areas within the composite unit may bring greater
harmony and coherence among the various actors in
the field as well as cost-effectiveness in the operations.

Thirdly, women represent almost 50 per cent
of our total population. Their rights and roles in
preventing conflict and rebuilding society cannot
be overemphasized. They deserve equal rights in the
context of the peace process and nation-building.
Unfortunately, they become the principal victims of
conflict and, in the recovery process, they are often
neglected. We therefore stress that women should be
included systematically throughout the entire process
in the areas of conflict resolution, mediation and
economic recovery, local Government, the rule of law
and other related areas of nation-building.

Fourthly, the needs of multidimensional missions
are multifaceted. They require trained personnel for
addressing issues related to military and police affairs
as well as issues of civilian engagement. Therefore,
training for peacekeepers should be customized so as
to address all those needs through the inclusion of a
unit-based training programme. We are ready to offer
our training facilities in Bangladesh, at the Bangladesh
Institute of Peace Support Operations Training centre.

Finally, United Nations peacekeeping is a collective
endeavour and the pride of the United Nations. Its
success is the outcome of the concerted efforts of all
stakeholders. Its future success will depend on the
forging of such partnerships on the basis of experiences
and lessons learned. We look forward to further
strengthening those partnerships in all areas of our
possible cooperation and contribution.

