Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank the High
Representative of the European Union (EU) for her
briefing and her presence here today. Belgium is of
course pleased to have this opportunity once again
to discuss the close partnership and cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union.
Ms. Mogherini's briefing made very clear the extent
to which the European Union is a major partner of the
Security Council, as it works to find lasting solutions
to many of the crises on our agenda here at the Council.

ThatisthecaseforSyria-Ms.Mogherinimentioned
the conference being held this week in Brussels,
co-chaired by the United Nations and the European
Union. That is also the case for Iran - Ms. Mogherini
mentioned the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
which remains an essential element of the global
non-proliferation architecture and is also a very
important achievement of multilateral diplomacy. I
would also like to point out that the agreement is also
one of the most successful examples of cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union.

That is also the case for the Balkans, where
the European Union is contributing to the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina through the EU-led
peacekeeping force's Operation Althea, as well as to
the strengthening of the rule of law in Kosovo through
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
under the auspices of the United Nations. Of course, we
hope that the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
that Ms. Mogherini is facilitating can be resumed as
soon as possible in Brussels.

As has been said, the European Union and the
United Nations share the same commitment to a world
based on the fundamental principles of democracy,
the rule of law and the universality and indivisibility
of human rights. The result is a natural partnership
between two organizations that are intensifying and
strengthening their cooperation. The European Union
and the United Nations share a common vision and
willingness to address the root causes of conflicts
and establish lasting peace, in particular through
an integrated approach, in accordance with both the
Sustainable Development Goals and the European
Union's global strategy. The European Union's role as
the largest donor of development and humanitarian aid
in the world is in line with that approach.

I would like to say that the presence of the High
Representative among us shows strong political
determination on the part of the European Union to
continue to deepen the current partnership with the
United Nations, which is based on complementarity.
The joint work of the EU and the United Nations in
peacekeeping and crisis management is a concrete
example of that complementarity. The High
Representative mentioned several cases in that context.
Allow me to highlight two particular points.

First, Belgium supports the inclusion of the women
and peace and security agenda as a cross-cutting
priority. At the level of peacekeeping operations, the
United Nations and the EU must work together to make
that political commitment a reality by significantly
increasing the participation of women both in principle
and for reasons of positive operational impact on the
functioning of those missions.

Secondly, Ms. Mogherini mentioned the example
of trilateral cooperation among the United Nations, the
European Union and the African Union, which seems to
me to be a very interesting example. I would like to ask
the High Representative if she could identify specific
good practices in that area and if she sees the potential
for doing the same with other regional organizations.
My colleague from Kuwait just mentioned the
League of Arab States and, of course, there are other
organizations, such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. Is there a possibility for
trilateral cooperation with those organizations?

