Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to welcome, on behalf of my
delegation, the new Permanent Representative of Peru,
Mr. Jorge Voto-Bernales Gatica. We wish him every
success in the Security Council for the remainder of
this year and throughout next year.

I would also like to thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Alvaro de Soto,
for his excellent briefing. On behalf of the Argentine
Government, I would like to express our appreciation
for his ongoing efforts aimed at achieving peace in the
Middle East.

My country is particularly concerned about the
situation in the Gaza Strip. We regret to note that it
continues to deteriorate at an alarming pace. Israeli
military operations, the actions of Palestinian extremist
groups and the increasing political tensions between
followers of Hamas and Fatah are the main factors
contributing to this deterioration. The Palestinian
civilian population is the main victim of this violence
and suffers the most from the profound economic crisis
of the Gaza Strip. If this violence were to continue, we
would risk greater fragmentation and radicalization of
Palestinian society and a possible collapse of the
Palestinian Authority, which would be a terrible and
perhaps irreversible setback in the search for peace. We
must do everything possible to avoid this regrettable
scenario. We also regret that the negotiations to form a
Palestinian Government of national unity have proven
so far unsuccessful. Argentina firmly supports the
efforts of President Abbas with a View to ensuring that
the programme of the Palestinian Government reflects
the three basic peace principles set forth by the
international community. We hope that, in spite of the
difficulties encountered, these efforts will continue and
that the leaders of Hamas will reconsider their position.

The Israeli people and the Government of Israel
have the right to demand that the attacks with Qassam
rockets against Villages of southern Israel cease and
that Corporal Gilad Shalit be released without
preconditions. My delegation fully supports without
reservations these demands. At the same time, my
country believes that a purely military response and the
disproportionate use of force will not achieve the
desired results and will only contribute to increasing
the suffering of the Palestinian people and to
strengthening the positions of those who within
Palestine want to advocate more violence. The
Palestinian people also has the right to demand that the
closures and restrictions of movement are eased, that
the crossings in and out of Gaza are kept permanently
open, that the military operations that affect innocent
civilians are put to an end and that the members of the
Government and Palestinian Legislative Council, who
were arrested last month, are released. We should also
put an end to the construction of the separation barrier
and all new settlement activity should be frozen. My
country also supports these demands and calls upon
Israel to fulfil them. We also request Israel, through the
appropriate international mechanisms, to transfer all
tax and customs revenues that have been withheld
since the beginning of 2006.

In the end, it is essential to keep in mind that the
majority of Palestinians and Israelis agree on
something, namely, that there is no military solution to
this conflict and that a two-State solution cannot be
achieved through unilateral actions by either side. My
delegation is convinced that in the future the Security
Council and the Quartet must be more active and
effective in the search for a lasting peace in the Middle
East. The principles of that peace are well known to all
of us and do not need to be reinvented. We do not need
to repeat them here. What we do need is a credible
political process based on dialogue, implementation in
parallel of mutual obligations and international
monitoring of performance and fulfilment of
benchmarks. This is why we believe that in the
forthcoming months the Quartet should focus
decisively on revitalization of the road map with a
View to adjusting some of its provisions. We feel that
the time for action has come.

With regard to the situation in Lebanon, we are
generally pleased with the progress made in
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), and we
thank the Secretary-General for the work he has done
and we thank UNIFIL as well for the work that they
have done in this regard. However, we are also aware
that a lot still remains to be done. We reiterate our call
for the immediate and unconditional release of the
Israeli soldiers Ehud Goldwasser and Eldad Regev. We
are seriously concerned about the use of cluster bombs
by Israel in Lebanon, which constitute a threat to the
civilian population, humanitarian agencies and even to
the personnel of UNIFIL. We feel that Israel should
provide all relevant information regarding the areas
most affected by these weapons and the quantities and
types of bombs used. Israeli Violations of Lebanese
airspace are also a reason for concern. We feel that
they must cease immediately.

With regard to other aspects of the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), we support
the measures that the Lebanese Government could
undertake for the disarmament of Hizbollah and to
ensure that there are no armed groups or weapons
south of the Litani River besides the regular armed
forces operating in that area. The events of the past
months demonstrate that it is imperative to achieve a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. Such a peace
should encompass the Israeli-Palestinian, Israeli-
Lebanese and Israeli-Syrian tracks. With regard to the
last one, we hope that the parties will start negotiations
in order to put an end to the occupation of the Golan
Heights in compliance with resolution 338 (1973).

Argentina believes that in the current
circumstances, this Security Council and the broad
international community should avoid the temptation
of inaction and complacency. On the contrary, our
priority should be to revitalize the peace process with a
View to fully realizing the legitimate aspirations of the
peoples of the Middle East to security, dignity and
recognition.

