Mr. Carbo (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to express my thanks for making possible this open
debate in the Security Council to enable the
international community to grasp the magnitude of the
problems besetting Haiti. I also wish to thank the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Jamaica and Bahamas
for their statements on behalf of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), which, together with the
reports by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs yesterday, have made it possible for Member
States to have an accurate picture of the gravity of the
crisis in Haiti.

The serious developments of recent weeks prompt
me to express my deep concern about the violence and
political instability besetting this sisterly country, as
well as the full support of Ecuador for its democratic
institutions.

This meeting gives us an opportunity to urge the
democratic institutions, the political leadership and the
Haitian people, with the urgency that the situation
merits, to establish channels of dialogue and
democratic understanding that will make it possible to
find a peaceful solution to the current problems in that
country and to achieve the national reconciliation that
would make its democratic life more robust and would
strengthen its efforts to improve the political, economic
and social conditions with a View to ensuring
prosperity and sustainable development for future
generations within a framework of peace, tolerance and
national concord.

Ecuador considers that, as a prerequisite to
achieving a negotiated settlement of the crisis, the
current spiral of violence must be halted in order to
avoid further bloodshed and a worsening of the
humanitarian emergency. In that context, there must be
greater participation on the part of the international
community to guarantee access to this assistance by the
most vulnerable segments of the population, in order to
avoid a humanitarian catastrophe with greater
consequences. The Security Council and the United
Nations must play a leading role, in coordination with
the Organization of American States (OAS) and
CARICOM.

My country is convinced that the current crisis
must be resolved peacefully within the context of the
Haitian legal order. We therefore would like to
emphasize our strong support for the constitutional,
democratic system in that sister country, as well as for
the efforts to date by the OAS and CARICOM. and the
Group of Friends of Haiti with a view to stabilizing the
situation in that fraternal Caribbean country, preserving
its legal, constitutional and political order, protecting
human rights and avoiding an institutional and
humanitarian crisis that would affect not only the
Haitian people but also the neighbouring countries and
the Caribbean region as a whole.

Finally, in the knowledge that the resolution
adopted by the Permanent Council of the OAS urges
this body to take necessary and appropriate steps, as set
out in the United Nations Charter, to dealing with the
crisis in Haiti, I wish to express our country's support
for that resolution of the American regional organ and
urge the Security Council to adopt the pertinent
decisions with all due urgency in order to stabilize the
situation in Haiti.

