Mr. Kiplagat: Let me add my warm welcome to
you, Mr. President and members of the Security
Council, for coming to Nairobi and for agreeing to
discuss and to hear reports from us on Somalia.

First, we express great joy over the fact that two
years of work on peace and reconciliation and the
formation of Government have now been concluded
with the election of a President, the formation of
parliament and the appointment of a Prime Minister.
When we look back over these two years, we see many
obstacles that we had to face - perhaps the most
difficult and important of which was our own
scepticism, as Somalis, and that of the international
community since, it will be recalled, 13 previous
attempts had been made, all without success.

So everybody has been asking us the difference
between what we are doing now and what had been
done in the past. The only thing we can say is that
there are a number of factors that make us believe that
this time around we have a greater chance that the
peace agreement will be durable and stable.

One important factor was the presence of all the
major stakeholders during the two years of
negotiations, all the major faction leaders. We brought
in traditional leaders, who are here; leaders of the
people in the diaspora and of civil society; religious
leaders; and, more importantly, regional and
international actors. We believe, therefore, that the
presence of all these stakeholders augurs well for the
creation of a durable, stable Government.

So that is the first thing that we need to take note
of - the presence of these stakeholders. But I would
like you Mr. President to underline the importance of
the regional stakeholders - the member States of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. It was
their cohesion, their vision, their commitment to
working on the peace process that really brought us to
the position that we are in today.

The second thing to note is the way in which the
Parliament was selected. We believe this institution is
very important in the way it was crafted, with the
participation of all the major political groupings of
Somalia - not only clans, but also sub-sub-clans:
close to 89, representing all the regions of Somalia.
The process was not easy. It took time, but in the end
they came out with the names and the lists from their
sub-sub-clans. Again, I believe that this is good news
in the sense that there is representation right across the
board. It was a selection process, and the role played
by traditional and factional leaders, as well as by
political leaders, was very crucial in ensuring that we
have an all-inclusive Parliament.

The third aspect I wish to mention is that of the
election of the Speaker, other officials and the
President. This was carried out by the participants in a
very transparent manner. It took us a long time - in
some cases, 12 to 15 hours - of peaceful voting, and
we believe that the process not only reflected
participation but also ensured that the people who have
been elected enjoy the support of Parliament. We
cannot say that this is the same as enjoying the support
of the whole country, but their participation is
absolutely crucial to say the least.

Looking ahead to the future, those ingredients -
of Parliament being present, of the participation of the
traditional leaders and of the process of elections -
give us optimism and hope that we will be able to
stabilize the country. What is in store for Somalia in
the coming weeks and months? The first thing is the
continuation of the reconciliation process: the process
has not yet been completed. The message of hope from
Nairobi needs to be taken all the way to the ground.
The Somalis and IGAD, have therefore made the issue
of peace-building the priority, to ensure that everything
else will follow as a result.

Of course, there is also the reconstruction of the
State, and particularly of Somali democratic
institutions. All of this, however, will depend on
security. Security is absolutely crucial to enable the
Government to move forward. Hence, we believe that
it is of the utmost importance that the issue of security
for the Government be discussed and debated, and,
hopefully, that we will get the support of the Security
Council and that of the international community.
Let us hope that the scepticism of the past will be
left behind, and let us hold on to hope for Somalia.
That is what is needed today.

