Mr. Frnlich Holte (Norway): First of all, I would
like to thank Peru for organizing this debate. Norway
congratulates the authors of the progress study on
youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86). We are also
proud to have supported the study financially.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out, without
the full involvement of young people, there will be no
sustainable peace, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development will not be achieved and violent extremism
will not be curtailed. There is no greater resource than
our youth. Both the Security Council and the General
Assembly recognize the key role young people can
play in maintaining and promoting international peace
and security.

Norway has taken several concrete steps to
implement resolution 2250 (2015). Through our
involvement in peace and reconciliation efforts in
Colombia, the Philippines and South Sudan, we have
seen at first-hand the important contributions of youth.
Based on that experience, we encourage the inclusion,
at an early stage, of young women and men in peace
negotiations and the resolution of conflict.

Norway supports a number of youth movements,
including the Youth Civil Activism Network. The
organization has 1,300 members in 125 countries and
helps young people to develop skills and resources to
counter extremism in local communities.

Education is a main priority for Norway. We have
doubled our support to global education over the past
four years to ensure schooling for more than 3 million
boys and girls annually.
In the Group of Friends of Preventing Violent
Extremism, which is co-chaired by Jordan and Norway,
we share lessons learned and best practices for including
youth and civil society in national strategies to prevent
violent extremism.

At the national level, Norway has developed
legislative frameworks to ensure the integration of
youth into policymaking and the development of
initiatives to empower young people. We have also
established integration programmes to promote the
active participation and inclusion of refugee and
migrant youth in Norwegian society.

In 2014, the Government launched its action plan
against radicalization and violent extremism, which
outlines a strategic cross-sectoral approach. The
action plan focuses particularly on preventing the
radicalization of young people. One of the measures in
the action plan is a guidance programme for parents
and guardians.

Norway will continue to empower young women and
men to be agents of change in their communities - not
only to prevent violent extremism, but to remove its
root causes. As I said at the beginning, the innovative
abilities of youth will be crucial for achieving
sustainable peace and development.

