Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): At the outset I wish to
convey our appreciation to the delegation of Spain for
organizing today's high-level open debate, under the
agenda item "Preventive catastrophe: A global agenda
for stopping the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors". The risk of non-State
actors, especially terrorists, using weapons of mass
destruction (WMD), including nuclear weapons, is
one of the biggest threats to global peace and security.
While no major, large-scale attack of that nature has
yet happened, terrorists have shown the intent and
capacity to develop and use WMD. Therefore, it is
the responsibility of the international community to
effectively address the possible threat of the use of
WMD by non-State actors, in all of its aspects.

While some progress has been made in adopting
measures to prevent the proliferation of WMD by
non-State actors, the rate and variability of that progress
confirms that accomplishing the objective of the full
implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term
task that requires continued efforts at national, regional
and international levels. It also requires constant and
enhanced support from the Security Council, as well
as the provision of technical assistance to States that
require the same, especially for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and voluntary national plans
of action.

Afghanistan, surrounded by a number of nuclear
countries, has maintained a consistent policy of calling
for the total, worldwide elimination of all weapons of
mass destruction, including nuclear weapons. We have
done so knowing that a world free of WMD translates
into a safer and prosperous world for current and
future generations.

Afghanistan, as a State party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
Comprehensive Nucear-Tes- Ban Treaty, the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction and the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, stands in full support ofall initiatives
aimed at the realization of a world free of weapons of
mass destruction. In addition, Afghanistan joined the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004) on 9 August
and the United Nations Group of Friends on Chemical,
Biological, Radiological and Nuclear Risk Mitigation
and Security Governance on 23 March. Afghanistan is
committed to fulfilling its international obligations and
remains dedicated to achieving the aims and objectives
of the international treaties and instruments to which it
is a State party.

In conclusion, my delegation calls upon all
Member States to support international efforts to
prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery and urges
them to strengthen national measures, as appropriate,
to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction, their means of delivery and materials and
technologies related to their manufacture.

