Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I shall be very brief.

Today's meeting was a very emotional one, which
is understandable. At times it gave rise to the question:
are there any limits to the political exploitation of the
feelings of the families of those who perished and who
are experiencing a living horror?

A number of accusations were levelled at the
Russian Federation that I consider insulting and not
worthy of diplomats.

Turning now to the substance of the issues, we
made our arguments in our statement. I will touch on
only one issue, on the outcome of the discussions. It is
simply incomprehensible that a lack of understanding
of one form of judicial proceedings is being equated
with impunity. We made, and reaffirm, a proposal to
consider various formats for judicial proceedings.
Among them are simpler ones that are more effective,
more appropriate and certainly less politicized; these
are the ones on which we should focus.

In his statement, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ukraine, Mr. Klimkin, attempted to speak from a
moral and religious position of superiority. He referred
to the unacceptability of impunity and the need to
cooperate. I have only two questions for him: why were
civilian airliners sent to areas where military activities
were under way, areas where the Ukrainian forces were
fighting using military aircraft? Why were civilian
flights sent through that airspace? The passengers on
that airliner simply could not have known that a military
conflict was under way there. Even Malaysian aviation
authorities could not have known that a military conflict
was under way there. But Kyiv knew it. Why did it do
this? Why has it thus far not provided the recordings of
its military air dispatchers? That is impunity. Did they
punish anyone in Ukraine for that?

Finally, the tragedy concerning Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 is a terrible event - not only for the
citizens who died in that castrophe and the countries
that they represented, but also for the diplomats who
now are forced to deal with it. It is also a trial for the
concerned politicians, experts and specialists who
continue to work on this issue together. We need to walk
hand-in-hand down on this road. Unfortunately, today's
meeting is most unlikely to promote joint movement
towards the final objective, that is, to shed light on all
of the circumstances surrounding this tragedy and to
bring those responsible for it to justice. Russia is ready
to resume this work at expert, diplomatic and any other
levels. Let us therefore move forward from tomorrow-
on in this effort.

