Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We agree with the alarming assessment of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, of the negative impact of the
armed conflict in the Central African Republic on
neighbouring States, which is reflected, in particular,
in the increase over the past six months ofthe number of
refugees to 50,000 and the uncontrolled proliferation of
weapons. It is clear that a settlement of the military and
political crisis and a normalization of the humanitarian
and human rights situation in the country are extremely
important for the prospects for peace, security and
stability in the subregion.

We share the concern about the increasing scale
of cross-border crime, including poaching, in which
weapons from Libya have been used. We are particularly
concerned that the product of those crimes could be a
source of financing for the terrorist and criminal groups
operating in the subregion.

We welcome the mobilization of cooperation
among interested countries and organizations in the
fight against piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea. An important step in that direction could
be the summit of Central and West African States to
be held in June. We see the need to take necessary
measures to address potential factors for instability
in the subregion, including poverty and the growing
gap in income distribution, as well as widespread
unemployment, especially among young people.

We note a decline in the activity of the Lord's
Resistance Army, whose fighters have recently kept a
low profile and withdrawn to hard-to-reach border areas
of the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We note particular difficulties
in the practical implementation of the United Nations
strategy to combat the Lord's Resistance Army. The
deployment of the African Union Regional Task Force
has been delayed, due in large part to problems with
funding. As a result of criminal activities, the number
of refugees and internally displaced persons totals
440,000 people, which, among other things, reflects
the ineffectiveness of measures to protect civilians.
In addition, there is a lack of funding in general for
the humanitarian needs of those suffering from the
activities of the Lord's Resistance Army.
We have taken note of the adoption in April of the
implementation plan for the United Nations regional
strategy to address the threat and impact of the activities
of the Lord's Resistance Army (S/2013/240, annex).
The plan is ambitious and costly. We must note that,
in addition to its timely and needed measures, it also
stipulates the implementation of a number of projects
that would be difficult to call relevant at this time, in
particular with regard to the Central African Republic.

In conclusion, I note the contribution of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa to collective
efforts to ensure peace and security in the subregion.
We welcome the growing cooperation between the
Office and regional partners in such areas as preventive
diplomacy, peacebuilding, combating terrorism, piracy
and armed robbery at sea, the proliferation of weapons,
support for electoral processes and the training of
national staff.

