Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Mrs. Ogata, my delegation welcomes this
opportunity - unfortunately, for the last time - for
the Security Council to engage in a substantive
dialogue with you. We are grateful for your tireless and
determined advocacy on behalf of refugees and other
war-affected populations. You have spoken eloquently
and thoughtfully of the challenges facing refugees and
humanitarian organizations in countries which are on
the Security Council's agenda - and of those countries
which were not but perhaps should have been.

Each and every time you have briefed the
Security Council, Mrs. Ogata, you have always been
straightforward in your assessments. Like you, Madam
High Commissioner, I am disappointed to say that,
despite some significant successes over the last 10
years, in a great many instances durable solutions
remain elusive for a large number of refugees.

(spoke in English)

We must express our gratitude to those States,
such as, for example, Tanzania, Guinea, Iran and
Pakistan, which continue to provide much needed
refuge. While the parties to conflict which precipitated
the initial displacement retain paramount responsibility,
the Security Council has also been complicit, at times,
in failing to engage fully in addressing the political
dynamics of crises before they reached disastrous
humanitarian proportions.

In recent months, some positive steps have been
taken by the Security Council. We are trying to learn
"the lessons learned". But, as noted by the High
Commissioner, we can and must do better. As she
pointed out, the implementation of recommendations of
the Brahimi report will help. The Security Council is
making excellent progress, I am happy to report, on
this score, thanks to the Chairmanship of Ambassador
Ward of Jamaica. The General Assembly must do no
less. There will be no development without security.

Furthermore, as Member States, we must do a
better job in facilitating the transition from conflict to
development, nurturing both reconstruction and, as the
High Commissioner has put it, "coexistence". I would
welcome her views on how the Security Council might
be more sensitive to these questions, particularly in the
design of peace support mandates. In this regard, I took
note with interest of her proposal that peacekeepers be
given cross-border mandates in circumstances where
refugees are endangered.

In praising High Commissioner Ogata's efforts,
we also commend the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
staff world wide. Their courage and commitment,
increasingly at great risk to their lives, have enabled
vulnerable populations to gain access to protection and
material assistance. The safety of United Nations and
other humanitarian personnel, and the environments in
refugee camps, are priority issues for Canada and for
all members of this Council. Canada welcomes High
Commissioner Ogata's persistence in challenging the
Security Council to deal with the question of refugee
camp insecurity.

I would like to close by highlighting the
interaction between humanitarian and military
operations, as she has done. In the light of the
recommendations of the Brahimi report, I would be
most interested in the High Commissioner's assessment
of how the military can most effectively support
humanitarian action.

Let me reiterate Canada's appreciation for the
contribution Mrs. Sadako Ogata has made to the cause
of refugees in these last 10 years, and to the search for
international peace and security. Her courage, her
perspicacity, her persistence and her humanity have set
standards to which we all aspire. The world has been
fortunate to have her service. We wish her all the best
in her retirement from the Office of the United Nations
High Commission for Refugees, and we would ask her
to pass on to her successor, Mr. Ruud Lubbers, the
message that he can count on our support.

