Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Malaysia's initiative in convening today's
open debate. We welcome the presence here today of
Mr. Hamidi, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Home Affairs of Malaysia, to preside over this meeting,
and we would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing.

Preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) and their means of delivery is of
critical importance to international peace and security.
Thanks to the persistent efforts of the international
community, there is a growing international consensus
onnon-proliferation,withnon-proliferationmechanisms
improving by the day and cooperation in that respect
steadily moving forward. However, grave challenges
remain on the non-proliferation front. Certain hotspot
issues related to non-proliferation drag on and defy an
easy solution. The universality of international norms
on non-proliferation is yet to be achieved. Advances
in science and technology have lowered the bar for
proliferation. There is an increased risk of non-State
actors, terrorists in particular, acquiring WMDs and
related materials. The unstable security environment
makes some countries feel more threatened, which in
turn increases the risk of proliferation. How to properly
respond to the non-proliferation challenges and the
non-proliferation process is an important task facing
the international community. To that end, China wishes
to put forth the following points

First, with regard to establishing an enabling
international and regional environment, the issue
of non-proliferation is highly complex. Historical
grievances, regional conflicts, security concerns and
terrorism, among other factors, have made it more
difficult to find a solution. The fundamental way out
is to discard the Cold War mentality and to build a fair
andjust security landscape, based onjoint contributions
and shared benefits; to adopt a new concept of common,
integrated, cooperative and sustainable security; and
to strengthen international and regional cooperation,
thereby eliminating the factors that drive proliferation.

Secondly, with regard to developing and
strengthening the international non-proliferation
regime, thanks to tireless efforts over the years, the
international community has set up an international
non-proliferation regime that is guided by the Charter
of the United Nations and legally anchored in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention and the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty, and complemented by other relevant
non-proliferation mechanisms. That regime constitutes
an important pillar for the maintenance of international
peace, security and stability. We should adhere
to multilateralism and the principle of consensus
through consultation in working together to properly
maintain and develop the existing international
non-proliferation regime.

Thirdly, with regard to properly addressing
regional non-proliferation hotspot issues, all parties
should stay consistently engaged in the process towards
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, remain
committed to the maintenance of peace and stability
of the peninsula, continue to seek solutions through
dialogue and consultation and avoid any provocative
action that could escalate tensions. Non-proliferation
cannot be used as a pretext to beef up military
deployment, step up a military presence and scale up
military exercises.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
on the Iranian nuclear issue was achieved through
hard work. The relevant parties should intensify
mutual political trust and faithfully fulfil the relevant
obligations to ensure the steadfast implementation of
the J CPOA for far-reaching results.

Fourthly, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons is the cornerstone of the international
non-proliferation regime. Its universality, authority and
effectiveness should be enhanced on a continuous basis.
The goals related to the Treaty's three main pillars,
namely, nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation
and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, should be
promoted in a comprehensive and balanced manner.
The nuclear-weapon States should fulfil their nuclear
non-proliferation obligations in earnest and reduce
the role of nuclear weapons. While honouring their
obligations in non-proliferation, all countries are
entitled to peacefully partake of the fruits of the
development of the related technologies. We need to
establish and refine the relevant international norms on
non-proliferation in the light of the evolving dynamics
of counter-terrorism and take substantive measures to
prevent WMDs and related materials and technologies
from falling into the hands of terrorists.
Fifthly, with regard to giving fresh impetus to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), the
resolution, which was the first of its kind devoted
to non-proliferation to be adopted by the Security
Council, reflects the consensus among States on
the issue of non-proliferation. In the context of the
new challenges facing the non-proliferation effort,
the international community should adhere to the
mandate of the resolution to the letter and conduct a
comprehensive review of its implementation. That
comprehensive review should focus on the issue of
preventing proliferation by non-State actors and
should be conducive to maintaining State leadership
in the prevention of proliferation, to making the
assistance provided by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) more productive
and to strengthening capacity-building in developing
countries for the implementation of the resolution.

As a participating builder of, and a contributor
to, the existing international system, China is firmly
opposed to the proliferation of WMDs and their means
of delivery, fulfils its international non-proliferation
obligations with rigorous discipline and is an active
player in both international and regional cooperation.
China supports efforts to build nuclear -weapon-free
zones. We have ratified the Protocol to the Treaty on
a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia and have
resolved all outstanding issues related to the Protocol to
the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Southeast
Asia, which we look forward to signing as early as
possible. China is supportive of the early convening of
an international conference for a WMD-free zone in the
Middle East.

The implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is
high on China's agenda. We have been actively involved
in the comprehensive review process and the work
of the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts. In
September 2015, China hosted an event in cooperation
within the 1540 Committee, namely, training for the
focal points in the Asia-Pacific region, which is an
important contribution to enhancing capacity-building
in the countries of the region for the implementation of
thae resolution.

In the current circumstances, countries around the
world are evolving into a community with a shared future
and converging interests, but facing a common peril and
safety issues. An effective response to non-proliferation
challenges requires unreserved cooperation across the
international community. China will continue to work
with the international community and do its part to help
improve and develop the international non-proliferation
regime for the maintenance of international peace
and security.

