Mr. Akasaka (Japan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Madam President, on your
leadership in calling this open debate on children and
armed conflict.

Japan is happy to report to you that at the Group
of Eight economic summit, which successfully
concluded on Okinawa earlier this week, conflict
prevention was highlighted as one of the most
important issues. At their meeting at Miyazaki, the G-8
Foreign Ministers compiled the G-8 Miyazaki Initiative
for Conflict Prevention.

The issue of children in armed conflict is a matter
of special consideration for G-8 leaders, and they

agreed to take initiatives such as putting pressure on
those who involve or target children in armed conflict.
They also reaffirmed their commitment to human
security through the creation of an environment where
the dignity, well-being, safety and human rights of all
people are ensured. They also agreed that the United
Nations should continue to play a pivotal role in the
century to come.

Almost a year has passed since the Council
adopted resolution 1261 (1999), and heightened
international attention to this issue has led to several
encouraging developments. In this regard, I would like
to commend Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) and other relevant international
agencies, as well as civil society, for their activities
that have contributed to such positive changes.

Despite these developments, however, hundreds
of thousands of children still live in fear and suffer
from the cruel blows that war inflicts. As was made
clear at the Group of 8 summit, the plight of war-
affected children is one of the most disturbing human
security issues facing the world today. It is therefore
gratifying to note that the report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2000/712)
contains concrete recommendations that will guide us
in the actions we take from here on out, actions in
which Japan intends to play its part.

First and foremost, I wish to emphasize the
importance of conflict prevention for the protection of
our children. In the open debate held in the Security
Council on 20 July, Japan stressed the importance of a
comprehensive approach to preventing conflicts that
combines political, economic, social and humanitarian
measures, and the importance of fostering a culture of
prevention. For its part, Japan has engaged in a number
of activities to advance a culture of prevention, such as
hosting a series of international conferences on
development in Africa and on the issue of small arms
and light weapons, both of which indeed have an
impact on children.

The two optional protocols to the Convention on
the Rights of Child, which were long-awaited legal
instruments essential to strengthening further the
protection of children, were finally adopted this year.
Japan participated actively in the negotiations on the
consensus texts, and believes that the Optional Protocol
on the involvement of children in armed conflict
certainly gives additional legitimacy to the idea that
children must not become the victims of armed conflict
by being made its targets or its instruments. Now that
the legal framework has been set, it is time for us to
strive to realize on the ground the principles of the
Optional Protocol.

Raising public awareness on the specific
problems that children encounter in the course armed
conflicts is also crucial to creating the international
pressure necessary to halt such suffering. I would like
to take this opportunity to introduce some of Japan's
initiatives to support the recovery of war-affected
children. The scourge of war affects the physical and
emotional status of children especially deeply in post-
conflict situations. As the Secretary-General has rightly
pointed out in his report, the rehabilitation and
education of children who are recruited as child
soldiers, sexually abused, displaced or separated from
their parents needs to be seen as a priority in the peace-
rebuilding process. To this end, the Government of
Japan has been making significant financial
contributions to humanitarian programmes of United
Nations agencies such as UNICEF and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), as well as to the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC). For example, in 1998 and 1999,
it contributed a total of $1.8 million to projects that
included support for children in Sierra Leone through
the United Nations trust fund and through UNICEF.
More recently, Japan has approved the release of $16
million, for financing a UNICEF project on the
reactivation of quality primary education in Kosovo,
from the human security fund that Japan established at
the United Nations to deal with threats to human life,
livelihood and dignity. In addition, on 14 July, the
Government of Japan decided to extend to UNICEF a
grant of $1.23 million for the purpose of assisting the
smooth and successful implementation of its project to
reconstruct elementary schools in East Timor.

The impact of armed conflict on children varies
with the circumstances, yet the consequences are
always the same: tremendous fear and pain for those
who are our future. Strong political will, collective
international pressure and concrete action are essential
to end the most horrendous acts against children in
armed conflicts. Japan reaffirms its commitment to
continue working with others on this issue on the basis
of a comprehensive approach, and to create a world in
which children need no longer have any fear of being
children.

Finally, I would like to introduce a further
initiative of Japan to protect children from another
serious kind of damage. Sexual exploitation of
children, such as child prostitution and pornography,
not only causes serious health hazards, including
unwanted pregnancies, HIV/AIDS and sexually
transmitted diseases, but also traps children in often
long-term psychological traumas and deprives them of
their innocence. Because of the grave concern it feels
about this problem, the Government of Japan has
decided to host a second World Congress Against
Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children, in
cooperation with the organization known as End Child
Prostitution, Child Pornography and Trafficking of
Children for Sexual Purposes (ECPAT) and with
UNICEF, in Yokohama from 17 to 20 December 2001.
We hope that the meeting will promote the full
implementation of the agenda for action adopted at the
first World Congress, held in 1996, and that it will thus
contribute to eradicating the commercial sexual
exploitation of children.

