Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to welcome you,
Mr. President, to preside over the Security Council
today. I would also like to thank you for convening this
meeting on the important issue of missing persons in
armed conflict.

I wish to thank Ms. Reena Ghelani and Mr. Peter
Maurer for their briefings. As they highlighted earlier,
this issue has a legitimate place on the Council's
agenda. Indeed, the impact of disappearances on
individuals, families and communities is one of the
most devastating and persistent consequences of armed
conflict. Uncertainty and the search for answers can
span several generations, marking the history of entire
communities and even running the risk of generating
new conflicts.

Providing an adequate response to these challenges
has a profound impact on our ability to create lasting
stability and peace in post-conflict contexts. In
Belgium's view, this response is based on three
elements: first, prevention and the early management
of cases of disappearance; secondly, the fight against
impunity; and thirdly, international cooperation.

First, the prevention and early management of cases
of disappearance is, of course, in the interest not only
of individuals and their families, but also of States.
Without timely action, the work required to search
for missing persons is doubled, as is the suffering of
the families waiting for answers. It is important to
understand what prevention means in practice, and we
are pleased that resolution 2474 (2019), adopted today,
outlines several concrete measures. These include the
registration of detainees, the facilitation of information
exchange among separated family members,
information-gathering on missing or deceased persons,
the mapping of burial sites and graves and the appropriate
handling of human remains for identification. These
are often measures that are fairly simple but can have
an enormous impact if implemented early in a conflict
situation. Taking steps such as these means limiting
human suffering, preserving the fabric of society and
helping reduce feelings of resentment that could give
rise to new tensions.

This brings me to my second point. Many of these
examples fall within the provisions of humanitarian law
and human rights aimed at preventing the disappearance
of persons and addressing the consequences of their
disappearance. Failure to comply with these obligations
cannot be ignored.

Enforceddisappearances,be itinasituationofarmed
conflict or not, are unacceptable and may constitute
crimes against humanity. In this context, Belgium
welcomes the work of the United Nations Working
Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances
and calls on States to accede to the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance and to implement it in their
national legislation. This international legal framework
regulates States' obligations, including prosecuting
and punishing perpetrators of forced disappearances
and compensating the victims and their families. We
believe that no effort to bring about reconciliation or
peace can succeed when entire families are abandoned
and given no information about the fate of their missing
loved ones and with no prospect of reparation, leaving
impunity to reign undeterred.

Thirdly and finally, I would like to stress the
importance of international cooperation in preventing
disappearances and addressing their consequences.
We must not only coordinate and exchange specific
information on missing persons but also share
experiences among the existing mechanisms. In that
context, we naturally commend the tireless work of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
and the Central Tracing Agency. Belgium especially
encourages the ICRC's Missing Persons Project
initiative, because it is specifically aimed at ensuring
that information, advice and experience are more
effectively shared and at developing technical standards
that can benefit all States and actors concerned.

In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate you on convening this meeting and
submitting the resolution that we had the honour
to sponsor. Its adoption by consensus reflects the
international consensus on the humanitarian issue of
missing persons, which remains a global challenge and
requires a coherent response.

