Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Once again, for the third time in the past few months,
the Security Council is taking up the issue of Iraq. The
opportunity has been given to all Member States of the
United Nations to express their points of view and
opinions on this grave situation surrounding Iraq. This
indeed underlines the gravity and timeliness of the
issue, which threatens stability in the Arab Gulf region
and which will have adverse effects and unpredictable
repercussions for international peace and security.

The entire international community, represented
by its Governments and peoples, has followed the
reports by Mr. Blix, Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC), and Mr. ElBaradei,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). We have heard their opinions in many
press conferences since then, and have seen their media
appearances on television screens around the world.

The two reports have specific elements that we
wish to underline. First, inspections are making
concrete progress towards the genuine elimination of
weapons of mass destruction. A second element is the
call for giving the inspectors more time - not years or
weeks, but some months. That call was reaffirmed by
the Arab Summit held at Sharm-el-Sheikh, which
called for giving the inspection teams a sufficient
period of time to complete their mission in Iraq. The
Summit also called for those inspection teams to
continue to act objectively in carrying out their
mission. Thirdly, the IAEA did not come to the
conclusion that Iraq has revived its nuclear programme
in the past four years.

That is the overall point of view of those
internationally respected and credible international
officials and professionals. We have confidence in
them, and we call on Iraq to complete the
implementation of resolution 1441 (2002).

I do not believe that it is necessary to state that
today the Security Council stands at a pivotal and
critical juncture. The way the Council deals with this
vital issue will have deep repercussions on
international relations, now and for decades to come.
We therefore urge the Council members to reaffirm
their commitment to the Charter and the resolutions of
the United Nations. We call on them to settle
international disputes by peaceful means in order to
avoid a war that would have negative repercussions for
all.

The Arab Summit held in Egypt on 1 March
rejected any attack on Iraq. It rejected the use of threats
to the security and integrity of any Arab State. It called
on all States to support Arab efforts to avoid war. The
Arab States called for giving sufficient time to
inspection teams to complete their mission in Iraq.
Finally, the Arab Summit stressed the Council's
responsibility to avoid harming Iraq and its people and
to maintain the independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Iraq.

Egypt reaffirms its adherence to those Arab
positions. In that context, Egypt has been active in the
ministerial committee created by the Summit, which
last week undertook intense contacts in New York. The
committee will visit Baghdad in the next few days in
order to ensure Iraq's continued constructive
cooperation with the United Nations within the
framework of all relevant resolutions, the latest of
which is resolution 1441 (2002).

The Middle East, whether in the Gulf region or in
Palestine, needs to attain the objectives of peace and
stability. It must give its peoples the opportunity for
economic and social development and growth in order
that they may all enjoy well-being. No doubt the
deteriorating, even dire, circumstances in Palestine and
the attempts to break the will of the Palestinian people,
who resist occupation, will not help in realizing those
hopes for growth and development. They will not give
freedom and independence to this people, who have
long suffered and whose rights have been usurped.

We advocate a just and comprehensive peace in
that sensitive part of the world. We call for all
conditions to be provided to reach that end. The right
of peoples to self-determination must be protected. As
proposed by my President, Hosni Mubarak, weapons of
mass destruction must be eliminated. The Charter and
United Nations resolutions must be respected.

Therefore, we urge the international community
to give the inspection regime the necessary opportunity
to achieve security and peace in the region, which has
suffered for so long and has known much tragedy. War
would have serious consequences. Humanity and
international relations would suffer from war. This
makes it a duty for all to work seriously to avoid war,
save lives, to protect interests and safeguard the noble
principles that mankind has built on the rubble of the
tragedy of the Second World War, when humanity said,
"Never again".

