Mrs. Ogata (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees): Let me start by thanking the members of the
Security Council for their interest in and support of the
kind of work my Office and my colleagues, especially in
the field, are doing. I think that if I relay the Council's
interest, questions and observations, these people will be
very much encouraged. I think it is an enormously
encouraging thing to know how much the Security
Council itself looks at humanitarian issues as an extension
of its own responsibilities and interests. Refugees are
mostly victims of conflicts of the kind that I very much
expect the Security Council to be in a position to solve.

Given the limited time, I shall just say a few things
on the general question of security, on follow-up to
Security Council resolution 1208 (1998) and on the ladder

 

of options. We have been following up very closely with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We have done
the study. There are certain options that we ourselves, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees can do; we call them the soft options. They range
from trying to set up camps away from the borders, to
having assistance and distribution systems that are as fair
and as transparent as possible, to trying to keep the camps
civilian in character. This is the most difficult challenge,
but I think that in the case of situations such as those in
Guinea or in Albania we tried our very best to maintain the
civilian character of camps, preventing arms or armed
elements from coming in.

As to the "medium" options, what exactly have we
done? We have taken steps to help train local police. We
have done that in Kenya, and also in Tanzania, giving
equipment, radios, vehicles and also some support -
incentives - to the police so that at least the refugee
camps themselves will be free of armed activities and
military training. That is one concrete thing that we have
done. I think we have also placed some liaison officers. We
did this during the crisis in Zaire. We had liaison officers
in Zaire to supervise the training of some of the law-and-
order maintenance forces. Also we have put a liaison
officer in Tanzania. And I think here we would like to get
more support from donors. I think there is room for
improvement, because there is a common understanding
that we should maintain the civilian character of all refugee
camps.

When it comes to the question of the "hard" option -
that is, how much we rely on international peacekeeping
forces and to what extent can we quickly bring in
international police contingents, be it in Kosovo or in many
other areas that are coming up in Africa - I would really
like to seek the Council's very positive and imaginative
ideas and action.

As regards regional peacekeeping forces, we have
entered into much greater consultation with the Economic
Community of West African States Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), trying to bring some kind of a humanitarian
component to their operations. I do not know how the
ECOMOG forces are going to fare in the future, but I think
that it is extremely important for there to be regional
peacekeeping forces with which we can link up and for us
to have more input into humanitarian aspects.

What I am trying to say today in the African context
is that, yes, there is some possibility for there to be a
ceasefire and peace. I think it is up to the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and also to the United Nations to
come up with back-up systems. How can you really force
the peace that is looming? This is where I would follow
and expect the Council's input.

With the OAU we have had very close working
relations, especially as this is the thirtieth anniversary of
the OAU Refugee Convention. And it is in this spirit that
we have worked closely with the OAU, trying to make
sure that international protection is given to refugees in
Africa and that adequate assistance is given to them. This
has not necessarily always been easy; however, we have
good working relations, especially last year, when the
OAU and UNHCR hosted the Kampala meeting in May.
We felt that progress was made, at least on the question
of which way to go - that is, protection of refugees,
refugee and humanitarian principles to be observed, and
how to ensure that national security is not jeopardized by
the presence of refugees. This is a question that still
lingers.

However, the immediate follow-up to the Kampala
meeting was made difficult especially by the resumption
of conflict in the Congo since August. This is why the
ceasefire is a very important step from my point of View.
It may be a way to get greater support for enforcing a
ceasefire in such a way that the basic objectives of the
Kampala meeting can be really attained.

There was a question about how to get safe corridors
and how to get assistance to refugees. This really depends
on how much assurance we can get from the parties in
conflict that this access will be respected. This is a point
about which I appealed very strongly to President Kabila
just two weeks ago.

There were several specific questions that I think I
should address. Regarding funding, I am very pleased that
members have shown their great concern for this matter.
Our total budget for Africa for 1999 is $302 million. This
comprises $137 million for the general annual
programme, for which we get funds and allocate them
from our side, and $165 million for special programmes,
that is, country-specific appeals. For the special
programmes which cover the specific programmes for the
Great Lakes region, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, the Horn of
Africa and Angola, the response has barely reached 25
per cent. For the general programme we have received a
62 per cent response as of 13 July.

We would really appreciate greater awareness of the
importance of funding for African refugees. In Sierra

 

Leone, Liberia and north-west Somalia, operations are on
the brink of being paralysed because of the very, very
limited funding that we have received. Funding is crucial to
consolidating peace as well as to the care and maintenance
of refugees in countries, whether of asylum or of origin,
which have not come to a point that allows them to return.
I think most of the solutions for refugee problems on a
large scale take the form of repatriation, but there are many
important local integration programmes too, and some
resettlement programmes. So funding is a very important
aspect of members' attention because, as several have said,
consolidation of peace depends a lot on funding.

Linking poverty issues in Africa with conflict
resolution also requires some financial backing, and the
linkage of humanitarian assistance to development
procedure also has very important funding implications. So
I think this is a very important area, especially since all the
operational activities of the United Nations do depend on
voluntary contribution. I would also like the Security
Council to promote the funding aspect as a way to
implement its peace initiatives.

Now, regarding a couple of specific problems that you
have asked about. As far as repatriation is concerned in
Sierra Leone, we are setting up some field offices in the
northern border areas inside Sierra Leone. My
representative in the country has been given the task of
humanitarian coordinator, and he has recently gone to the
rebel-held areas. He will be then going to this meeting in
London, and I hope that there will be more concrete
agreements on how we carry out the agreed upon
repatriation. I think that as long as peace holds - and it is
good that it is holding - refugees will go back. I do not
think a rapid massive return of the kind that we saw in
Kosovo will take place there.

With respect to my View on the amnesty clause with
regard to the Lorne agreement, I have to be honest. I am
not in a position to express my views on an agreement that
was concluded between two parties. I think the basic View
is that peace is very important. When I was Visiting Sierra
Leone and Guinea and talking with the refugees in various
places, they wanted peace.

On the question of Rwanda and the Rwandan refugee
repatriation, the arrangement made is that there will be a
collection point in the Kivu area. I do not know where the
points are, but there will be several collection points where
people who want to return will go, and they will have to be
disarmed. They will disarm themselves and go to collection
centres. As long as these two conditions are met, they will
be taken back to Rwanda. We will support their
transportation, and the Rwandan Government has agreed
to take them. So there is no need for screening. The fact
that they give up arms and go to the collection centre is
an expression of their will to return.

In the Republic of Congo (Brazzaville), the
arrangement is considerably different, and we are still
negotiating the details. But there will be a place identified
in the northern part of Congo (Brazzaville) which will
require people to end their involvement in the conflict
near Brazzaville and to go away. Of course, there too
they will have to be disarmed when they go to these
places. They will be given one-time assistance, and they
will have to engage in peaceful activities, such as farming
and so forth. So the fact that they will be leaving the
areas in which conflict participation is possible is another
sign of giving up their intention to continue fighting.

We have tried screening a lot, both in Congo
(Brazzaville) and in the various neighbouring countries,
and it has been very difficult. So de facto practical
separation is what we have come to, and I think as far as
those who have continued to fight or to be armed are
really excluded from international protection. I think this
is the way we are interpreting it.

On the Gabon situation, we are certainly looking into
what members have asked about, and we will see what
kind of arrangements we can set up.

On the question of child soldiers, those Congolese
who have gone to the Central African Republic are a
mixed group. There are soldiers, there are civilians and
there are some child soldiers. We are trying to reach the
child soldiers, but it is a very complicated issue, because
UNHCR does not deal with soldiers. At the same time,
they are children, so what should be done? It is a new
kind of a concrete situation that we are just facing now,
and certainly we will have to consult with our other
partners, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
the United
 

Nations Children's Fund and, ol'course, the Central African
Republic itself. So this is a very complex issue. In
demobilization of child soldiers. who takes what kind of
action is something which still requires further examination.

On the question of refugees from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we have 25,000 in Zambia and
about 80.000 in Tanzania. and recently this group that went
to the Central African Republic has been a very worrying
one. The refugee outflow to Tanzania from both Burundi
and the Congo is giving Tanzania a very heavy burden, as
is often the case.

I hope I have covered most of your questions. If I
have not, I will be happy to respond bilaterally after the
meeting. Let me thank you very much again for your
questions. I think the questions give us a lot of food for
thought too as we carry on our operations.

