Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by thanking you, Sir, for convening this
meeting today and to pay tribute to your lifelong
commitment to disarmament, both regionally and
globally. It is very fitting that, as a Nobel Peace Prize
laureate, you are here presiding over the Council with
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. I thank you for being
here.

We also welcome back to the Council Vice-
President Lewis-Navarro of Panama and thank him for
his statement. Our thanks go also to Mr. Sergio Duarte,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for his
concise briefing.

The United Kingdom shares the determination to
look afresh at the challenges facing us in the field of
disarmament. We are working with partners to
strengthen all pillars of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to
promote an arms trade treaty to implement high
common standards for conventional arms exports,
which are, of course, the weapons of daily destruction
around the world. And it is why, for the United
Kingdom, arms control, counter-proliferation and
disarmament are about finding common ground to
enhance our collective security, which is at the heart of
everything we do at the United Nations, and especially
here in the Security Council.

The United Kingdom also welcomes the principle
promoted by this debate of mainstreaming
disarmament into development policy. That is
particularly important in the fields of conventional
weapons and small arms and light weapons, and in the
disarmament and demobilization of armed groups and
their reintegration into their communities.

The United Kingdom is committed to
strengthening the Non-Proliferation Treaty. We will
show zero tolerance for proliferation and we will work
for a world free from nuclear weapons. There must be
progress on both sides of that, on both nuclear
disarmament and on non-proliferation and to support
progress on non-proliferation, we need a reinvigorated
approach to nuclear disarmament. We are therefore
calling for further reductions in the major nuclear
arsenals and for progress on the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and negotiations towards a
fissile material cut-off treaty.

In the meantime, the United Kingdom has been
undertaking innovative work to address some of the
technical challenges posed by disarmament. We have
reduced our nuclear arsenal to just 160 operationally
available warheads and we have offered to host a
conference for the permanent five to discuss the
technical aspects of disarmament verification.

On the other side of the coin, proliferation of the
nuclear-fuel cycle poses grave dangers to regional and
global stability, as it paves the way for the proliferation
of nuclear weapons technology. Multilateral nuclear
fuel assurances provide a possible way for States to
enhance their collective security and their energy
diversity by exercising their rights under article IV of
the NPT, while avoiding proliferation of the most
sensitive nuclear technologies.

Proliferation concerns are not only limited to
nuclear technologies and material; other emerging
technologies contain threats as well as opportunities,
which is why the Chemical Weapons Convention and
the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention remain
so important in this century.

On small arms and light weapons, the United
Kingdom welcomes the progress at the Biennial
Meeting of States on implementing fully the United
Nations Programme of Action, and collectively we
have made real progress in the important field of
anti-personnel landmines, covered by the Ottawa
Convention. I would like to confirm the United
Kingdom's strong support for the universalization of
the Convention and for the worldwide implementation
of its provisions on stockpile destruction and mine
clearance. The United Kingdom is the third-largest
donor to mine clearance programmes in affected
countries, where anti-personnel landmines still pose a
serious humanitarian threat.

The United Kingdom also welcomes the
successful negotiation, earlier this year at the Dublin
Conference, of a new treaty that bans cluster
munitions, a whole class of weapons. The end result is
a Convention that will make a major contribution to
addressing the humanitarian threat posed by such
weapons. We plan to sign the Convention on Cluster
Munitions on 3 December, in two weeks' time. My
Prime Minister has made it a personal commitment to
work with other countries to promote the widest
possible adherence to the norms of the new
Convention. We in the United Kingdom have ceased to
use such weapons. We have begun the process of
withdrawing them from service and placing them in a
destruction programme, and we have also added cluster
munitions to the list of items prohibited for transfer.

I would like to conclude my remarks by
reaffirming the importance of the proposed arms trade
treaty. Achieving such a treaty is a goal that you,
Mr. President, have championed at the United Nations
and in Central and Latin America, and I pay tribute to
your personal commitment. An arms trade treaty has a
significant role to play in ensuring collective
international security. With one person killed every
90 seconds by a conventional weapon, the irresponsible
trade in conventional weapons creates instability and
has a direct impact on countries' ability to deliver
sustainable development and to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals. An arms trade treaty
would address the issue of irresponsible trade and
would thereby contribute positively to international
peace and security.

A number of countries have concerns about the
proposal, and those concerns must be addressed openly
and honestly. But a properly regulated arms trade
would be to the benefit of all: to our peacekeepers
around the world; to law enforcement and security
forces in Member States; to the business community
that manufactures and sells arms and wants to do that
responsibly; and, above all, to ordinary people whose
lives are shattered by our failure to control the
unscrupulous and irresponsible trade in arms.

Thank you once again, Mr. President, for bringing
this issue to the Security Council and for elevating our
debate through your presence.
08-60919

