Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Sir, I
welcome you back to New York. We would also like
to thank the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-
General Gettu. I also thank Ms. Blanchett for using
the power of her voice at a time when the Rohingya
have too few voices to fight for them. We thank her for
being here.

One year ago this week, unspeakable violence was
reaching its peak in Burma. A brutal campaign of ethnic
cleansing was under way - one that ultimately resulted
in more than 700,000 Rohingya refugees being exiled to
camps in Bangladesh. Now, thanks to the support of the
United States Department of State, we have an official
account of what the refugees witnessed and what they
suffered before they were driven from their homes. The
results are consistent with the recently released report
of the United Nations Independent International Fact-
Finding Mission on Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64) . The
world can no longer avoid the difficult truth of what
happened in Burma. Let me warn everyone listening
that the details of the crimes the Rohingya suffered
in Burma are stomach-churning, difficult to hear and
even more difficult to say. But the facts of the ethnic
cleansing of the Rohingya must be said and heard.

The State Department report is eye-opening, even
for those of us who have a good understanding of what
has occurred in Burma over the past two years. It is
based on interviews with 1,024 Rohingya refugees in
camps throughout the Cox's Bazar refugee camp. The
interviews were conducted by a team of experienced
international human rights investigators and the
refugees interviewed were randomly selected. In
short, the methodology of the report is sound and its
conclusions are shocking. The first-hand accounts of
the survivors reveal that the majority of the Rohingya
directly experienced violence, either to their homes,
families or both. Most importantly, the report identifies
one group - the Burmese military and security
forces - as the perpetrator of the overwhelming
majority of the crimes. The numbers tell just part of
the story.

Eighty-two per cent of the refugees saw a killing;
82 per cent saw their homes or villages destroyed; 65 per
cent witnessed an abduction, arrest or detention of a
fellow Rohingya; 64 per cent watched a family member
or fellow villager be injured and half of the Rohingya
refugees - 51 per cent - said they witnessed sexual
violence. I repeat - 51 per cent. Forty-five per cent
specifically witnessed a rape and, behind the numbers,
there are stories of almost unbelievable brutality. In
some areas perpetrators used tactics that resulted in
mass casualties, for example locking people in houses
to burn them, fencing off entire villages before shooting
into the crowd or sinking boats full of hundreds of
fleeing Rohingya. Rohingya men, women and children
were mutilated, dismembered, decapitated and burned
alive. Infants and children were not spared. Multiple
witnesses saw soldiers throwing infants and small
children into fires and burning huts, rivers and village
wells. The very young, the very old and the sick who
could not escape the attacks were burned inside their
huts. The military and police went from house to house
looking for girls and women. When they found them,
they did not bother to hide what they were after. Women
and girls were raped in the open, in public. Fully one
fifth of all Rohingya who survived witnessed more
than 100 victims being killed or injured. Let me repeat
that - 20 per cent of the randomly selected survivors
of the violence saw a mass-casualty event.

The United States, the United Kingdom, Kuwait,
the Netherlands, Peru and others have worked to keep
the Security Council's focus on the atrocities in Burma.
We have worked to hold the Burmese security forces
accountable. Many of us have heard at first hand
the accounts of victims. We have seen the sprawling
refugee camps and the bulldozed areas where villages
once stood. We have seen where innocent human beings
were raped, murdered and burned alive for no other
reason than their religious and ethnic identity.

Some have stood up to help ease the suffering and
provide accountability to Burma. The United States
recognizes the generosity of the Government and the
people of Bangladesh. They have fed and sheltered
nearly 1 million desperate people. Their generosity
has saved countless lives. The United States is the
largest provider of humanitarian assistance to the
Rohingya crisis. We also recognize others who have
given generously.

Beyond our humanitarian efforts are important
efforts to demand accountability. In June, the European
Union and Canada sanctioned seven Burmese military
officers for their roles in the violence. Earlier this
month, the United States Department of the Treasury
sanctioned five Burmese military and border-guard
commanders and two units of the Burmese army for their
involvement in the ethnic cleansing and other human
rights abuses. However, much more must be done. The
United Nations must have full and unimpeded access
to Burma to deliver humanitarian aid and development
assistance. The media must have access to the country,
including Rakhine state. A free and responsible press
is critical for all democracies. We expect to see Wa
Lone and Kyaw Soe 00, two Reuters journalists facing
trial for reporting the violence against the Rohingya,
acquitted of all charges when a Burmese court renders
its verdict next week.

The difficult path to democracy must continue in
Burma and culminate in a military that is subordinate to
the civilian Government, not the other way around. Here
at the Security Council, we must hold those responsible
for violence to account. A responsive, democratic
Government that respects the rights of its minorities
will not emerge in Burma until the Government
demonstrates that it is committed to accountability. We
will continue to suffer the shame that our predecessors
suffered after Rwanda and Srebrenica if we do not act
when the Burmese Government falls short.

In one of his final acts of service, Kofi Annan led
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, which
investigated the causes of the crisis in Burma. The
Commission recommended equal rights for all Burmese
citizens. It called for all Burmese to have opportunity
to feed their families. It called for all people of Burma
to enjoy freedom of movement and have equal access
to justice under the law. The implementation of
those recommendations would advance the dignity
and security of all Burmese. Until then, none of
us - members of the Security Council, the Burmese
military, civilian leaders or other world leaders - has
the excuse of ignorance. We are now all armed with
the devastating eye-witness accounts of the Rohingya,
which lead us to the following conclusions.

Children, babies, women and men suffered
unspeakable crimes. The attacks were planned,
premeditated and coordinated. The perpetrator was
the Burmese military and security forces. The whole
world is watching what we will do next, and whether
we will act.

