Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks Australia for organizing this first
meeting of the Security Council on the role of United
Nations police in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The
fact that you, Madam President, are presiding over this
meeting demonstrates your country's commitment to
this matter. I also wish to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve
Ladsous, as well as Commissioners Greg Hinds, Fred
Yiga and Luis Miguel Carrilho for their briefings.

This morning, in adopting resolution 2185 (2014),
the first stand-alone resolution on policing, the Security
Council has made a practical and useful contribution
to peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations and
to security sector reform. Luxembourg was therefore
a sponsor of the resolution initiated by Australia.
As recalled by the concept note for this meeting
(S/20l4/788, annex), the past 20 years have seen an
unprecedented increase in the number of contingents of
United Nations peacekeeping missions. The missions
have grown ever more complex and diverse, operating
in situations of increasing difficulty that are subject
to rapid deterioration. The briefings we have just
heard from the heads of the police components in
Liberia, South Sudan and the Central African Republic
have amply shown that. It is therefore correct for the
Security Council to devote increased attention to police
components.

The protection of civilians lies at the heart of
the mandate of most United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Police components are a key player in
the proper implementation of those mandates. It is
therefore essential for police components to be well
trained and qualified, and for them to be aware of the
need for civilian protection. They must have sufficient
capacity and the necessary resources for the effective
protection of civilians, in particular woman and
children, who are the first victims of conflicts. Today,
as we commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
we welcome the fact that the resolution just adopted has
taken that aspect into account. Indeed, resolution 2185
(2014) reiterates that the protection of children in armed
conflict must be an important factor in any general
strategy aimed at conflict resolution or peacebuilding.
It also underscores the importance of strengthening
coordination between police components and the
advisers responsible for the protection of children and
women. It also encourages the training of police prior
to their deployment, through role-playing, in order to
strengthen their ability to prevent sexual and gender-
based violence and to reinforce their capacities in the
area of child protection. That provision is in line with
resolution 2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict.

In the interactive spirit of this meeting, I would like

to ask Commissioners Yiga and Carrilho to tell us how
they view the way in which the protection of women
and children is being implemented on the ground in
South Sudan and the Central African Republic. 1 would
also like to know how the coordination between the
police components and the advisers responsible for the
protection of women and children is working out within
the frameworks of the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
Would the designation of focal points for the protection
of children within police components help to further
strengthen that coordination? And what measures
could be taken by the Security Council to strengthen
the ability of the police components in UNMISS and
MINUSCA to protect civilians?

Allow me now to say a few words about the issue
of women and peace and security. As the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations has
noted, it is clear that female police officers make an
essential contribution to the work ofpolice components,
above all when missions are required to interact with
women affected by sexual violence during conflict. It
is therefore important to redouble efforts to increase
their number and to eliminate any obstacles to the
participation of women in police components. Female
police officers also need to have access to all levels
of responsibility in the field and at United Nations
Headquarters.

As guardians of peace, the police are the most
visible face of the State for citizens. They need to meet
the most stringent criteria in terms of professionalism,
quality and discipline. In that respect, we believe that
the mentoring dimension in the training of national
police by United Nations police components is essential,
as is the training of more senior officials. I take this
opportunity to ask Commissioner Hinds what specific
measures are being taken in Liberia to ensure that the
capacity-building of national Liberian police is lasting,
in other words, that the local police can function in
the long term without the support of United Nations
Mission in Liberia.

To conclude, I would like to express Luxembourg's
deep gratitude to the more than 12,500 police
officers deployed in the framework of United Nations
peacekeeping missions and special political missions.
Alongside peacekeepers and civilian personnel, those
police officers carry out essential work, often under
difficult conditions, in the implementation of the
mandates that the Council defines. We applaud their
commitment, as we salute the memory of those who
have given their lives in the exercise of their duty in the
service of the United Nations.

