The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Pursuant to the decisions taken at the 5289th
meeting, held earlier today, I recognize the presence at
the table of the representative of Serbia and
Montenegro pursuant to rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, as well as that of
Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, and
Mr. Kai Eide, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the comprehensive review of the situation in
Kosovo, pursuant to rule 39.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the report
prepared by the United Nations Secretary-
General's standards review Envoy, Ambassador
Kai Eide, on the comprehensive review of the
implementation of Standards, as well as of the
overall situation in and relating to Kosovo
(Serbia and Montenegro), forwarded by the
Secretary-General on 7 October 2005
(S/2005/635). The Council pays tribute to
Ambassador Eide's work in compiling his
important report.

"The Security Council recalls the Secretary-
General's report of 23 May 2005 (8/2005/335) in
which he initiated the comprehensive review
conducted by Ambassador Eide. In the light of
the findings in Ambassador Eide's report, the
Council stresses that further, more sustained
progress is required, and that the implementation

of standards in Kosovo must continue with
undiminished energy and a stronger sense of
commitment, as underlined by the Secretary-
General in his letter. It urges Kosovo's leaders to
increase their efforts to ensure the
implementation of standards at all levels,
allowing tangible results to be delivered to all
Kosovo's citizens. Particular and time-conscious
attention should be given to protecting minorities,
developing further the process of
decentralization, creating the necessary
conditions to allow sustainable returns,
preservation of cultural and religious heritage in
Kosovo, and promoting reconciliation. The
Council also urges the authorities in Belgrade to
do their utmost to facilitate this process, and to
engage constructively. The Council reaffirms its
full support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen,
and UNMIK in their continuing work to support
the implementation of standards, which must
continue during the future status process and will
be an important factor in determining the degree
of progress.

"The Security Council agrees with
Ambassador Eide's overall assessment that,
notwithstanding the challenges still facing
Kosovo and the wider region, the time has come
to move to the next phase of the political process.
The Council therefore supports the United
Nations Secretary-General's intention to start a
political process to determine Kosovo's future
status, as foreseen in Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). The Council reaffirms the
framework of the resolution, and welcomes the
Secretary-General's readiness to appoint a
Special Envoy to lead the future status process. It
looks forward to an early appointment. The
Council offers its full support to this political
process, which would determine Kosovo's future
status, and further reaffirms its commitment to
the objective of a multi-ethnic and democratic
Kosovo, which must reinforce regional stability.

"The Security Council welcomes the
intention of the Contact Group (France, Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom and the United States of America) to
remain closely engaged in the political process
that will be led by the United Nations, and to
support the Secretary-General's Future Status

Envoy. The Council calls upon interested regional
and international organizations to cooperate
closely in the process to determine Kosovo's
future status. The Council also supports the
meaningful involvement and cooperation of
countries in the region.

"The Security Council requests that the
Secretary-General provide regular updates on
progress in determining Kosovo's future status, as
defined by Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), and will remain actively seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2005/51.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
