Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Before I proceed with my statement, allow me
to express my country's great outrage and resolute
condemnation of the attack against the Muna Hotel in
Mogadishu, a cowardly act in which several Somali
officials and prominent persons were killed.

Your country, Mr. President, deserves to be
commended for its wise choice of the subject for this
debate, namely, piracy off the coast of Somalia, which
we believe to be a crucial component of the overall
problem of the crisis in the country. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his report submitted pursuant to
resolution 1918 (2010) of 27 April (S/2010/394) and
for his important statement this morning. I also
welcome the very relevant statement made by Legal
Counsel Patricia O'Brien, as well as the participation
of the Permanent Representative of Somalia in this
debate. Lastly, I should like to say that my country
associates itself with the presidential statement read
out earlier at this meeting.

The debate to which you have convoked us, Sir,
reflects the express desire of the Council to develop a
legal framework to punish those who commit piracy
and armed robbery in the vast maritime area of the
Gulf of Aden and beyond. My delegation's contribution
to this debate will focus on two crucial points: the
urgent need to put in place an inclusive legal
mechanism and the need for heightened involvement
by the international community in resolving the Somali
crisis in general and the problem of piracy in
particular.

The report of the Secretary-General sets out
various avenues conducive to eradicating the
phenomenon of Somali piracy. Among the most
important is the establishment of a legal mechanism to
punish perpetrators. My delegation supports that
approach and would like to underscore the need for
such a mechanism to be placed under United Nations
supervision so as to ensure its legitimacy and its
inclusiveness.

Securing the Somali coast against acts of piracy
and armed robbery, including the swift and effective
punishment of perpetrators, requires very close
cooperation among all stakeholders. The involvement
of the United Nations in that process is all the more
relevant both because of the Organization's expertise in
the area of jurisprudence and because of the financial
and technical resources it could provide to any legal
mechanism to be established.

We welcome the considerable efforts that have
already been made by the international community, in
particular by the Security Council, with a view to
overcoming the problem of piracy in Somalia. With
regard to eliminating acts of piracy, we welcome the
Council's adoption in recent years of resolutions 1816
(2008), 1846 (2008), 1897 (2009) and 1918 (2010).
Those resolutions emphasize: strengthening international
cooperation in legal investigations and prosecutions
against perpetrators of acts of piracy; authorization of
States involved in combating piracy to carry out naval
operations in Somali territorial waters; and the need to
bring to justice those who have committed acts of

piracy.

In addition to those resolutions, we also have
other regional and international legal instruments in
place, including the Djibouti Code of Conduct
concerning the repression of piracy, which was agreed
under the aegis of the International Maritime
Organization, and the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea. We welcome the efforts made by
countries taking part in the naval operations that are
being carried out primarily by the European Union and
NATO. The regularity and effectiveness of those
operations have made contributed to a significant
decrease in the number of attacks against merchant
ships off the Somali coast.

Gabon continues to believe that the problem of
piracy should be addressed through a comprehensive
strategy to resolve the Somali crisis. In that regard, the
response of the international community should be
commensurate with the many challenges facing the
country. That response should also be the outcome of
more active, coordinated and united cooperation among
the stakeholders involved in the Somali crisis
settlement process. Such a holistic approach will help
us to understand that piracy is in fact the symptom of a
wider and deeper phenomenon that poses a threat to
peace and security not just in Somalia but in the entire
Horn ofAfrica region.

In order to better respond to this regional concern, it
is crucial to address the issue of strengthening the
institutional capacities of the countries of the region.
That includes the training of coast guards, improving
judicial systems and setting up an effective mechanism
for exchange of information. Once these capacities are
in place, those countries will be able to ensure full
control of their coastal areas and put set up appropriate
national systems to control weapons and ammunition
and to carry out patrols in their sovereign maritime
spaces. The establishment by the United Nations of the
International Trust Fund to meet expenses related to the
pursuit and detention of pirates and to strengthening
judicial capacities in the region and the work of the
Contact Group are all part of a comprehensive response
to the Somali problem.

It is therefore not difficult to understand why we
emphasize the need to view the problem of piracy
through the prism of insecurity on land in Somalia and
political instability in that country, which are the root
causes of the insecurity at sea. That is the approach
that has been taken by the African Union in seeking to
resolve this crisis. At Kampala in July 2010, African
Union heads of State or Government reiterated their
call for an international conference devoted to in-depth
consideration of the causes of piracy and to launching a
process ultimately leading to the adoption of an
convention against this phenomenon.

I should like to conclude by underscoring the
need for the international community to provide
financial, human and logistic support for the African
Union Mission in Somalia, one of whose tasks is to
contribute to restoring the rule of law in the country. A
stronger international commitment to stabilizing
Somalia and consolidating its judicial, security and
administrative institutions will certainly contribute to
improving the situation at sea and to establishing
lasting peace in the Horn ofAfrica.

