Mr. Djangone-Bi (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Mr. President, my delegation is grateful to
you for giving us this opportunity to take part in this
public meeting of the Security Council and to offer our
views on an issue as important as it is timely: United
Nations peacekeeping operations. As we all know,
Pakistan has long been one of the major constant
providers of troops for the operations of which we are
speaking. Through your highly appreciated presence in
this body, Mr. President, you show, once again, the
steadfast commitment of Pakistan to supporting United
Nations peacekeeping missions to engaging in active
and effective solidarity with fraternal countries whose
peace and security have been painfully disturbed.
Thank you, Sir, for this reassuring display of
compassion.

The irrepressible and almost exponential
numerical increase in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the impossibility of predictably controlling
their duration or location, their growing complexity
and the increased global burdens they impose on the
international community require us periodically to take
a fresh look at their founding principles, their mode of
conduct and the evaluation of their results.

The fall of the Berlin wall seemed to mark the
end of the cold war and of revolutionary wars that
almost exclusively affected young countries, such as
Cote d'Ivoire, that were just embarking on their
experience of national sovereignty and independent
development. The welcome triumph of pluralist
democracy, the free-market economy and human rights,
reinforced by the shaping force of the globalization of
economies and cultures, seemed to add to that hope for
international and intra-national peace, for full human
development in solidarity with our peoples and nations
united by a common destiny. Unfortunately, we must
now think again.

Armed conflicts, most so-called internal ones,
have again locked developing countries into a
straightjacket of immediate concerns and reactions that
take them ever further from the path of shared growth
and invalidate all their efforts to catch up with the
wealthy nations. The human, moral, intellectual,
material and financial resources of the international
community are now being spread thin in the settlement
of armed conflicts, rather than helping to achieve the
necessary millennium objectives: a sustainable and
significant reduction of poverty, the elimination of
known diseases, the closing of the digital divide, and
access for all to information, drinking water and
energy, to name but a few.

Is it not time to move from a culture of reaction,
ruinous for us all, to the more universally gratifying
one of prevention, as recommended four years ago by
the Secretary-General? He noted quite rightly that:

"Conflict prevention lies at the heart of the
mandate of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security [and that]
preventive action by the international community
can contribute significantly to strengthening the
national sovereignty of Member States".
(5/2001/574, p. 3)

I would add that this unity of preventive action -
undertaken in a multilateral framework, in support of
national initiatives, in respect for international rules
and with global and consistent strategies - remains in
all respects the best and most economical way of
promoting lasting peace and establishing a climate
conducive to fostering human development that is both
holistic and sustained. My delegation is available to the
Council to contribute, in due course, to any future
debate in the Council on this topic.

As beneficiaries of the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), the people and Government
of Cote d'Ivoire wish once again to convey its
profound gratitude to the international community, and
especially to those friendly countries that have
provided contingents to the Operation. Our ongoing
experience allows my delegation to attest that United
Nations peacekeeping operations must take every
precaution to ensure their full effectiveness in the
maintenance and consolidation of peace, as well as in
the critical phase of the reconstruction of stricken
nations and subregions.

United Nations peacekeeping operations, which
are irreplaceable, must, in the name of international
peace and security, enjoy the contribution, the support
and the timely, consistent and proactive backing of all
Member States. The lack, inadequacy, tardy
involvement or early depletion of the resources of
those peace missions can jeopardize peace processes
under way by reining in their momentum and, often, by
reducing to naught the benefits of the cumulative
effects of the results already achieved.

While it is highly desirable for a lead nation to
take charge of the coalition entrusted with any
peacekeeping operation under consideration, we must
reduce to a minimum any conflicts of interest in
choosing that nation and the high-ranking officials of
the mission in question. The necessary additional
political support of the international community for the
implementation of a peace process being consolidated
by a peacekeeping operation should be offered in full
respect for national sovereignty and established
institutions, with no influence other than that of the
international community itself. Such support should, of
course, be given in coordination with the crucial
activities of the regional and subregional organizations
concerned, as has been eloquently noted by previous
speakers in this debate. The success of a peacekeeping
operation depends on it.

