Mr. Osho (Benin) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to associate myself with preceding speakers
in extending my sincere and enthusiastic
congratulations to our brother, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guinea, who has the honour of presiding
over this meeting of the Security Council during this
delicate month of March 2003. This is especially so in
light of the burning acuteness of the present
international political situation, which, as everyone
knows, is almost completely polarized with respect to
the Iraqi crisis. To note the speech given a few hours
ago, the holding of a workshop such as this ran the risk
of seeming a non-event. But, very fortunately, that is
not the case when you consider the number and the
stature of the participants, in particular, the effective
presence of Secretary-General Kofi Annan at this
meeting's opening. I would also like to warmly
welcome the positive inspiration of the Guinean
Minister for Foreign Affairs- the President of the
Security Council - to inscribe for reflection by this
United Nations body this matter of concern for West
African States - the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and the use of mercenaries.

Regarding the topic submitted to us for our
individual and collective reflection, and speaking after
a series of speakers, there are not too many new things
for me to say. The essential things have been said,
particularly by the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
of Senegal, whose approach and conclusions, the
relevance of his ideas, as well as the relevant statement
of the honourable representative of the United
Kingdom, I would like to publicly support.

Benin believes that we must stop making
speeches on the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. Rather, we must look to specific and
effective actions. In that context, Benin believes that
we must act upon the source and the fundamental
reasons for two scourges - the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and the use of mercenaries.
Our specific proposals in that regard are the following.

We must establish an international convention
that strictly limits the purchase of light weapons of war
only to States and national armies, aiming particularly
at the ability to trace weapons and at supplying them
through official channels.

Secondly, we must put in place at the
international level provisions related to the dismantling
of bodies, firms and international networks that sell
weapons that do not have the agreed or official status
of an exporting State of these light weapons of war.
Benin draws the attention of all participants to the fact
that poor countries such as ours have neither the
technology nor the logistics to sell or manufacture, or
to organize the flows or the delivery of weapon
stockpiles. Therefore, countries that have this
technology and these logistics, both in terms of
manufacturing weapons and transporting, shipping and
delivering them, are, clearly, fully responsible in this
regard.

Thirdly, we must put in place a United Nations
convention for the dismantling of companies and
agencies that specialize in so-called military-service-
providing activities, which are nothing more than
official mercenary companies, militias or private
armies. These companies exist and are flourishing in
the northern countries. In some southern countries,
these companies have set up shop and have begun
recruitment through legally placed advertisements.
Why is that the case? Because today we increasingly
are seeing actions recognizing these companies as
providers of government protective services and
protective services for official institutions, while in
reality, these companies that provide lethal and
destabilizing services are nothing but mercenary
organizations.

Therefore, we must admit that henceforth our
assessment of the question of the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and of the use of mercenaries
must clearly integrate the empowerment of States,
holding them responsible, including groups of
nationals, where groups of nationals have been
identified as mercenaries. It will no longer suffice to
invoke the personal freedom of individuals who have
made the choice to engage in an activity, even if that
activity is marginal, illegal or illicit. They will not be
able to sidestep their responsibility with respect to the
State. We will have to admit that individuals,
recognized as mercenaries from a particular country,
engage, at the same time, the responsibility of States
that have not been able to gain control over their
institutions and nationals in illicit activities carried out
abroad.

The fourth proposal is that the Security Council
should put in place a working group that would design,
organize and carry out a media counter-campaign at the
international level, against the campaign that we have
seen for a while now, a campaign which tends to extol
or preach the decriminalization of mercenary activities.
We read increasingly in the press - as I did on my
way to New York yesterday - specialized articles to
the effect that, given their weakness and their lack of
money, poor countries are not able to organize their
own security and that, as a result, it is legitimate that
those States have recourse to certain services and
agencies that specialize in security matters. Those
companies, however, are the same ones that are the
service providers for political groups that organize the
destabilization of legal institutions within States.

My fifth proposal - and it is of a general
nature- is to act upon the source of these two
scourges. Acting upon the source means that it should
be understood that the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and the use of mercenaries have as
fertile ground misery, poverty, the lack of a political
system and institutional democracy, the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and endemic
underdevelopment that persists in most of the southern
countries and in the subregion I come from.

As a result, the global problem of development
assistance once again emerges. And, in the search for
effective solutions to that problem, there is the problem
of assistance to the armies and national police forces of
underdeveloped countries. Today, cooperation
agreements that have been concluded, whether at the
bilateral or the multilateral level, generally and
systematically exclude the police and the army from
their aims, on the pretext that those are institutions of
State sovereignty and that cooperation is limited to
economic, technical and financial aspects, among other
things.

But how can we create conditions enabling a
national army to control the situation within a
country's borders, to confront aggression and to protect
State institutions, if that army itself is not a well-
equipped army, a trained army, an army that does not
function with respect for the constitution and for State
institutions? The same applies to the police and the
national police with regard to public security. As a
result, it is increasingly appropriate to consider very
seriously the issue of the equipping, arming and
technically training national armies and national police
forces so that they can become institutions that serve
the rule of law and, if the conditions are such, so that
we will naturally be able to lend enough help to the
countries in which the democratic process is
developing harmoniously, to assist the countries in
which we observe concrete and significant efforts
aimed at good governance. Because it is bad

governance - marginalization of a part of the
population, of the intelligentsia outside the political
sphere - that creates frustration. Once again, that is

fertile ground for the recruitment of mercenaries and of
those who wish to take up arms to bring about political
changes through violence and destabilization.

I shall conclude by expressing the hope that the
necessary support will be provided to ECOWAS to
enable it to complete the follow-up of the
implementation of the Moratorium and all other
oversight activities of the national commissions to
combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons.

