Mr. Komizin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, for
his briefing on the most recent events in Timor-Leste
and also for his introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2003/449), which objectively
considers the work done by the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) during the
reporting period in implementing its mandate, and
which accurately describes the problems of the
establishment of statehood for Timor-Leste.

We share concern regarding a certain
exacerbation of the security situation in Timor-Leste.
The serious civil disorder provoked by extremists in
Dili last December and the recent stepping up of
diversionary activities of armed groups and former
militia members are extremely alarming. In this
situation, UNMISET personnel and the Timor-Leste
authorities must intensify their joint efforts to
neutralize such threats. It is our hope that the revised
programme and timetable approved by the Security
Council for the drawdown of the police and military
components of the Mission will enable the Mission,
before the transfer of full responsibility for the
maintenance of security to the national army and
police, to more effectively provide conditions that
would rule out destabilization of the young State and
the undermining of its independence.

Extremely important for the establishment of a
viable, independent State is the establishment and the
strengthening of a national army and the National
Police of Timor-Leste. Here we welcome UNMISET's
efforts to prepare and train the military and police
forces of the country. We also welcome the expansion
of the area of responsibility of the army and police
forces now being formed in Timor-Leste. This is taking
place according to schedule and without serious
complications. We take note of the progress of the
establishment of a Timor-Leste State administration. A
good deal of credit must go to the UNMISET Civilian
Support Group, as its staff members are undertaking
significant efforts to share knowledge and experience
with their Timorese colleagues and are giving effective
assistance to the Government in ensuring the
functioning of ministries and agencies.
Assistance for the social and economic
development of Timor-Leste from multilateral and
bilateral donors is vital for the long-term stability of
the country. Here, the Russian Federation emphasizes
the need for the intensified donor support for the
Government of Timor-Leste in its efforts to achieve the
fundamental objectives of the National Development
Plan.

We welcome the positive changes in the
relationship between Timor-Leste and Indonesia,
particularly regarding the important question of
demarcation and regulation of the common border. The
establishment and maintenance of good-neighbourly,
mutually beneficial relations with neighbouring
countries is a prerequisite for the successful
establishment and development of the young State of
Timor-Leste. We support the extension of the
UNMISET mandate for one more year, until 20 May
2004.

In conclusion, we would like to wish the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, and all the personnel of UNMISET further
success in implementing their mandate.

