Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal has been
following recent developments in Angola with a sense of
cautious optimism that was confirmed by the statement of
the Permanent Representative of Angola. The new
timetable for the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol,
approved by the Joint Commission on 9 January, should
be a meaningful step towards the normalization of the
political and military situation in Angola.

However, it could be said that we should avoid
holding overly high expectations, not only because of the
difficult nature of the tasks which remain incomplete, but
also because of the relatively short time in which they
must be fulfilled. After all, we have to bear in mind that
the Angolan peace process has proceeded far more slowly
than had been expected three years ago, when the Lusaka
Protocol was signed. That is the reality. But the new
timetable is nevertheless our best shot at trying to
reinvigorate the peace process. Without the speedy
completion of the remaining tasks, peace in Angola will
not become a reality.

The recipe for political stability in Angola is well
known. On the part of UNITA, it is imperative that it
facilitate the normalization of State administration in the
areas it controls, including its headquarters in Andulo and
Bailundo. UNITA must also transform Radio Vorgan into
a non-partisan broadcasting facility, thus dismantling the
remains of its propaganda-war machine. And last but not
least, UNITA must demilitarize fully. Nothing short of
this is acceptable. Portugal is therefore concerned by
reports that UNITA continues to regroup its military
elements in some areas of Angola. This type of behaviour
is incompatible with its necessary transformation into a
political party.

On the part of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation, there is a responsibility to ensure
that the rule of law reigns throughout Angola and that the
fundamental principles of democratic societies, including
human rights, are fully respected. This is vitally important
in the long run, and is also essential to establish right
away the climate of confidence and trust in Government
that is required to overcome the culture of Violence that
so many years of war have left behind in Angola.

 

In this context, the long-awaited meeting in Angola
between President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and Mr. Jonas
Savimbi could be seen as a catalyst for the successful
conclusion of the peace process. The Portuguese
Government fully shares the view of the Secretary-General,
as stated in his latest report on the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA), that this meeting could
enhance mutual confidence and contribute significantly to
the prospects for national reconciliation, reconstruction of
the country and movement towards democracy.

The victory of peace over war in Angola still depends,
to a large extent, on the support of the international
community. It is disappointing to know that the response to
the 1997 consolidated inter-agency appeal for Angola
generated only 44 per cent of the funds required. The same
could be said about the fact that only 7 out of the 18
Angolan demining brigades are now operational, due to
shortages of both equipment and funds from national and
international sources. Similarly, demobilization has also
been negatively affected by the lack of international
support.

Portugal believes that additional international
assistance is required in order to enable the Angolan
Government and UNITA to walk this last mile for peace.
In this context, we would like to draw attention to
paragraph 10 of the draft resolution, which urges the
international community to provide assistance for
demobilization and the social reintegration of ex-
combatants, demining, the resettlement of displaced persons
and the rehabilitation of the Angolan economy. Full
cooperation with the 1998 consolidated inter-agency appeal
for Angola, currently being finalized, would be equally
important. Extending the mandate of MONUA along the
lines proposed by the Secretary-General is a step in the
right direction. The comprehensive report requested by the
Security Council in paragraph 3 of the draft resolution will
be instrumental in this context, by assessing the
implementation of the timetable agreed upon by the
Government of Angola and UNITA and approved by the
Joint Commission.

The proposed continuation of the United Nations
presence in Angola after April 30 fully deserves our
agreement, and we look forward to studying carefully the
preliminary recommendations in this regard that the
Secretary-General will in time submit to the Security
Council. Let me also seize this opportunity to pay tribute to
the work that has been done, sometimes in very difficult
circumstances, by the United Nations personnel, as well as
to the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Maitre Alioune Beye.

The presence in MONUA of 352 Portuguese - the
largest contingent after that of Zimbabwe - is a practical
expression of the confidence Portugal has in a successful
outcome of the peace process in Angola. We are ready to
be patient in assisting the people of Angola to cross the
bridge to stability, democracy and economic development.
But we also have to point out that the Angolan
Government, and UNITA in particular, must present us,
in the next few weeks, with renewed proof of their true
commitment to respect their mutual obligations. Full
compliance with the new timetable would show us that
commitment to peace.

