Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): We thank the Secretariat for
its interim briefing on the humanitarian situation in
Darfur.

Like all other members of the Council and of the
international community, Turkey is concerned about
the humanitarian situation in that troubled region.
Owing to circumstances not of their own making,
millions of innocent people in Darfur have been
displaced and are in constant need of humanitarian aid
in almost every conceivable form. That is a huge
undertaking, and one that must continue unhindered as
delays and disruptions in the effective flow of
humanitarian aid can potentially have very serious
consequences.

That is why Turkey believes that we must all
continue to urge the Sudanese Government to reinstate
the licences of the non-governmental organizations in
question. We very much hope that this can be possible
without any delay, for the present situation is
extremely grave and cannot wait. Meanwhile, as we
discussed during our most recent consultations on this
subject, the Secretariat must have developed a plan that
addresses the critical question of how the gap that has
been created by the decision of the Sudanese
Government can be filled in the short term. In that
regard, we look forward to receiving a comprehensive
briefing from the Secretariat with more precise
information and recommendations, once the joint
assessment that is ongoing between the United Nations
and the Sudanese authorities is completed. Turkey
believes that the Council will be in a better position to
appraise the evolving humanitarian situation in Darfur
once all the information from the Secretariat team on
the ground has been received and analysed.

Turkey places great emphasis on the humanitarian
dimension of the Darfur crisis. For its part, Turkey
extends significant bilateral and multilateral
humanitarian assistance to the Sudanese people, and
we will continue to do so. We will also continue to
support the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan in every way we can.

We must also accept the fact that the
humanitarian situation cannot realistically be
decoupled from the political and regional realities. As
we have said on a number of occasions before, the
Council must be able to take a holistic and strategic
approach to this very sensitive question. We have to be
able to address all the dynamics that are in play. Thus,
we look forward to our meeting with the Joint Chief
Negotiator, Mr. Bassole, next week.

