Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to express my sincere appreciation for the
initiative of the United States presidency of the Security
Council this month in convening today's ministerial
meeting. We welcome the presence of Secretary of State
John Kerry to preside over the meeting. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General, the President of the World
Bank, Special Envoy Mary Robinson and Commissioner
Ramtane Lamamra for their participation and their
briefings. We also appreciate the high-level presence
of Ministers from the members of the Security Council
and the countries of the Great Lakes region. We are
confident that today's meeting will provide an excellent
opportunity to review the progress thus far and further
bolster the momentum for achieving sustainable peace
and development in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region as a whole.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
constitutes a strong political foundation for the region's
lasting peace and stability. The participating countries
must share a common responsibility to implement the
commitments of the Framework. Full and uninterrupted
implementation by all concerned the parties concerned
at the national, regional and international level must be
ensured.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has the primary responsibility for its own reforms.
It should continue to undertake extensive reforms in
the areas of security, governance, decentralization and
democratization with firm commitment. Enhancing
effective capacity-building in the security sector,
among other areas, should lead the process. While
respecting the sovereignty of neighbouring countries,
enhancing regional cooperation by deepening economic
integration is vital. Maximizing this integration will
be a key part of achieving broader and longer-term
development goals and, ultimately, political stability.

We are of the view that the Framework's success
depends upon an oversight mechanism with well-defined
benchmarks that are verifiable and action-oriented. The
benchmarks should also include a process to address
those that fall short of their stated goals.

We fully support the holistic approach to peace and
development in addressing the challenges in the Great
Lakes region. In that regard, it was highly commendable
that the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy
visited the region with World Bank President Jim Yong
Kim. The unprecedented joint visit by the leaders of
the United Nations and the World Bank clearly shows
the value of an integrated effort that addresses both the
security and development issues of the region. In order
for that partnership to bear fruit, close cooperation and
coordination between the two bodies should be further
refined and strengthened. We hope that the partnership
can continue and expand to other areas as well.

One of the important policy goals of my
Government is the concurrent realization of peace,
security and economic and social development, not
only at the national but also at the regional and global
levels. As a part of that policy effort, my Government
will continue to actively engage in international
development cooperation. As the countries of the Great
Lakes region pursue security and development, the past
development experience of the Republic of Korea could
be helpful. The Republic of Korea is the only country
that has transformed itself from a least developed
country to donor country within just six decades. The
"New Village Movement" can provide a useful model
for rural development and poverty eradication in the
region.

In conclusion, we believe it is essential to maintain
high-level engagement and commitment from the
international community. We are confident that the
Framework, with firm support from the international
community, will surely contribute to the political
stability and the economic development of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region.

