Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, Mr. President, I would like to thank you and the
rest of the delegation of Bangladesh for holding this
meeting on this important issue and to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his statement.
Our thanks go also to the delegation of Malaysia for its
efforts in enhancing the Security Council's awareness of
the issue of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping
environment.

In recent years, facts and experiences have shown
that the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process has become an increasingly important component
of United Nations peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-
building activities; in particular, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers has
drawn wide attention. Current United Nations
peacekeeping activities in Kosovo, East Timor, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone and
other places have all to varying degrees involved the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants; this highlights the importance and relevance
of our discussion in the Security Council today.

 

We thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
and informative report on this issue and wish to take this
opportunity to make some preliminary comments.

First, the Security Council, which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, should attach due importance to the matter of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and should
provide policy guidance for work in this field. We endorse
the View that disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
should be included in relevant peace agreements from the
very beginning, with overall planning that takes into
account the specifics of each conflict, clearly defines the
responsibilities of the parties concerned and of the United
Nations, and identifies the sources of the financial resources
needed. In this regard, because this process involves
political, economic, military, social and other factors, the
United Nations should carefully listen to and fully respect
the opinions of all parties involved, especially those of the
Governments concerned, and should seek their support and
cooperation, so as to create a basis for the smooth
implementation of the programmes.

Secondly, without a relatively secure and stable
environment, it is impossible for the United Nations to
carry out disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes in coordination with the countries and parties
concerned. Without guaranteed safety, ex-combatants will
not voluntarily give up their weapons, and a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process will therefore be
out of the question. Therefore, the parties to a conflict
should demonstrate political will for this process and should
abide by agreed ceasefires in earnest. At the same time,
United Nations peacekeeping operations should be put in
place as soon as possible, to help stabilize the situation on
the ground. The current peacekeeping operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is at such a critical
stage, and needs a concerted effort by all parties to the
conflict and by the United Nations. Otherwise, there will be
no prospect of a disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, and the peace agreement cannot
possibly be fully implemented.

Thirdly, when carrying out disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, the
international community, including the United Nations,
must maintain an impartial and objective attitude and must
enable all former combatants to be fully and thoroughly
transformed into civilians or to be incorporated into regular
national forces in accordance with the relevant peace
agreements. The existence of illegal armed forces in any
form cannot be allowed, lest there be a resurgence of
destabilizing factors. To take the case of Kosovo, the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) has been in place for several
months, but the situation remains turbulent and volatile,
with continued and constant violence. Therefore, the
Security Council should follow closely the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process in Kosovo and
should sum up past experience and lessons learned. That
would enhance our in-depth understanding of what is
being discussed here today.

Fourthly, illicit arms flows have more often than not
made effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration operations very difficult to carry out or have
obliterated their achievements. The parties concerned
should therefore control such flows. And more important,
the Security Council's existing mechanisms for arms
embargoes should be strictly implemented. The series of
guidelines on the collection and disposal of arms and the
demobilization and rehabilitation of ex-combatants
adopted by the United Nations Disarmament Commission
in April 1999 should be abided by and implemented, and
should be considered as a basis for future studies on this
question by relevant United Nations bodies.

Fifthly, the issue of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration is very complicated, involving different
fields and sectors. We endorse the proposal made by the
Secretary-General in his report that coordination and
cooperation among relevant agencies should be
strengthened. The issue of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration is not only something for the Security
Council to discuss from the perspective of maintaining
security and peace; it also demands participation and
coordinated action by all relevant United Nations bodies
and the exchange of information and communication
among them. In this regard, guaranteed sufficient
resources are critical. We call on the international
community and relevant United Nations agencies to
provide the necessary contributions and appropriations for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in a
peacekeeping environment. We believe that serious
consideration should be accorded the proposal in the
report of the Secretary-General that the coordination of
voluntary and assessed funding should be enhanced in
providing financial support.

In his report, the Secretary-General puts forward
many concrete proposals that require full study by the
Security Council and other relevant bodies. We hope that
today's discussions will be able to benefit the Security
Council and other relevant agencies in their review of
past experiences and lessons and in improving the

 

disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes in
current United Nations peacekeeping or post-conflict peace-
building operations and those to be authorized in the future.
The Chinese delegation supports the draft presidential
statement to be adopted.

As observed in the presidential statement, the process
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, which
involves economic, social and other aspects, must be
addressed comprehensively. Here, I would like to reiterate
that the international community should step up its long-
term assistance for development to countries concerned, and
to African countries in particular, in order to help develop
their economies and root out the underlying causes of
conflicts. Only by so doing can the achievements of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration be
consolidated.

