Mr. Chambas: It is my honour to be here in the
Council today to introduce the Secretary-General's
report on the activities of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (S/2017/IIO4).

Despite continuous progress in West Africa and
the Sahel, notably regarding democratic and peaceful
political transitions, the security situation in the region
remains a matter of grave concern. In Mali, terrorists
launched a complex attack on bases of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in Kidal, resulting in the
death of one peacekeeper. Three more Malian soldiers
were killed recently by a landmine in Mopti region,
and another Malian soldier was killed by terrorists in
Niono. Two separate attacks on security posts were
also registered in Burkina Faso near the Malian border.
The attacks in Mali as well as within the Mali-Niger-
Burkina Faso tri-border area are mainly attributed to
Al-Qaida-affiliated groups and the Islamic State in
Greater Sahara.

In the Niger, the increasing number of security
incidents has compelled the Government to dedicate
17 per cent ofpublic expenditure in 2018 to the security
sector, compared with 15 per cent in 2017. This has,
however, triggered demonstrations in the capital of the
Niger given the expected detrimental effects on the
delivery of social services.

Following a notable decline in the number of Boko
Haram attacks in the first half ofthe year, there has been
an uptick in the number of incidents since September
last year, with a peak of 143 civilian casualties alone in
November 2017. The use of children as suicide bombers
by Boko Haram increased five-fold compared with 2016,
to reach 135 cases in 2017. While 700 people abducted
by Boko Haram have recently escaped captivity, the
group continues to kidnap innocent persons, as shown
by the recent disappearance of 31 loggers in Gamboru
near the Cameroon border. Overall, more than 2 million
displaced persons are still desperately waiting for an
end to the crisis in the Lake Chad Basin.

The comprehensive response of the region to
address the Boko Haram threat must be supported by
the international community. I commend the successful
efforts of the Multinational Joint Task Force and
welcome the conference on the resuscitation of Lake
Chad to be hosted by Nigeria next month.

In the Sahel, the Group of Five (G-S Sahel) has
made significant progress in the operationalization of
its Joint Force, including by establishing its military
command structure and a Force headquarters in Sevare,
and conducting its first military operation with French
troops in late October 2017. In line with resolution 2391
(2017), consultations are currently ongoing regarding
the conclusion of a technical agreement among the
United Nations, the European Union and the G-5 Sahel
States on the provision of operational and logistical
support to the Joint Force through MINUSMA.

On 8 December, at a meeting of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the European Union and
representatives of the G-5 Sahel in Brussels, I
underscored that the security response needs to be
complemented by measures to tackle governance
challenges as well as to boost economic development
and the resilience of the Sahelian population, as
articulated in the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel.

The past six months have seen substantive
progress in the efforts to reinvigorate the strategy,
notably through an extensive mapping of strategy-
related activities and the presentation of a proposal in
that context to strengthen the resilience of the Sahel
population during the third annual Climate Finance
Day, to be held on 11 December in Paris. A support
plan for the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel will now be shared with national, regional and
international partners so as to harmonize approaches
and to canvass for effective support for the Sahel in line
with national and regional priorities, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union's
Agenda 2063.

Meanwhile, the exponential spread of intercommunal
and farmer-herder conflicts, which have claimed
hundreds of lives in the recent past, must also be cause
for worry. It is a ticking time-bomb that unattended
could escalate beyond the community level.

Last December, during the Policy Committee of
the West Africa Coast Initiative, member countries
committed to reinforcing the fight against organized
crime in line with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) regional action plan to
address illicit drug trafficking, transnational organized
crime and drug abuse. Also, migration has become one
of the most lucrative activities for criminal networks
across West Africa and the Sahel. In this regard,
stemming human trafficking must continue to be a top
priority in 2018, as recently underscored by Secretary-
General Guterres.

In line with resolution 2282 (2016), the United
Nations continues to pioneer the sustaining peace
approach in the Gambia and Burkina Faso to ensure
lasting peace and the consolidation of these young
democracies. Strong support by the international
community for Burkina Faso's emergency plan will
enable it to withstand threats to its peace and security.
The Gambia has just concluded the first phase of its
security-sector reform, and democratic consolidation
is progressing with generous financial support on the
part of international partners. However, more attention
still needs to be paid to the challenges facing the two
countries in the areas of security-sector reform, national
reconciliation and thejustice sector. The United Nations
continues to coordinate closely with the African Union,
ECOWAS, the European Union and other partners in
this regard.

Respect for human rights and the rule of law is a
fundamental basis for advancing peace, security and
development. Thus I particularly welcome Burkina
Faso's new law on human rights defenders and the law
recently passed by the Gambia's National Assembly
to establish a national human rights commission. The
establishment of a judicial commission in Nigeria to
review the armed forces' compliance with international
human rights standards and the start of judicial
proceedings against Boko Haram suspects in Nigeria
also need to be commended.
Regarding the demarcation of the Cameroon-Nigeria
border, the good-neighbourly relationship between
the two countries continues to increase prospects for
its completion.

The trajectory of successful democratic elections
in West Africa continues. Notably, on 10 October
and 26 December the people of Liberia came out in
large numbers to peacefully elect a new President.
I applaud the Liberian people and their leaders for
their recourse to exclusively legal means to settle all
electorally related disputes; this has served to further
strengthen its existing democratic institutions. The
deployment of former President Obasanjo of Nigeria,
whom I accompanied in his capacity as a member of
the Secretary-General's High-Level Advisory Board on
Mediation, following the 26 December presidential run-
off, contributed to the gracious concession statement by
Vice-President Boakai and the magnanimous gesture of
President-elect George Weah, and demonstrated once
more the efficacy of preventive diplomacy.

Further attention now needs to be paid to the
forthcoming elections in Sierra Leone and Guinea. In
Togo, opposition parties continue with their protests.
The lack of consensus on the implementation of
constitutional reforms in the country could threaten the
holding of the legislative and local elections scheduled
to be held this year. I continue my close collaboration
with President Nana Akufo-Addo of Ghana and
President Alpha Conde of Guinea, Chairperson of
the African Union, to facilitate a resolution of the
impasse between the Government and the opposition,
in consonance with the Togolese Constitution, regional
democratic best practices and the ECOWAS Protocol
on Democracy and Good Governance.

As we pay tribute to the outgoing President of
Liberia, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, who is leaving office
after 12 years of leadership and service to her country
and the wider region, in particular during her term
as the Chair of the Economic Community of West
African States, we must increase our efforts to promote
the participation of women in decision-making and
leadership and ensure that the region's youth are solidly
placed at the centre of development policies.

Let me finally underscore that UNOWAS remains
strongly committed to continuing to support efforts for
the consolidation of peace and stability in West Africa
and the Sahel in line with its mandate and very much
appreciates the constant support it enjoys from the
Security Council.
