The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Spain.

Spain shares the views expressed by previous
speakers and aligns itselfwith the statement to be made
later by the observer of the European Union.

We welcome the support for the people of
Afghanistan and for the National Unity Government
and its efforts to promote stability, democracy,
security, human rights and the country's economic and
social progress. We commend the support provided to
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the outstanding work that the United
Nations is carrying out in Afghanistan. We share in
the satisfaction at the considerable progress achieved
in Afghanistan in the past decade, while recognizing
that it remains fragile. We also share the determination
to continue to work together to consolidate it. We join
the call on the Afghan authorities to continue to support
the reform process, including electoral reform, good
governance, combating corruption, the promotion and
protection of human rights, in particular the rights of
women and children.

We share the concern at the security situation in
the country and at the growing number of civilian
victims of the conflict, and, of course, the common and
deep outrage of all at the persistence of terrorism and
violent extremism.

The international community is united here, as it is
in very few cases, in its support for Afghanistan, as was
evident once again at the Brussels Conference, convened
jointly by the European Union and Afghanistan, and at
the Warsaw NATO summit, both held this past year.

I should like here to highlight three issues.

First, I would refer to the briefing given this
morning by Ambassador Van Bohemen, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011) and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities. Spain supports all
efforts aimed at ensuring an Afghan-led and owned
peace process as the only way to put a definitive end
to the conflict. We trust that the agreement reached by
the Afghan Government with the Hezb-i-Islami will
achieve the desired results and that new agreements for
peace will follow.

Secondly, I would underscore the work done on
Afghanistan by the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security, co-chaired by Spain and the
United Kingdom. I welcome the commitment of the
Special Representative and his UNAMA team in this
respect, and I reiterate our gratitude for the work begun
by the Government of Afghanistan to implement the
national plan of action on resolution 1325 (2000) and
the national strategy to eliminate violence against
women. We encourage the Government to continue
to translate into reality, in a decisive, tangible and
irreversible manner, the commitment it has undertaken
in terms of ensuring the rights of women and their
increased participation in public life, including in the
peace process and the reconciliation process.

Thirdly, with respect to the humanitarian situation,
the Secretary-General and the Special Representative
have shown us the growing relevance of this issue in the
immediate future. The situation is very disturbing, not
only because of the increase in the number of internally
displaced persons, but also because the situation has
worsened given the new dynamics of the conflict
and given the number of Afghans who are returning,
many of whom are undocumented and in a situation of
extreme vulnerability. We appeal to the Government
of Afghanistan, the United Nations, humanitarian
agencies and the countries of the region to give priority
attention to the situation in the coming months.

I would conclude by pointing out that today's
debate is the last one in which Spain will participate
as an elected member of the Security Council for the
2015-2016 biennium. My country has had the honour of
carrying out the important responsibilities of penholder
in the Council with regard to Afghanistan. That role has
been fulfilling in two ways. As a friendly country to
Afghanistan, we have been able to keep our commitment
in a unique way by coordinating the work of the
Council in the promotion of peace and security within
Afghanistan. As an active and committed member of
the Security Council, we have tried to contribute to
maintaining the unity of the Council in its support for
Afghanistan. 1 thank the representative of Afghanistan
for the kind words he shared about my country. I want
to assure him that, under different circumstances after
1 January, Afghanistan will continue to have a friend, a
partner and an ally in Spain.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
To that end, let me take this opportunity to remind
speakers that the presidency will use the flashing lights
on the collars of the microphones to prompt speakers to
bring their remarks to a close. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing or to post them on the PaperSmart web page.

I now give the floor to the representative of Italy.

