Mr. Ito (Japan): The Council has just taken a
very significant decision on the question of peace and
security on the Korean peninsula and North-East Asia.
Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
1695 (2006).

With the adoption of the resolution, the Council
has acted swiftly and robustly in response to the
reckless and condemnable act of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea in launching a barrage of
ballistic missiles on 5 July, local time. Through the
resolution, the Council has, in unity, sent, on behalf of
the international community, a strong and unmistakable
message to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and agreed on a set of binding measures that both the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Member
States are obliged to comply with in order to deal
appropriately with the situation created by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

The launching of missiles and other related
activities conducted by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea have been a matter of very serious
concern for the peace and security of Japan. Those
missile launches in and of themselves pose a direct
threat to the security of Japan and other countries, but
the nature of the threat is far more serious, particularly
in the light of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's claim that it has developed nuclear weapons.
06-43152
The well-known behaviour of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea as a leading proliferator of ballistic
missiles and related technology, among other
unacceptable behaviours, should not escape our
attention.

To initiate an appropriate and swift Council
response to the event, Japan and other concerned
members of the Council prepared a strong draft
resolution the next day after a series of consultations.
The original draft resolution was presented on 7 July
and sponsored by eight members - Denmark, France,
Greece, Japan, Peru, Slovakia, the United Kingdom
and the United States.

Subsequently, China and Russia presented the
text of a presidential statement and later submitted a
draft resolution. We welcomed the move on the part of
China and Russia, both neighbouring countries of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and important
members of the six-party talks. However, their draft
was considered to be weak in the message and
measures it proposed and insufficient to deal
adequately with the issue of peace, security and
stability at hand - indeed, with the threat posed by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's defiant and
unacceptable act.

After the series of intensive consultations that
ensued to breach the differences between the two texts,
members have been able to reach agreement on a text
that is strong in its message and binding on Member
States under the United Nations Charter on measures
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security.

It is important that, in today's resolution, the
members of the Council have acted in unity. The
resolution clearly states that the Council is acting
under its special responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and demands that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea suspend all
activities related to its ballistic missile programme and
re-establish its pre-existing commitments to a
moratorium on missile launching.

The resolution also strongly urges that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea return
immediately to the six-party talks without
precondition. Japan strongly urges the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to comply with the
Council's demand and to sincerely respond to all the
06-43152
other provisions addressed to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

Japan also urges the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to cease all its work on nuclear-
related activities, with the aim of the complete,
verifiable and irreversible dismantlement of all its
nuclear programmes.

We believe that it is essential, as the resolution
just adopted requires, that Member States that have not
yet done so exercise vigilance and prevent missile and
missile-related items, materials, goods and technology
being transferred to the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's missile or weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) programmes.

It requires Member States to exercise vigilance
and prevent the procurement of missile-related
materials and technology from the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and the transfer of any financial
resources in relation to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's missile or WMD programmes.

I would like to state my Government's intention
to implement, in accordance with this resolution, those
measures that are necessary to achieve the objectives
set out in the resolution, in accordance with domestic
laws and procedures.

My Government has already taken a number of
measures against the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea on a unilateral basis that include the
continuation of the strict implementation of export-
control measures on missiles and WMD-related goods
and services against the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea.

Japan also expects that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea will respond quickly to the calls
from the Council to return to the six-party talks and
work towards the expeditious implementation of the
19 September joint statement and return also to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) and International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) safeguards.

This is an important milestone in the world's
community's fight against the proliferation of missiles
and WMD. Today marks an important step forward in
the promotion of peace and security on the Korean
peninsula and in North-East Asia. All the countries in
the region must work together in keeping with the
spirit and the letter of this important resolution.

Finally, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for

having guided us through these difficult deliberations,

and I thank all members of the Council, in particular

the eight sponsors of our draft, for their cooperation

and unstinting support in the process of bringing days
of hard work to fruition.

