Ms. Power (United States of America): The United
States supports the Security Council's adoption of
the resolution 2285 (2016), which renews for another
year the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO).
MINURSO plays an indispensable role in preserving
and ensuring safety and security in Western Sahara and
must continue to do so until a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution that will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara is
achieved. We thank members of the Security Council
and those in the Group of Friends of Western Sahara
for their support in concluding the negotiations on the
MINURSO mandate renewal and adopting the resolution
today in advance of the mandate's expiration tomorrow.

As we all know, this year's mandate renewal was
challenging and contentious. That is an understatement.
It is taking place against a backdrop of significant
uncertainty for the Mission, with the removal of civilian
staff, including the Mission's political component,
rendering MINURSO incapable of fully functioning
and fulfilling its mandate. Civilian staff provide
essential support of the Mission's operations. Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous has made abundantly clear
that the current conditions in which MINURSO is
striving to do its job are unsustainable.

It is important that Morocco and the United
Nations have a constructive relationship. In fact, it is
absolutely necessary if the United Nations-led process,
which we all support, is to bring about a peaceful,
sustainable and mutually agreed solution to the conflict
in Western Sahara. To that end, it is critically important
that continued engagement between Morocco and
the United Nations leads to resolving the challenges
facing MINURSO and to restoring MINURSO to
full functionality.

The policy of the United States regarding Western
Sahara has not changed. We consider Morocco's
autonomy plan serious, realistic and credible. It
represents a potential approach that could satisfy
the self-determination aspirations of the people of
Western Sahara. At the same time, the United States
believes that we - and by "we" I mean not only our
Government but also the Security Council - have a
responsibility to protect the integrity of the mandates
that we authorize and to ensure the effectiveness and
safety of peacekeeping personnel worldwide, including
those serving in MINURSO.

The Security Council must respond swiftly and
proactively in any situation in which a Government
requires the staff from a United Nations peacekeeping
mission immediately to depart. Our goal has been and
remains securing a return to the full functionality of
the MINURSO mission as soon as possible so that it
can fulfil the mandate given to it by the Council. We
consider the civilian component, including the political
reporting function, to be a crucial part of that mandate.
Resolution 2285 (2016) provides an important signal
from the Council and a realistic path to achieving that
necessary return to full functionality.

