Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2010/562). We welcome the participation in
today's Security Council meeting of the Foreign
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Jeremie. We share the
assessments contained in his statement.

We carefully listened to the statement by
Mrs. Citaku. We are disappointed by the unwarranted
views that she has expressed, which run counter to
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

Russia supports the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Serbia. We are of the
View that it is undeniable that resolution 1244 (1999)
remains fully in effect and remains the international
legal basis for a Kosovo settlement that is binding upon
all. Our position remains unchanged in respect to that
resolution, that is, we do not recognize the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo.

We believe that it is important for the stakeholders
to resume dialogue in order to bring about a settlement
of the Kosovo issue. Here, we cannot condone unilateral
actions of Pristina and the international presence in
northern Kosovo that are aimed at changing realities on
the ground in order to impact the modalities and
outcomes of the dialogue ahead.

In that regard, we are concerned over the growing
activity of the Kosovo Albanian authorities north of the
Ibar river, and their plans, despite the negative view of
UNMIK on those plans, to build and restore destroyed
homes on land that is adjacent to Serbian towns, as
well as their plans to open a court without the consent
of the United Nations Administration in Mitrovica or
of the Serbian city council in northern Mitrovica.

The situation continues to be unsatisfactory with
respect to the return to Kosovo of internally displaced
persons, including Serbian citizens. There are many
reasons for that, including the fact that returnees are
not confident about their security, nor are the rights of
return encouraged by actions such as those by the
Kosovo defence and security entities when, on
26 September, they removed transmitters of the Serbian
telecom company in the Serbian-populated areas of
Kosovo.

As a result of this, almost all the enclaves to the
north of the Ibar River have been left without mobile
communications and some without landline
communications. We believe that that is a blatant
violation of human rights as part of an unfair
competitive struggle. We believe that such intent is
fraught with additional tension in terms of security in
Kosovo and could spark growing mistrust of the
Serbian population with respect to the readiness of the
peacekeeping force to carry out its duties. This step
should also be seen as premature in the light of the
incidents, described today by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, that occurred in the town of Pee
during the enthronement ceremony of the Serbian
Patriarch.

The attempts of the Kosovo media to discredit
UNMIK are unacceptable. The campaign against
UNMIK jeopardizes its staff's security and prevents
the Mission from carrying out its functions. We insist
that UNMIK carry out its duties with respect to the
external representation of Kosovo in regional and
international organizations and mechanisms. Attempts
to secure Pristina's participation in international events
as a sovereign State are unacceptable. In that respect,
we maintain our position that the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo, on basis of its mandate from the
Security Council, must play as active a role as possible
in assisting the process of a Kosovo settlement. We
insist on the need to maintain the leading role of the
Security Council in resolving the issue of Kosovo, as it
remains the guarantor of compliance with international
law, the United Nations Charter and its own decisions.

Information on the substance and proceedings of
negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina should be
reflected in the quarterly reports of the Secretary-
General on the activities of UNMIK, with reports of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
attached thereto.

