Mr. Sc'epanovie (Montenegro): Permit me to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption and
conduct of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January. I would like to thank you for
organizing this important debate. Let me also thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs for his
briefing.

Montenegro fully associates itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I would, however, like to make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.

Montenegro's long and proud history has been
marked by numerous wars - two World Wars as well
as two Balkan wars in the twentieth century alone.
Even though it did not bring war directly to the soil of
Montenegro, the dissolution of the former Yugoslavia,
in the 19905, also saw war-like clashes that affected the
whole region. As our history suggests, unfortunately,
Montenegro has been no stranger to war. But it is
important to stress here that Montenegro has strictly and
solely fought freedom wars, never having any territorial
or other ambitions and claims, notwithstanding the fact
that war, especially in the Balkans, in the historical
context, presumed that struggle for liberation implied
changing border lines.

As a small country to which these various wars
brought so much suffering, including of an existential
nature in the aftermath of the First World War,
Montenegro has been in a position to draw many
lessons from those experience and, as a result, base
its modern national strategic policy and orientation
on the premises of peaceful solutions, relations and
coexistence. History has taught Montenegro something
that cannot be emphasized enough in the current and
ever-fragile international peace and security context,
that is, the best and only truly sustainable way to solve
differences and rectify tensions and conflict situations
is through peaceful means, in the spirit of dialogue,
committed to diplomatic and political efforts and tools.

One of the main prerequisites in that sense is the
need for the parties in conflict to show a willingness
to accept painful compromises for the greater good.
As bloody as the price of independence for some ex-
Yugoslav was, Montenegro was able to regain its
independence, in 2006, in a completely peaceful
manner. The Montenegrin leadership at the time took
some very difficult decisions, including the acceptance
of threshold of a 55 per cent majority set under the
facilitation of the European Union, which marked
the first time such a threshold had been established
and used. When combined with other aspects, such
as the wisdom and sense of being patient at such a
historic juncture and waiting for the right moment and
conducive environment to hold a referendum, as well as
to exercise an open and transparent approach with our
counterparts, the end result was a separation between
Serbia and Montenegro that came about peacefully,
although it had had the potential to be violent.

It is in that framework that I would like to underline
the significance of the United Nations early detection
and early-warning mechanisms. Our focus should
definitely be strengthened towards preventive measures
in order to avert crises from developing and escalating,
and to mitigate the possible repercussions of crises.
With that aim, as a member of the Group of Friends
of Mediation, I would like to advocate that mediation
truly be established as a core function of the United
Nations, as prescribed in Article 33 of the Charter of
the United Nations. As such a cost-effective tool for the
prevention and peaceful resolution of conflict that has
been largely under-utilized, mediation embodies one
of the most important instruments at our disposal and
rightfully deserves increased attention and resources
of the United Nations system and United Nations
membership as a whole.

The responsibility to protect and its further
operationalization must also remain a priority. In an
era of accountability, perpetrators of crimes against
humanity should not go unpunished. Countries need
to demonstrate strong commitment to the rule of law,
respect for human rights and freedoms, democracy and
the non-use of force in settling disputes.

Montenegro's path to renewed statehood was
a carefully crafted, step-by-step process. The road
to a political solution is often long and exhausting,
especially if it concerns crisis and violent situations.
Sometimes the hardest step is to bring opposing parties
to the negotiating table. In that context, I would like
to highlight the positive and valuable role that regional
and subregional organizations can play in facilitating
the beginning of dialogue and a conciliatory tone, as
we have seen recently in many instances in Africa.
When regional or subregional approaches do not bear
fruit, it is for the United Nations to step in and take
ownership, as was done for the Syrian crisis, for which
we commend the personal engagement and tireless
efforts of the Secretary-General to take leadership and
put his credibility and full weight behind organizing
the second Geneva Conference on Syria.

The experience of the League of Nations after the
First World War, followed by the nearly seven decades
of the existence of the United Nations, even considering
all of the weaknesses that have been seen along the way,
point to the indispensable and vital role of such world
organizations in the system of global governance - for
ensuring global peace and security, development and
respect for human rights and freedoms. In order to
make sure that the United Nations maintains its rightful
place as the central mechanism in global governance,
the Organization has to take on a modern, reformed
shape, one that recognizes new geopolitical realities
and the world's evolving multifaceted conditions and
environments.

Once the parties are brought together, it takes
persistence, belief and serious commitment to the
give-and-take process, which is carefully balanced
and leaves no clear-cut winners or losers. It is only in
that way that we can count on the sustainability of the
outcomes reached and avoid relapse into crisis.

One crucial aspect that cannot be overlooked
throughout the diplomatic process of searching for
political solutions is the constructive and positive
involvement of the relevant States and other
stakeholders from the immediate and wider region, as
well as global players who can use their influence over
developments on the ground to help carve out the best
possible resolution.

In conclusion, allow me to point out that the strategic
priorities of Montenegro foreign policy are based on the
pillars of developing good neighbourly relations and
regional cooperation, as well as developing bilateral
and multilateral cooperation. For its pragmatic role
that has no hidden agenda, and having no open issues
with its neighbours, Montenegro has been recognized
as the factor of stability in the region, fostering efforts
for reconciliation and the promotion of overall regional
cooperation.

Complementary to the irreplaceable undertakings
of European and Euro-Atlantic structures, and efforts
of countries in their respective integrations roads, all
of Montenegro's activities are oriented towards the
purpose of achieving permanent peace and prosperity
in the region. Such a forward-looking attitude, geared
towards the future, focusing on close cooperation for
the benefit of all, working in the spirit of dialogue and
compromise to overcome differences and at the same
time ensuring that their peoples enjoy good living
standards, is a recipe for success.

The best example is the European Union-facilitated
landmark agreement between Serbia and Kosovo of
April 2013, on the normalization of relations. The
agreement marks a positive sign and will go a long
way for both peoples - as well as for the whole region,
which has had its share of turbulent times - as it
will, hopefully, represent a shift away from harmful
ideologies and ways of thinking towards peaceful and
prosperous coexistence.

