Mr. Biagini (Italy): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Honore Braithwaite for
her substantive briefing and her and her staff's
commendable service.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.

In recent months, Haiti has continued its path
towards consolidating its stability and constitutional
order, thereby reaffirming the Security Council's
decision to better adjust to the present needs of the
country by withdrawing the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and replacing it with
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).

As the Council witnessed during its mission
last June, Haiti is at a crossroads. A constructive
collaboration between the Government and the
Parliament and an inclusive dialogue with civil
society are now crucial to implementing the reform
agenda jointly adopted by the executive and legislative
branches, as well as for the development of a shared
national vision for the country's future. We encourage
the Haitian Government to continue on that path.

We welcome the start of a thorough assessment of
constitutional review and emphasize in particular the
importance of a consensual and effective reform of
the electoral system. With the assistance of the United

Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
the Haitian National Police has achieved remarkable
results, on which it must now build. We welcome the
priority assigned by the authorities to its consolidation,
which remains an essential pillar of security and
stability in the country. Efforts must be redoubled
to address weaknesses in the rule of law and justice
system, with a special focus on the independence of
the judiciary, the reform of the corrections system, the
reduction of women's vulnerability and their increased
participation in the political and socioeconomic life of
the country. The United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) would rightly focus
on those sectors.

Among the challenges still facing the country,
allow me to point out the fight against cholera. We
highly appreciate the Secretary-General's commitment
to supporting the Government's efforts in that fight. We
welcome the adoption last week by the General Assembly
of resolution 71/161 B, which Italy co-sponsored.

Secondly, Italy remains firmly convinced that the
transition between the two Missions is a due response
to the evolution of the country's needs. Building on
the results achieved by MINUSTAH, MINUJUSTH
will have targeted tools that are adjusted to the present
conditions on the ground and to the specific challenges
being tackled by the Haitian authorities. That transition
must be well planned and responsible. So far, the
withdrawal of MINUSTAH has not affected the overall
security situation and we invite the Secretary-General
to continue to follow that process with special attention
and to keep the Council duly informed.

It is essential to ensure continuity and to identify, as
of now, a strategy to progressively transfer competencies
to the country team, whose role will be strengthened
and, ultimately, to Haitian authorities. We invite the
Secretary-General to continue that planning effort
on the basis of the integrated approach highlighted
in his report (S/2017/604). I would like in particular
to underscore the political strategy underlined in the
MINUJUSTH priorities outlined by the Secretary-
General. We fully share the pivotal role assigned to the
Mission's political pillar and to its good offices, as well
as the intention to put in place mobile and integrated
Mission deployment throughout the country, in order to
maximize its impact while at the same time keeping a
light footprint.

United Nations action in Haiti attests to the need
to ensure coherence between supporting the political
process, keeping peace and promoting development
and human rights. In that respect, in our view, Haiti
represents a test and reference model of the Council's
ability to handle a transition based on a recognition
of the close connection that exists among prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and comply with the
criteria of effectiveness, peer mandates and a well-
timed sustainable exit strategy. Such an effort requires
the involvement of the entire United Nations system
and the use of all the tools at its disposal to ensure
peace, avoid relapses into conflict and trigger lasting
development, In Haiti, we have the opportunity to
show the value of that strategy, which is in line with
the wider peace and security reform that Italy shares
and supports.

In conclusion, Italy has a long-standing history
of friendly relations and solidarity with Haiti and its
people. We will continue along that path as a member
of the Council, the United Nations and the European
Union, and at the bilateral level.

