Ms. Lisson (Australia): I should first like to
thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council, and to thank Tanzania for convening
today's debate at such a crucial point along the road to
the restoration of a secure environment in the Great
Lakes region.

The progress in the peace processes in the Great
Lakes region in recent times demonstrates what can be
achieved through cooperation and coordinated regional
and international efforts. Australia congratulates
Burundi on having moved successfully to government
by democratically elected representatives. We further
applaud the steps already taken by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo towards achieving that goal.
The successful staging of the recent constitutional
referendum augurs well for the forthcoming general
elections.

However, security and the humanitarian situation
in the Great Lakes region remain of concern to the
international community. The United Nations Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Jan
Egeland, briefed the Council last month on the serious
and growing threat to regional peace and security
wrought by the activities of the Lord's Resistance
Army in the southern Sudan, northern Uganda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those activities
have brought suffering and instability to the region and
displaced millions of innocent people.

Peace within the Great Lakes region cannot be
attained while militant groups such as the Lord's
Resistance Army are rampant. We therefore call upon
the Lord's Resistance Army to cease its acts of
violence and to cooperate fully with the international
community and regional countries to end the conflict.
We further encourage the three Governments
concerned to work to promote regional solutions.

While Australia's main focus of humanitarian
activity is our own Asia-Pacific region, Australia has
assisted those affected people of northern Uganda with
donations administered through the United Nations
Children's Fund and the World Food Programme. Last
year, Australia made $2 million available through the
World Food Programme to assist displaced people
living in camps in northern Uganda. We have also
contributed towards regional stability through the
deployment of 15 Australian Defence Force personnel
to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS).
In the near future, 10 Australian Federal Police officers
will also be deployed to UNMIS.

Australia welcomes the recent decision to
establish a United Nations Peacebuilding Commission.
We support a stronger and more coordinated role for
the United Nations in assisting fragile States to
negotiate the peacebuilding process. We particularly
support better coordination among the various United
Nations actors on the ground in post-conflict countries.
In the context of the current debate on the Great Lakes
region, we envisage that the Commission will be able
to assist regional countries and regional organizations
in pursuit of their goals.

Finally, Australia encourages the Council to
remain seized of the security and humanitarian issues
facing the Great Lakes region.

