Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank the Vice-President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Panama for his presence
at our meeting this morning, to which we have come to
debate this issue. We also welcome the presence of
several ministers of State, as well as the briefings by
Ms. Coomaraswamy and Ms. Veneman, the valuable
contribution of Ms. Jo Becker of Watchlist on Children
and Armed Conflict and the information provided by
the organization Security Council Report.

A little over 10 years ago, Graga Machel's report
(A/51/306) highlighted to the Organization the horrors
suffered by children affected by armed conflict. That
led to the holding of the Security Council's first open
debate on children and armed conflict. In June 2008,
10 years will have passed since that event. We regret
how many young lives have been lost or tragically and
violently affected, especially as regards girls.
Unfortunately, since then we have also witnessed the
changes that have taken place in war tactics and the
nature of conflicts, wherein civilian populations have
increasingly become the targets of violence and
unspeakable atrocities, leading to a new spiral of
violence and further threats to children.

In spite of so many atrocities, which have all
caused irreversible damage to children, Guatemala
recognizes that some progress was made in that time.
For example, this subject has been regularly discussed
in 11 open debates, and resolutions have been adopted
that refer specifically to the situation of children in
armed conflict - including resolution 1612 (2005),
which set out the conceptual framework to strengthen
the protection of children who are victims of armed
conflict and to combat the recruitment and use of
children as soldiers by armed forces or groups of any
sort. It is clear that of the six grave violations
identified throughout the years, the recruitment and use
of children has garnered the greatest attention. In
addition, more recently, child protection advisers have
been included in peacekeeping and special political
operations. It is now up to us to continue to move
ahead to address the very widespread phenomenon of
gender-based violence, including the systematic rape of
girls, sexual slavery and the brutal violence to which
they are subjected and their ensuing stigmatization by
their communities.

We must also not fail to increasingly address
other forms of violence that also affect children:
mutilation, murder, kidnapping and attacks against
school and hospitals. Such violence forces children to
flee their families and communities, forcing them to
become refugees in neighbouring towns and countries.
Without a doubt, that makes them even more
vulnerable. Worse yet is a phenomenon that has been

documented in several conflicts, namely, the denial of
the very humanitarian assistance that goes some way
towards ameliorating the problems of children affected
by armed conflict.

The responsibility to protect children in armed
conflict is incumbent upon us all. However, there is no
doubt that this is the primary responsibility of States.
Civil society can be a country's best ally - gathering
information on examples or cases of violence against
children and sharing that information with the relevant
Government officials responsible for corroborating it
and taking the appropriate steps. The role of civil
society can also be very important as regards working
with Governments to implement a monitoring and
reporting mechanism, mediation efforts to secure the
release of children in the hands or combatants and
rescuing children from military organizations. Civil
society also has a role to play in the rehabilitation and
social reintegration of children and in designing and
implementing reconciliation processes aimed at
repairing the social fabric.

If they do not receive appropriate assistance, as
adults, children who have grown up in a climate of
violence, have suffered from violence or have been
forced to engage in it are likely to repeat that
behaviour. In that connection, we should also recall the
importance of fully adhering to and implementing
international principles, norms and procedures of
restorative justice and social rehabilitation when it
comes to addressing cases of children accused of
committing crimes in association with armed groups or
forces.

That reference to justice leads me to the annexes
published by the Secretary-General in his reports,
which identify groups that recruit children and on
which, year after year, several groups are listed that we
already know to be habitual violators of the rights of
children. In that connection, there is a need to put an
end to impunity. Guatemala concurs with the
Secretary-General that those groups should be
subjected to much more robust and effective targeted
sanctions. There should also be closer controls over the
sale and availability of weapons and over capital flows
intended for weapons. Eliminating such groups should
be a resolute and urgent priority for the Security
Council.

Given the sensitive nature of the issue before us
today, it is important that any information coming into
the United Nations system, the Office of the Special
Representative, the Security Council and any other
body of the Organization should be objective, reliable
and from responsible interlocutors. From the
community level to national and international
institutions, communication, cooperation, coordination,
information exchange and verification, and
transparency among all parties and actors should be
carried out in line with the relevant mandates and
working methods.

In conclusion, Guatemala recognizes and is
grateful for the valuable contributions made by the
Paris Principles and Guidelines on children associated
with armed forces or armed groups. They provide us
with a comprehensive picture of the experiences and
lessons learned in the course of the past 10 years. We
also appreciate the so-called toolkit developed by the
Council's Working Group. We believe its work should
be decisively utilized.

