Mr. Ould Abdallah: This is my third
presentation to the Security Council since taking office
more than nine months ago. During my first
presentation, on 17 December 2007 (see S/PV.5805), I
proposed three options to the Council to address the
Somali crisis. The first option was to continue business
as usual, with massive assistance, including
humanitarian aid, as we have done for the past 18
years. During the past 10 years, the official amount of
assistance given to Somalia has been in the vicinity of
$6 billion to $8 billion. That approach has helped to
save millions of lives and should be commended and
pursued. However, its side effects cannot be ignored,
and it cannot be expected to bring lasting peace. Today,
more than 3 million Somalis live in exile and more
than 800,000 are displaced, and the violence continues.

The second option was to withdraw from a
country where we have yet to make a significant
difference. I know that it is difficult. Therefore, I
advanced a third approach to try something different:
simultaneous political and security action.

The Transitional Federal Government, the
Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS) and
civil society organizations agreed, at the invitation of
the United Nations, to attend the Djibouti talks, which
were designed to bring Somalis together to end almost
two decades of violence. On 9 June 2008, the
internationally recognized Transitional Federal
Government and the ARS, which was considered
extremist while in power in Mogadishu in 2006, signed
the Djibouti agreement. Members of both groups are
now here in this Chamber as representatives of a future
stable Somalia. The Djibouti agreement was witnessed
by a number of observer States and international
08-43530
organizations, including France, the United Kingdom,
the United States, the African Union, the League of
Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the European Union, as well as by the
host countries and representatives of Governments
accredited to Somalia.

The working visit of the Security Council to
Djibouti at the opening of the discussions was one of
the most important contributions to the successful
conclusion of the Djibouti agreement. The Council
delegation, led by the Permanent Representatives of
the United Kingdom and South Africa, made a decisive
impact on the negotiations and on participants and
observers during the two-day-long exchange with
Somali representatives. I am grateful to the Security
Council, and so are the Somalis. Everyone called on
them to come up with a peace agreement, and the
Somalis successfully delivered on that. They deserve
the full support of the international community.

In all peace processes, some individuals or
groups always begin by rejecting agreements. Effective
implementation of the agreement should be an
incentive to bring more Somalis on board and to give
them a chance to contribute to the rebirth of their
country. In that context, I would like to propose that
the Council make a strong public expression of its
support for the Djibouti agreement and call on Member
States to give it a chance to be implemented rapidly.
For their part, the Somalis have started working
together, and today the ball is in the court of the
international community. We need to act quickly.

The agreement will not bring peace overnight -
no agreement has ever done so - especially if spoilers
and freelance mediators, as I stated to the Council in
my presentation last December, continue meddling. For
a long time, violence has been pervasive in Somalia,
and it will continue for a while. However, the
agreement provides an opportunity to marginalize and
eventually stop such violence. At the same time, a
review of those on the Security Council sanctions list
should help to recognize the role of those individuals
who have decided to change their behaviour and to
support peace.

Our priority should be to stay the course and
follow through on the implementation of the Djibouti
agreement. Such a development should provide security
for humanitarian programmes - in particular, naval
escorts for the World Food Programme, which brings
08-43530

80 per cent of its food aid to Somalia by sea.
Unfortunately, those vital escorts - initiated by France
and then conducted by Denmark and the Netherlands -
have recently ceased. I sympathize with the Somali
nationals who constitute more than 95 per cent of aid
workers in south and central Somalia. They risk their
lives daily and have, all too often, been the innocent
victims of targeted killings. With international
determination, as shown in Kosovo and elsewhere, the
individuals carrying out these terrible deeds should not
be given a chance to prevail.

The international community must unite and
show solidarity with the Somali people. It would be a
terrible mistake to allow certain individuals to gamble
with the future of Somalia and the entire Horn of
Africa. Violence can easily spread across international
borders. The continued neglect of Somalia poses a
threat to international peace.

Today, our choices for bringing peace to Somalia
are limited, but the time has come to make a final
decision. The African Union Mission in Somalia has
been doing an excellent job under extremely difficult
conditions. The Council could consider re-hatting that
force if that could provide the needed capabilities.
Another option would be an international stabilization
force, as indicated in the Secretary-General's letter of
20 September 2007 to the President of the Security
Council (S/2007/762), who at that time was the
representative of France. A third credible possibility for
the Security Council would be the establishment of a
United Nations peacekeeping force. Given that the
Somalis have suffered for so long, and given the current
favourable political context following the Djibouti
agreement, it seems to me that it is time for the Security
Council to take bold, decisive and fast action.

