Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would first of all like to thank you,
Mr. President, for arranging this timely open meeting so
that the Security Council can discuss the situation in
Burundi and hear the views of the membership at large.

We would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Fall for his comprehensive briefing.
The recent situation in Burundi is disturbing. Conflicts
continue; the Arusha peace negotiations have reached a
stalemate; the untimely death of the Facilitator,
Mr. Nyerere, further complicated the situation; and poverty
and lack of security have resulted in a huge outflow of
refugees, making the humanitarian situation all the graver.

The murder of United Nations staff members has
resulted in a curtailment of United Nations activities in
Burundi. We condemn the killing of the innocent.

We would welcome measures taken by the
Government of Burundi to ensure the safety and protection
of international relief agency personnel. There is
widespread concern that the tragic 1994 Rwanda massacre
will recur.

The Chinese delegation believes that even though the
situation in Burundi has not reached crisis level, the
international community, the United Nations and the
Security Council should learn from the lessons of the past
and should give the situation its full attention before it
deteriorates to the point of no return.

Timely measures should be taken to promote the peace
process, and we are pleased to note that the United Nations,
in cooperation with the parties concerned, is actively
pursuing diplomatic efforts to save the deadlocked peace
process.

The Chinese delegation supports the effort to restart
the Arusha peace process and to promote the peace process
in Burundi. We appreciate the contribution made by
countries to this end. Furthermore, we hope that a new
mediator acceptable to all States will be found quickly
and will continue to lead the Arusha peace process.

We would also like to emphasize that a negotiated
political settlement is the only way to restore peace and
reconciliation. Any military action can only waste the
results achieved in the peace process and bring more
suffering for the Burundi people.

The Arusha peace negotiations are at a critical
juncture. The various parties in Burundi should cease
hostilities and return to the negotiating table so that an
agreement can be reached at an early date in a spirit of
reconciliation.

Poverty is the most fundamental cause of unrest. The
unstable political situation in Burundi is directly linked to
the severe economic situation. We call on the
international community and donor countries to provide
more generous economic assistance. President Buyoya
plans to visit China soon, at which time the two countries
will exchange opinions on international questions of
common concern and bilateral relations. As always, China
will, within its means, provide support to the peace
process in Burundi.

We need to point out that peace and stability in
Burundi depend on the peace and stability of the Great
Lakes region. The region has always been plagued with
disaster and ethnic genocide. Armed groups cross borders,
and illegal weapons abound. The unrest and conflict
among countries are intertwined and interactive.
Therefore, the international community must commit itself
to settling the unrest in the Great Lakes region as a
whole. Only in this way can the safety and stability of
every country in the region be guaranteed.

In conclusion, I should like to express our
appreciation to the countries that have supported and
assisted the peace process in Burundi. In particular, we
wish to pay tribute to the late Mr. Nyerere, and we hope
that Burundi will achieve peace and reconciliation so that
he may rest in peace.

The President I thank the representative of China
for the kind words he addressed to me.

