Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): I congratulate
the delegation of Poland on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May and
for organizing this timely open debate on upholding
international law within the context of the maintenance
ofinternational peace and security.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Let me be clear. The law in itself does not protect. It
is only effective implementation of the law and respect
for it that protect. We want to stress that in order to
uphold international law, the international community
must be governed by a system in which all players
are accountable to laws that are equally enforced and
independently adjudicated. Without that, the fabric
of international law will lack credibility. We should
not selectively condone breaches of international law,
including non-compliance with Council resolutions,
because of the political reluctance of a few. In our
consideration of the upholding of international law, we
must start with the resolutions of the Council, which
are at times ignored or deliberately breached. The
Council should ensure that there is accountability for
its decisions, or they will be rendered worthless.

Respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law is an essential component of the rule
oflaw, particularly in conflict situations, and it plays a
crucial role in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Security Council resolutions on specific
country situations, as well as on thematic issues,
have reiterated that link on numerous occasions. The
Council should continue promoting compliance with
the principles and rules of international humanitarian
law by parties to armed conflicts.

The United Nations could play at least two important
roles with regard to the implementation of international
humanitarian law. First, during times of peace, it is
important for the United Nations to assist Member
States, at their request, with the dissemination and
effective domestication of international humanitarian
law instruments. Secondly, the United Nations should
continue to play a vital role in monitoring adherence
to and prosecution of international humanitarian
law violations during times of armed conflict. It is
important to note that a proactive approach, involving
dissemination and education, should be the primary
focus, rather than a reactive one in which action is
taken only following grave breaches of international
humanitarian law. The way forward also lies in States
adopting, ratifying and codifying in national laws
the various conventions and protocols on the law of
armed conflict, and assuring their implementation on
the ground. Just as national Governments have the
primary responsibility for ensuring the safety and
protection of their civilians, national courts also have
a clear obligation to bring to justice those accused of
grave breaches of international humanitarian law and
national laws based on it.

The fight against impunity, and efforts to ensure
accountability for genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and other egregious crimes, have been
strengthened through work on those crimes and their
prosecution in the international criminal justice system,
in ad hoc and mixed tribunals as well as specialized
chambers in national tribunals. The Council is also
increasingly recognizing the contribution that national
justice systems are making to combating impunity for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. The importance of strengthening
national accountability mechanisms, with full respect
for due process and the rights of the defence, including
building investigative, prosecutorial and witness-
protection capacities in post-conflict countries, should
be recognized and nurtured.

The evolution of global threats to international
peace and security has seen significant innovation in
the design and imposition of United Nations sanctions.
The rational for sanctions has expanded to include the
protection of civilians and the prevention of human
rights atrocities, by thwarting the development of
unconventional arms and their delivery systems and
the financing of conflict through the exploitation
of natural resources and criminal activities. As the
focus of United Nations sanctions has narrowed to
target specific goods and services, as well as specific
individuals and entities, we should ensure that those
sanctions are reconciled with the rule oflaw, especially
with regard to due process and human rights.

The vital link between the promotion of justice
and the attainment of a peaceful world is inherent
in the building blocks of the United Nations. The
establishment of the International Court of Justice as
a principal organ of the United Nations reflects the
recognition of that link. We continue to encourage the
Council to make better use of the International Court
of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, by making requests for advisory opinions
when confronted with complex legal questions. It would
confirm that notwithstanding the primary role of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council operates within the
framework of international law in all its actions. The
Security Council can play a role in the promotion of the
rule of law by regularly requesting advisory opinions
from the International Court of Justice.

We are pleased that the General Assembly has
been ready to use that prerogative to request advisory
opinions, and we encourage the Council to follow suit
when faced with questions of legal complexity. The
Security Council has an important role to play in the
enforcement of decisions of the Court in accordance
with Article 94 of the Charter. We believe that
responsibility applies equally, though differently, where
the implementation of advisory opinions is concerned.
Although advisory opinions of the International Court
of Justice are not binding, they are not without legal
consequence, and failure to comply with them indicates
a violation of whatever rule or law that the Court may
have deemed to be at issue.

Lastly, my delegation would like to reaffirm the
importance of partnership and cooperation between the
Council and regional and subregional organizations, in
accordance with Chapter VIII, in supporting conflict
prevention and peacebuilding activities, as well as
forging greater regional and national ownership.

