Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to first thank Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive
briefing.

I should like to reiterate Lebanon's insistence on
the full implementation of the provisions of resolution
1701 (2006). I would also like to pay tribute to the
commendable efforts of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon.

I would also like to emphasize to the Security
Council that Lebanon continues to adhere to its
principled position in defence of Syria's unity and
sovereignty, as well as the right of the Syrian people
to live in dignity and freedom and enjoy safety and
security.
Allow me now to turn to the main topic on our
meeting today, namely, the Arab-Israeli conflict and its
repercussions.

The Council may be aware that, the day before
yesterday, Israeli Defence Minister Ehud Barak
approved a decision to demolish eight villages south of
Hebron, in the occupied West Bank. Those are villages,
in which Palestinian Arabs have lived for more than
200 years, include Majaz, Tabban, Safti, Fakheit,
Halaweh, Mirkez, Jinba and Kharuba. The decision
will result in the expulsion of more than 1,500 people,
on the pretext that the Israeli army needs the land for
military exercises. This is a step aimed at appropriating
more Palestinian territory and establishing another
buffer zone in the southern West Bank, along the Blue
Line. Ultimately, this will serve to displace people and
destroy their property.

As a country that upholds the Charter of the United
Nations, we are duty-bound to recall that the Security
Council must play its full role in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Does the Council intend
to take any steps to put an end to such Israeli actions?
What are those steps? Or will the Council remain
paralysed, its will held hostage in the face of ongoing
Israeli violations of the provisions of international law
and its total disregard for the resolutions of the Council
and the General Assembly?

The Council may well be aware that the committee
established by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu, and led by retired Supreme Court Justice
Edmund Levy, to consider the legal status of Israeli
outposts in the West Bank and find a way to legalize
them concluded in its report issued earlier this
month that Israel was "not an occupying State from
the perspective of international law" and that "all
settlement activities are legitimate, in particular those
described as 'illegitimate"'. The Levy committee
recommended that settlers be given property rights and
that a parallel Israeli land cadastre be established for
them. It also called for the revocation of the Jordanian
land law, which is valid in the West Bank, as well as for
the revocation of the Israeli Supreme Court decision of
1979, so as to facilitate the building of settlements and
the exercise by Jews of settlers' rights all over Judea
and Samaria.

A comment in the Levy committee report made by
Michael Sfard, a lawyer and legal adviser to the Israeli
human rights organization Yesh Din, expressed the
eloquent view that,

(spoke in English)
"The Levy committee was conceived in sin
to legalize a crime, and it has fully accomplished
its mission. Its report is not a legal report but an
ideological report that ignores the basic principles
of the rule of law. The members of the Levy
committee apparently fell down the rabbit hole, and
their report was written in Wonderland, governed
by the rules of absurdity: there is no occupation,
there are no illegal outposts and there is apparently
no Palestinian people either. To that we must say in
the words of Alice: 'This is the silliest tea party I

9"

have ever been to .

In the same context, Aeyal Gross wrote, on 10 July,
in an editorial on the report of the Levy committee in
Haaretz:

"What would you call an occupation where the
occupying State moves its citizens in as inhabitants
while exploiting ground, water and other natural
resources? And what would you call a regime
where two populations live under different law,
applied according to their nationality? If any good
could come out of the Levy committee, it is the
unveiling of the hypocrisy that under the perception
of occupation lies a regime which better resembles
a combination of colonialism and apartheid."

(spoke in Arabic)

Faced with the gravity of the recommendations
and the discussions of the Levy committee, allow me
to ask, once again, are there any steps that members
intend to take in the Council to recall the provisions
of international law and the resolutions of the Council
and the General Assembly on the illegitimacy of settler
activities, or will the Council remain paralysed with its
will held hostage?

We have frequently recalled before the Council that
article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War states
that "The occupying Power shall not deport or transfer
parts of its own civilian population into the territory it
occupies."

We have also recalled repeatedly that the Security
Council, in paragraph 1 of resolution 446 (1979),
adopted more than 30 years ago, after recalling the fact
that the Fourth Geneva Convention applied to Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, determined
that

"the policy and practices of Israel in establishing

settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967 have no legal
validity and constitute a serious obstruction to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East."

Do I really need to recall that the International
Court of Justice decided in its advisory opinion on the
Legal consequences ofthe construction ofa wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory that

"The Court concludes that the Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory (including East Jerusalem) have been established in breach of
international law". (A/ES-10/273, advisory opinion, para. 120)

The legal provisions on settlements are very clear,
as they are with regard to the ongoing Israeli practices
since 1967, which themselves are in defiance of those
same provisions. The number of settlers exceeds half a
million. The more than 120 settlements, to say nothing
of the outposts, the bypass roads and the camps, have
devoured approximately 42 per cent of the territory of
the West Bank. Our question remains: how long will
the Council continue to be paralysed, its will held
hostage, failing in the face of Israeli settlement activity
to shoulder its responsibilities under Article XXIV of
the Charter of the Nations?

