Mr. Otunnu: It is very good to see you,
Mr. President, back at the United Nations and at the
Security Council. Your previous engagement and
leadership in this arena left a mark that precedes you
on this occasion.

We are very grateful for the leadership that
France has been providing in the Council on the agenda
for the protection of children affected by armed
conflict. We recall that, but for the terrorist attacks of
September 2001, the Security Council would have held
a special summit that month devoted to this issue, on
the initiative and under the leadership of President
Jacques Chirac. We also recall that France played a key
role in drafting resolution 1379 (2001), which, in part,
created the basis for the list under discussion today.

Since the Security Council formally affirmed that
the protection and well-being of children exposed to
conflict constitute a fundamental peace and security
concern that belongs on its agenda, the progressive
engagement of the Council has yielded significant
gains for children. Those include the three resolutions
devoted to this issue - resolutions 1261 (1999), 1314
(2000) and 1379 (2001) - an annual review and
debate of the issue; the incorporation of child
protection into peacekeeping mandates and training;
the inclusion of children's concerns in country-specific
reports; the creation of the role and deployment of
child protection advisers in peacekeeping operations;
the inclusion of children's concerns in peace
negotiations and accords; the direct participation of
children in the deliberations of the Security Council;
increasing focus on children in post-conflict
programmes in situations such as Kosovo, Sierra Leone
and Afghanistan; and regular engagement with non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) in the context of
Arria formula consultations. I congratulate the Security
Council on those major achievements.

Parallel to those important developments in the
Council, tremendous progress has been made over the
last few years to strengthen and codify international
norms and standards for protecting children exposed to
war. As the Secretary-General has just indicated, key
international instruments that have entered into force
over this period include the Optional Protocol, the
Rome Statute, Convention No. 182 of the International
Labour Organization (ILO) and the African Charter on
the Rights and Welfare of the Child.

We now have in place a very impressive body of
norms and standards. We have in place a
comprehensive set of principles and measures set out in
the three Security Council resolutions to which I have
referred. A lot of progress has been achieved outside
the framework of the United Nations, particularly
through the advocacy and activities of NGOs, civil
society organizations and regional organizations. There
has also been a significant increase in public and
official awareness of children exposed to war.

We have now reached a critical juncture in the
development of this agenda. With these gains in place,
what should be the next steps in the development of
this agenda? The most pressing challenge facing us
collectively is how to translate the principles, standards
and measures that have been put in place into facts on
the ground - into a protective regime that can save
children in danger. For this, as the Secretary-General
has called for, it is imperative to embark on an era of
application; the Security Council is well placed to lead
the way by its example and its action. As we embark on
such an era of application, two issues above all will test
our collective resolve to make a real difference on the
ground.

First, we need to ensure systematic monitoring
and reporting on the conduct of parties to conflict. This
is not a proposal for some general and dispersed
exercise. It is a project focusing on compliance with a
set of agreed and very specific obligations and
commitments concerning the protection of children,
most of which are laid out in equally specific
instruments and commitments.

Secondly, information received through such
monitoring and reporting must serve as a trigger for
action, a trigger for the application of concerted
pressure and targeted measures against violators. When
information is received about grave violations against
children and no action is taken, it betrays the trust of
the children.

There are other measures which are critical to
translating the concept of an era of application into a
meaningful reality. We need to redouble our efforts to
ensure that the concerns of children are included in all
peace negotiations and peace accords; that the
rehabilitation of children becomes a central component
of any post-conflict programme; that there is full
integration of child protection in all aspects of
peacekeeping mandates, training and activities; that the
deployment of child protection advisers becomes a
general practice in all peace operations; that, with the
establishment of the International Criminal Court, we
work to ensure that individuals responsible for war
crimes against children will be among the first to be
prosecuted in that Court; and that all reports to the
Security Council on country-specific situations include
the protection of children as a specific aspect of the
reports. In most of those areas, the Security Council
has a key role to play.

In resolution 1379 (2001) the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to provide a list of
parties that use or recruit children in situations of
conflict of which the Council is seized. The list
annexed to the present report of the Secretary-General
(S/2002/ 1299) breaks new ground: for the first time, an
official report has specifically named and listed those
responsible for brutalizing children in situations of
conflict. The list signals a move towards the era of
application. It puts on notice parties to conflict that
exploit and brutalize children that the international
community is watching and will hold them accountable
for their action. In this respect, therefore, the list
represents the thin end of the wedge, leading to
systematic monitoring and reporting on the conduct of
parties to conflict.

The present report and the list are confined to
situations that are on the agenda of the Security
Council. There are other situations of equal concern,
which have been discussed and included in the main
body of the Secretary-General's report. There are other
conflict situations where the use of child soldiers by
certain parties to conflict is widespread. They include
Colombia, Myanmar, Nepal, the Philippines, the
Sudan, Uganda and Sri Lanka. The list provides an
important opportunity for the Security Council to
respond by sending the clearest message of its
determination to embark on an era of application by
holding parties responsible for their actions.

In that connection, I recommend the following
measures for the Council's consideration: a call on the
parties on the list to immediately end recruiting and
using child soldiers and to provide full information on
measures they have taken to this effect; consider taking
targeted measures against parties where substantial
progress is not found to have been made - such
measures should include imposition of travel
restrictions on leaders and their exclusion from any
governance structures and amnesty provisions, a ban on
the export or supply of arms to those groups, and
restriction on the flow of financial resources to the
parties concerned; and a comprehensive list in the next
report of the Secretary-General to include all parties
involved in armed conflict which continue to recruit
and use child soldiers.

For practical reasons, the present list is limited to
the phenomenon of child soldiering. That is only one
aspect of the impact of war on children; there are many
other equally grave dimensions of the impact of
conflict on children. All child victims of war deserve
the attention and protection of the international
community.

Developments unfolding in the occupied
Palestinian territories and Israel are a matter of great
pain and preoccupation. They have grave impact on
children. As the Secretary-General's report indicates,
his Personal Envoy reported last August that stricter
closures, curfews, roadblocks and checkpoints have
created humanitarian problems including frequent
school closures in the West Bank and Gaza and a drop
in immunization levels among Palestinian children. In
this context, I call on the Israeli authorities to abide
fully by their international human rights and
humanitarian legal obligations concerning the
protection, the rights and the well-being of Palestinian
children.

The use of suicide bombing is entirely
unacceptable. Nothing can justify it. We have
witnessed child victims at both ends of these acts:
children have been used as suicide bombers, and
children have been killed by suicide bombings. I call
on the Palestinian authorities to do everything within
their power to stop all participation by children in this
conflict.

I am deeply concerned about the tragic turn of
events in Cote d'Ivoire, a country which for so long
exemplified peace, prosperity and solidarity in Africa.
This has been broken by the drums of war, which are
now beginning to reach the children. No efforts should
be spared to preserve unity and peace in that country,
to ensure the protection of children and to prevent their
engagement in the conflict.

Much has been put in place by the Security
Council. Now everything must be done to translate
those principles, norms and measures into a protective
reality for millions of children who are exposed to war.
I am eager to work closely with the Council to fulfil its
promise to those children.

