The President: The Security Council will now resume
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

(spoke in French)

"The Security Council has considered the matter
of protection of civilians in armed conflict.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the growing civilian toll of armed conflict
and notes with distress that civilians now account for
the vast majority of casualties in armed conflict and
are increasingly directly targeted by combatants and
armed elements. The Council condemns attacks or acts
of violence in situations of armed conflict directed
against civilians, especially women, children and other
vulnerable groups, including also refugees and
internally displaced persons, in violation of the
relevant rules of international law, including those of
international humanitarian and human rights law.

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council is especially concerned
about attacks on humanitarian workers, in violation of
the rules of international law.

"The Security Council notes that large-scale
human suffering is a consequence and sometimes a
contributing factor to instability and further conflict,
whether due to displacement, violent assault or other
atrocities. Bearing in mind its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Council affirms the need for the
international community to assist and protect civilian
populations affected by armed conflict. The Council
calls upon all parties concerned to ensure the safety of
civilians and guarantee the unimpeded and safe access
of United Nations and other humanitarian personnel to
those in need. In this regard, the Council recalls the

statement of its President of 19 June 1997
(S/PRST/l997/34) and also recalls its resolution
1208 (1998) of 19 November 1998 on the status and
treatment of refugees.

"The Security Council expresses particular
concern at the harmful impact of armed conflict on
children and, in this regard, recalls the statement of
its President of 29 June 1998 (S/PRST/l998/18).

"The Security Council calls upon all parties
concerned to comply strictly with their obligations
under international law, in particular their relevant
obligations under the Hague Conventions, the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols of 1977, and the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989, as
well as with all decisions of the Security Council.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
deliberate targeting by combatants of civilians in
armed conflict and demands that all concerned put
an end to such violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. The Council
expresses its willingness to respond, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, to situations
in which civilians, as such, have been targeted or
humanitarian assistance to civilians has been
deliberately obstructed.

"The Security Council also condemns all
attempts to incite violence against civilians in
situations of armed conflict and calls upon States to
fulfil their obligations to take action at the national
level. The Council affirms the need to bring to
justice, in an appropriate manner, individuals who
incite or cause violence against civilians in situations
of armed conflict or who otherwise violate
international humanitarian and human rights law. In
this regard, the Council reaffirms the importance of
the work being done by the ad hoc Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda and calls upon all
States to cooperate with the Tribunals, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
Council acknowledges the historic significance of
the adoption of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.

"The Security Council notes the deleterious
impact of the proliferation of arms, in particular
small arms, on the security of civilians, including
refugees and other vulnerable populations. In this

 

regard, it recalls its resolution 1209 (1998) of 19
November 1998 which, inter alia, stressed the
importance of all Member States, and in particular
States involved in manufacturing and marketing of
weapons, restricting arms transfers which could
provoke or prolong armed conflicts or aggravate
existing tensions or armed conflicts in Africa, and
which urged international collaboration in combating
illegal arms flows in Africa.

"The Security Council expresses concern over the
widening gap between the rules of international
humanitarian law and their application. The Council
welcomes the commemorative events planned to mark
the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions and
the centenary of the First International Peace
Conference of The Hague. These occasions provide an
opportunity for a further exploration of ways and
means by which the international community may
enhance the compliance of parties to an armed conflict
with the relevant rules of international law, including
those of international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council welcomes the continuing
contribution to the implementation of international
humanitarian law of the International Committee of
the Red Cross.

"The Security Council considers that a
comprehensive and coordinated approach by Member
States and international organizations and agencies is
required in order to address the problem of the
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflicts.
To this end, the Council requests the Secretary-
General to submit a report containing concrete
recommendations to the Council by September 1999
on ways the Council, acting within its sphere of
responsibility, could improve the physical and legal
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict.
The report should also identify contributions the
Council could make towards effective
implementation of existing humanitarian law. The
report should examine whether there are any
significant gaps in existing legal norms, through the
review of recent reports in this regard. The Council
encourages the Secretary-General to consult the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee in formulating his
recommendations.

"The Security Council affirms its intention to
review the recommendations of the Secretary-
General in accordance with its responsibilities under
the Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1999/6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I might also add my personal thanks to all members
of the Council for their commitment to this briefing, for
their attention and for the eloquent statements that they
have all made. We look forward to the report.

The meeting rose at 2.15 pm.
