Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
should like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Eamon
Gilmore, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of Ireland
and Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and to
thank him for his statement.

Azerbaijan supports the OSCE concept of
comprehensive, cooperative and indivisible security,
and considers the organization to be the most
appropriate and unique framework for discussions on
European security under Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. We believe that, as a regional
arrangement, the OSCE has the potential to play a
more consistent role in encouraging participating
States to comply with their obligations under the
United Nations Charter and the OSCE Helsinki Final
Act of 1975, as well as to implement the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly. As an OSCE participating State and elected
member of the Security Council, Azerbaijan stands
ready to contribute to these efforts.
The OSCE provides an ongoing forum for
discussion towards a settlement of the conflict between
Armenia and Azerbaijan, which sometimes is
mistakenly referred to as the dispute over Nagorno
Karabakh or even the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh.
The correct use of terminology is important to
addressing the root causes of the problem, especially in
situations involving flagrant violations of international
law. It is well known that the conflict is being dealt
with by the OSCE Minsk Group; as noted in
resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993), 884
(1993) adopted by the Security Council in 1993 in
response to the illegal use of force against Azerbaijan
and the occupation of its territories, as well as General
Assembly resolution 62/243 on the situation in the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan, adopted on
14 March 2008.

Although the mediation efforts conducted for
over 20 years have not always been consistent and
have yet to yield results, Azerbaijan continues to be
committed to the negotiated settlement of the conflict.
We proceed from the understanding that at the core of
the ongoing political process is the settlement formula
based on putting an end to the illegal occupation of our
territories, the restoration of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, the return of forcibly
displaced persons to their homes, and ensuring the
peaceful coexistence of Azerbaijanis and Armenians in
the Nagorno Karabakh region within Azerbaijan.

At the same time, the lack of agreement on
political issues cannot be used as a pretext for
contempt and disregard for international law, in
particular international humanitarian and human rights
law. Thus, continued illegal activities in the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan, in particular those aimed at
changing their demographic, social and cultural
character, definitely serve to further consolidation of
the status quo of the occupation.

In 2005 and 2010, at our initiative in the United
Nations, OSCE-led fact-finding missions visited the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan. Both missions
documented the facts of illegal activities in those
territories involving, inter alia, the implantation of
settlers, the extensive redrawing of boundaries, the
changing of place names and the discriminatory
treatment with respect to cultural property and sacred
sites. However, we are seriously concerned that the
recommendations of those missions remained on paper
and that nothing is being done to translate them into
deeds. Azerbaijan hopes that the OSCE Chairperson-in-
Office will insist on the need to immediately and
unconditionally cease all actions that cause serious
obstruction to the perspectives of a negotiated and
international-law-based settlement of the conflict.

It is essential to strengthen OSCE capabilities in
all areas of conflict prevention, crisis management and
peacekeeping. We expect that the OSCE chairmanship
will continue working on all elements of the conflict
cycle, keeping in mind the OSCE documents
incorporating and reaffirming the relevant approach in
this regard. We believe that increasing attention to
mediation-related topics within the United Nations,
including in particular the recent adoption by the
General Assembly of resolution 65/283 on
strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as the development of guidance for
more effective mediation, may serve as a useful basis
for deliberations in the OSCE in the coming months.

We expect that the OSCE will vigorously develop
peacekeeping capacities in order to be adequately
prepared to implement its role as a regional
arrangement under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations and in accordance with chapter III of
the OSCE Helsinki Document of 1992.

Azerbaijan also believes that the development of
the police component of OSCE peacekeeping
operations will contribute to efforts in maintaining
regional peace and security. We consider it vital to
further strengthen the cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations and the OSCE in these
areas.

One of the OSCE's major contributions to peace
and security under the politico-military dimension is
mainly delivered through arms control and confidence-
and security-building regimes. The work on updating
and tailoring these regimes to the current security
environment should take into account the legitimate
security needs of participating States, especially those
non-members of military alliances with conflict-
affected territories, and the consequences of conflict,
including military intervention and illegal deployment.

The OSCE acknowledges the leading role of the
United Nations in combating international terrorism
and organized crime. In this context, better interaction
between the two organizations - including, inter alia,
by equipping the OSCE with the principles of

12-2284]
cooperation and approaches elaborated within the
United Nations in that area - would undoubtedly
serve the greater unity of purpose and action in
addressing transnational threats.

Azerbaijan attaches great importance to
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE
in the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Promoting tolerance and non-discrimination,
countering racism, encouraging dialogue among
cultures and civilizations, and addressing the
fundamental rights of displaced persons, including
their right to return, represent examples of areas in
which the international community can benefit from
close relations between the two organizations.

In conclusion, I would like to touch upon a
particular aspect of environmental security that gives
rise to the need for more coordinated efforts between
the United Nations and the OSCE. Ageing nuclear
power plants located in the OSCE area may pose
serious risks to the security of States and their
population. Therefore, the ongoing policy debate on
stricter nuclear safety standards and the timely
decommissioning of old-generation reactors represent
an essential component of the targeted agenda on good
governance and transparency in the field of security.
We believe that the OSCE, along with other specialized
institutions, including those within the United Nations
system, based on its comprehensive and cooperative
approach to security, might provide a complementary
forum to explore ways to address this challenge.

