Mr. Nl'lfiez-Mosquera (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on presiding
over the Security Council for the month of May. I would
also like to congratulate your predecessor in this post, the
Ambassador of Portugal, on the manner in which he led the
work of the Council in the month of April.

We would have preferred this debate to have taken
place in the General Assembly, a democratic organ with
transparent working methods where all Member States of
the United Nations are represented on an equal footing. The
kind of humanitarian assistance the United Nations can
provide is much more closely related to the work of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
than to that of the Security Council.

The Security Council, as stipulated in the Charter of
this Organization, is the organ entrusted with maintaining
international peace and security. Its actions should be
confined to international conflicts that may endanger peace
and security between nations; it is not empowered to deal
with questions related to humanitarian assistance.

However, as it happens, the Security Council has taken
it upon itself to make decisions on humanitarian assistance
with unwonted vigour. The Security Council has granted
itself the right to determine when, why and how
humanitarian assistance should be offered, through
decisions and actions designed and inspired by the interests
of certain of its permanent members.

With increasing frequency the Security Council issues
pronouncements creating mandates that commingle
peacekeeping activities with humanitarian actions, or even
with activities that fall within the sphere of economic
development.

It is truly a matter of concern to witness, in the guise
of humanitarian assistance, the use of military force and
attempts to justify real armed interventions, which,
understandably, are rejected by the peoples of the
countries concerned. Hunger, poverty and disease cannot
be eradicated by using soldiers and weapons.
Humanitarian assistance, therefore, cannot be linked with
the use of force.

Internal conflicts are essentially different from those
that the Security Council, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, is competent to act upon. For this
reason, the usual procedures governing United Nations
actions in international conflicts cannot mechanically be
applied to these cases.
At the heart of many conflicts lies an appalling
economic situation and many centuries of exploitation and
pillaging of the natural resources of other countries. Such
conflicts cannot be resolved without also resolving their
root causes. Moreover, one cannot ignore the existence of
other organs of the United Nations whose reason for
being is to provide humanitarian assistance, such as the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, various specialized agencies and the Economic
and Social Council itself in its role as the coordinating
body.

The fact that in recent times we have seen a
tendency to confuse humanitarian assistance with
humanitarian assistance operations has detracted from the
value of the former. To put humanitarian assistance in the
hands of the Security Council by definition gives that
form of assistance a coercive and military character,
which does nothing to contribute to the truly effective
utilization of this assistance by the peoples affected. This
could even give rise to conflict situations, which are
counter-productive with regard to this type of activity.

In its resolution 46/182, adopted by consensus on 19
December 1991, the General Assembly established the
principles governing the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance in the United Nations system.
This task must be discharged by all the Members of the
United Nations, not just a few. These principles include,
notably, respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and
the national unity of States, as well as the consent that is
required from affected countries.

The manner in which humanitarian assistance is
being handled, in disregard of established principles and
of the Charter of the United Nations itself, gives rise to
a great many questions, from the increasing politicization
and militarization of humanitarian assistance to the

 

frequent predominance of political objectives over
humanitarian aspects. This shift in the meaning of
humanitarian assistance is tending, gradually and
increasingly, to undermine the sovereignty of States and to
impose conditions on assistance for development.

For this reason, there must be a clear conceptual and
practical differentiation between peacekeeping operations
and what are known as humanitarian assistance operations.
It is the responsibility of the Security Council to take action
in situations that endanger international peace and security
and to take various measures provided for in the Charter,
but it is not the Council's responsibility to devise or take
part in a humanitarian assistance operation.
I should like at this point to comment on the so-called
complex emergencies and on what is known as the
integrated approach. To try to link these concepts in order
to justify the Security Council's playing a role that it should
not play in this field would lead to flagrant violations of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the principles
contained in General Assembly resolution 46/ 182. In
addition, this would bring about a militarization of
humanitarian assistance, with all the harmful effects that
would entail. So-called complex emergencies must be the
responsibility of the entire United Nations system, and in
particular of the organs that deal with assistance in disaster
situations or others of a similar nature. They are not the
responsibility of the Security Council. Any exceptions that
may arise must be considered on a case-by-case basis and
cannot become rules for the establishment of principles.

Cuba acknowledges the importance of the promotion
of respect for internationally recognized humanitarian
principles, and we reiterate once again our unswerving
support and ongoing readiness to provide the necessary
assistance to peoples in a state of crisis or emergency.

As was stated in the Final Declaration of the
Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement held
recently in New Delhi, it is essential to draw a distinction
between humanitarian action, United Nations peacekeeping
operations and operational activities for development. For
the sake of independence, neutrality and impartiality in
humanitarian actions, such actions must be kept separate
and independent from political or military action, in
accordance with their respective mandates.

