Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
welcomes Ambassador Muburi-Muita to the Security
Council. We thank him for his briefing on the work of
the United Nations Office to the African Union. As this
is the first time that he briefs the Council in his
capacity as Head of the United Nations Office to the
African Union (UNOAU), we wish to take this
opportunity to congratulate him on his maiden briefing
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

South Africa views the integrated and enhanced
presence of the United Nations at the African Union
(AU) as a further manifestation and testament to the
increased partnership between the two organizations in
the areas of conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard, the presence of
UNOAU should, in accordance with its mandate,
contribute significantly to the effective implementation
of the Ten-Year Capacity Building Programme. In
addition, the presence of the United Nations Office
must further enhance the capacity of the AU in its
support and management of peace operations,
including the Peace and Security Architecture.

We call on the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to bolster
support for concerted efforts to fully operationalize the
African Peace and Security Architecture, including the
development of a continental early-warning system, the
African Standby Force and an enhanced mediation
capacity, including through the Panel of the Wise.

It is important that the United Nations be
represented at an appropriate level, taking into account
the increasing level of integration of the African
Union. This is also important in view of the mandate of
UNOAU in enhancing the strategic and operational
partnership between the two institutions and the
subregions.

We welcome the notable efforts under way to
forge closer cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union, specifically in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. The
United Nations retains the primary role in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
therefore there is an expectation that it must contribute
to the role of regional and subregional organizations,
which has in recent years been shown to be seminal,
especially in the context of the African Union. We are
convinced that the interests of peace will be well
served if the requisite synergy and cooperation exist
between the two organizations at both the strategic and
operational levels.

Moving from this common understanding, we
look forward to a vision that clearly defines this
strategic partnership, a vision that articulates the
expectations of the role of regional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The African Union's proximity to conflicts on the
continent as well as its legitimacy and credibility
makes it an important ally in our collective efforts to
advance peace and security in Africa. We recognize
that a strategic relationship cannot take into account
peacekeeping issues only. A strategic relationship will
include cooperation on a range of considerations that
may include conflict prevention, preventive diplomacy
and political mediation. In that regard, we look forward
to receiving the report of the Secretary-General on his
strategic vision of the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations.

At the institutional and operational level, my
delegation strongly supports the view that the reports
of the Secretariat to the Security Council should
incorporate the decisions and the views of the African
Union and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in particular. That would be in line with
the practice of the African Union Commission, which
incorporates the views of the United Nations Security
Council in their reports to the AU Peace and Security
Council. This, in our view, would be a further
contribution to enhancing synergy and possible
collaboration between the two Councils.

My delegation welcomes the establishment, on
25 September 2010, of the United Nations-AU Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security, which will further
enhance cooperation at the operational level.

Africa's commitment to the establishment of
peace and security on the continent is further
evidenced by its increasing role in peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, the African Union Mission
in Somalia and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur are further indications of
the commitment and political will of the African Union
to bring peace to conflict-affected areas.

The African Union's efforts are severely
hampered by the lack of sustainable, predictable and
flexible financing for AU-supported peacekeeping
operations. It remains important that the United
Nations, at an institutional level, continue its
consideration of this important matter, pursuant to
resolution 1809 (2008). The Secretary-General, in
reference to this important issue, stated that the current
financial framework for partnership in peacekeeping
operations was not conducive to building a sustainable
long-term strategy. In that connection, we reiterate the
call by the African Union for this issue to receive the
continued support of the United Nations.

In conclusion, we view the United Nations Office
to the African Union as strategically placed, first in
assisting both the African Union and the United
Nations in advancing these broad issues I have
outlined, and, secondly, in ensuring that the
complementarity and the comparative advantage of the
African Union is maximized and adequately resourced.

My delegation wishes the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General every success in his current
endeavours and looks forward to a subsequent update
on the progress made by the United Nations Office to
the African Union in facilitating a strategic and
cooperative relationship.

