Mr. Zannier: The report you have before you
today (S/2009/497) details the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 1 June to 15 September 2009. The
period following the conclusion of the Mission's
reconfiguration on 30 June has been one of
consolidation and readjustment for UNMIK, reflecting
the evolving realities on the ground. UNMIK has now
become a more compact and more politically focused
mission within the remit of its mandate under Security
Council 1244 (1999).

As this Council is aware, political realities have
substantially affected the implementation of UNMIK's
administrative role. Consequently, the Mission has
concentrated its efforts on crucial tasks that we are
well suited to perform: addressing the concerns of
minority communities in order to foster confidence;
promoting dialogue in order to foster reconciliation;
and addressing external relations issues with
non-recognizing States, including facilitating Kosovo's
participation in regional and international processes, in
order to foster economic development and regional
cooperation. Our guiding principle is to ensure
Kosovo's lasting security and stability and the security
and stability of the region.

Although conditions remained generally stable
during this period, the situation in northern Kosovo
remains an issue of concern, with the potential to
destabilize other parts of Kosovo if not kept in check.
In this regard, I am pleased to report that UNMIK's
presence and efforts, together with those of the Kosovo
09-55956

Force (KFOR), the European Union Rule of Law
Mission (EULEX) and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), have so far
contributed to preserving a fragile stability. Notably, in
August, when the situation threatened to get out of
hand, UNMIK helped the parties in the northern
Mitrovica suburb of Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani to reach a
compromise on the issue of reconstruction of Kosovo
Albanian houses damaged in the conflict, and
construction of new Kosovo Serb houses. Over the
summer, I visited Mitrovica twice to meet with local
leaders and emphasized that returns should not be
politicized, but should be the result of a balanced and
properly regulated process that does not create new
tensions and resentments.

In spite of a modest increase in the overall
numbers, returns remain far below the level we would
hope to see. We know that displaced families from all
communities wish to reclaim their lost lives and begin
anew, and I believe the United Nations can play an
even more active role in supporting them. I have
therefore tasked our Office of Community Support and
Facilitation to work closely with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and develop contacts with Belgrade in order
to further returns. Pristina authorities insist that they
are committed to a multiethnic Kosovo and I encourage
them to develop incentives for sustainable returns and
address security concerns relating to internally
displaced persons (IDPs). And they can count on
UNMIK's support and assistance.

In that regard, I have met with local authorities
and the Kosovo Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian (RAE)
leadership in Mitrovica on the long pending issue of
the RAE IDP camps located there. To support the plans
of the Kosovo institutions to address the issue, I have
established a Coordination Group, which I am chairing,
composed of UNMIK experts and the United Nations
Kosovo Team, with the participation of the European
Commission Liaison Office. Our aim is to speed up the
closure of the camps and ensure the sustainable
relocation of their residents.

The Kosovo political landscape is currently
dominated by decentralization and the upcoming
municipal elections scheduled for 15 November.
Kosovo Serb views on these two issues range from
outright rejection to engagement. Since the Secretary-
General's report before you was drafted, the Kosovo
authorities have decided that, as part of their
09-55956

decentralization programme, four new municipalities
with Kosovo Serb majorities are to be established
following these municipal elections. These elections
will be the first organized by the Kosovo institutions
since the declaration of independence in February 2008.

While there has been little, if any, support for
decentralization or the 15 November vote among the
Kosovo Serb leaders in the three northern
municipalities, a number of Kosovo Serb community
leaders south of the Ibar River have openly called for
participation in the upcoming elections. Putting status
considerations aside, I personally believe that greater
participation in Kosovo's local structures could benefit
all of Kosovo's communities and foster the
development of multi-ethnic local institutions, leading
to stronger protection of minority rights and
encouraging returns.

In this regard, the return of Kosovo Serbs to their
posts within the Kosovo Police Service has been a
welcome development, reinforcing the multi-ethnicity
of and promoting community confidence in the police.
I am disappointed, however, that efforts to develop
cooperation in other practical areas between Pristina
and Belgrade have been less successful. Kosovo
authorities have distanced themselves from an
agreement on police cooperation between EULEX and
the Serbian Interior Ministry. I therefore urge
pragmatism and compromise so that fully functioning
multi-ethnic courts and customs points in northern
Kosovo can be re-established and life for all of
Kosovo's communities normalized.

In particular, cooperation in the important area of
cultural heritage has been greatly reduced since
Kosovo's declaration of independence. UNMIK stands
ready to play a role with Belgrade, Pristina and the
European Union to help protect and preserve the
cultural heritage of Kosovo and the patrimony of the
Serbian Orthodox Church there.

Similarly, both Belgrade and Pristina need to
work harder so that the technical dialogue working
group on missing persons, chaired by the International
Committee of the Red Cross, can meet the expectations
of the families whose loved ones are still missing. Ten
years after the conflict, the bodily remains of more
than 3,000 individuals have been identified and
returned to their families, but the fate of 1,885 missing
persons is still unknown. People with knowledge of the
facts need to heed the repeated calls to come forward
3
and divulge this information so that families can
achieve closure and Kosovo's communities can
continue the process of reconciliation. In this regard, I
also urge the international community to ensure that
there are sufficient resources available to continue this
important work.

In a broader context, I am pleased that UNMIK's
facilitation has enabled Kosovo's participation in
important international and regional forums and
processes, which would not otherwise have been
possible. Resolution 1244 (1999) requires Kosovo's
representation under the United Nations banner. It is
clear that the Kosovo authorities would prefer to
participate on their own, without UNMIK having to
facilitate their presence. On the other hand, there are
significant benefits accruing to Kosovo by
participation, without prejudice to their stand on status
and in line with our own status-neutral stance.
Accordingly, UNMIK does not attend without the
participation of the representatives of Kosovo's
institutions, nor does it speak on their behalf.

The last time I addressed this Council, I noted
that the Kosovo and Serbian authorities alike were
increasingly concerned as to how their actions might
influence the International Court of Justice's advisory
opinion on the legality of Kosovo's declaration of
independence. Actions by Pristina and Belgrade
continue to be aimed at bolstering their respective legal
positions before the Court. As a consequence, our role,
although aimed at promoting pragmatic solutions to
existing problems, has not been an easy one to play.
For instance, most recently, the Kosovo Ministry of
Justice has announced that it is taking over the
processing of international legal assistance requests
involving non-recognizing countries and institutions, a
task being performed by UNMIK as part of our own
facilitation efforts.

In fact, UNMIK is inextricably caught between
the differing perceptions of Belgrade and Pristina.
While Belgrade expects a robust UNMIK role, the
Pristina authorities believe that UNMIK's job is done,
although I detect some acknowledgement that there are
areas where we can usefully work together, and
UNMIK continues to enjoy cooperation at the working
level with representatives of the Kosovo institutions in
many relevant areas.

Nevertheless, not having been able to obtain the
closure of the Mission, members of the Government in
Pristina have avoided any official contact with me
during the past few months. I am pleased to report,
therefore, that immediately prior to my departure for
New York, I was invited by President Sejdiu for a long
and cordial meeting. I was encouraged by this contact
and hope that it will continue.

Kosovo continues to present both challenges and
opportunities for UNMIK. UNMIK aims to help restore
full normality in Kosovo so that all of its people may
have better lives in a stable and peaceful region. While
that goal is ambitious, I am convinced that, together
with Pristina and Belgrade and our international
partners, as well as with the support of this Council,
UNMIK can meet it.

