Mr. Akasaka (Japan): Let me first of all
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. My delegation would like to express its
appreciation to you for providing us with the
opportunity to present Japan's views on the grave
situation we face in the Middle East.

Japan is deeply concerned that the situation in the
occupied territories has been witnessing the worst
crisis of the current peace process, which started in
1993. We are alarmed by the rising death toll there,
mostly among civilians, including innocent children.
We express our deepest condolences to the bereaved
families, and our heartfelt sympathy to the injured. A
vicious cycle of violence and hatred can do nothing but
bring about more tragedy and decrease opportunities
for a just, lasting and comprehensive peace, which can
be brought about only by negotiations based on mutual
trust.

Japan calls upon all the parties concerned to put
an immediate end to acts of violence, provocation and
retaliation, and to any other actions that could further
aggravate the situation. We urge all the parties to exert
maximum self-restraint.

In this context, Japan urges the Israeli
Government to put an end to the excessive use of force,
entries into the areas under the control of the
Palestinian Authority, and the seizure of Orient House
and other properties belonging to Palestinian
institutions in East Jerusalem. Japan also urges the
Palestinian Authority to exert its utmost efforts to
prevent the recurrence of terrorist attacks, which
cannot be justified for any reason.

Japan would also like to stress that the
recommendations of the Mitchell report should be fully
implemented at the earliest possible time. In this
connection, we would like to recall the G-8 Genoa
Summit statement on the Middle East, issued on 21
July, which states that "third-party monitoring,
accepted by both parties, would serve their interests in
implementing the Mitchell report".

Mr. Seiken Sugiura, Japan's Senior Vice Minister
for Foreign Affairs, conveyed these views of Japan to
the countries of the region during his trip to the Middle
East earlier this month, when he met with political
leaders of Egypt, Israel, the Palestinian Authority,
Jordan, Syria and Lebanon.

As Japan has stated on various occasions, the
serious deterioration of the Palestinian economy is a
matter of grave concern to us. Economic difficulties
have a direct and serious impact on the real life of the
Palestinians and no doubt have a negative effect on the
peace process. Here again, we must avoid the vicious
circle of the deterioration of the economy and the
escalation of hatred and violence. In this context, the
economic closure imposed on the Palestinians must be
lifted and the tax transfer to the Palestinian Authority
must be resumed. My delegation would like to add, in
this regard, that Japan has extended contributions to the
Palestinians amounting to $21 million since the end of
last September, when the current state of violence
broke out.

The crisis can be resolved only through serious
efforts by both parties based on self-restraint and
mutual trust. The international community must stand
by such efforts. I would like to assure you,
Mr. President, that Japan remains ready to extend every
possible support, both political and economic, for the
resolution of the current crisis, in cooperation and
coordination with the international community.

