Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
emergency briefing on the situation in Libya. We also
thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita for
her briefing on such short notice. Our meeting today
is the culmination of the series of events that have
been transpiring since the beginning of April. What
we feared, and what we were constantly warned about,
happened. The lives lost in Benghazi are the result ofa
prolonged conflict that has been left unresolved. Allow
me to make four pertinent points.

First, Indonesia strongly condemns in the strongest
terms the attack in Benghazi today that resulted in the
deathsO of three staff members of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and a number of
civilian casualties. We extend our deepest condolences
to the families of the victims and to the United Nations
for their loss. Indonesia, as a contributor of personnel
to United Nations missions, also feels the loss of
those fallen.

Secondly, we call for an immediate investigation
into the attack and for its perpetrators to be brought
to justice. Attacks on humanitarian workers,
United Nations personnel and civilian facilities are
unacceptable. They must stop. We call for all parties to
the conflict to respect international humanitarian law
and human rights.

Thirdly, Indonesia reaffirms its full support to
Mr. Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and UNSMIL in restoring a unified
international position on Libya to end its current crisis.
We welcome his three-step proposal as a solution to
the conflict, which begins with the appeal for a truce
during the Eid Al-Adha holiday. We welcome the
decision by both parties for a truce during Eid Al-Adha.
We believe that our collective action in creating an
atmosphere conducive to the implementation of a truce
will be a strong building block for further steps. It is
also the very reason that we should spare no effort to
nurture and sustain confidence-building measures. It
is without a doubt that UNSMIL's role in Libya is of
crucial importance. Any efforts, including villainous
acts towards UNSMIL personnel, will only destroy the
chance for achieving a peaceful future in Libya.

Lastly, we urge those with ties and influence to
use their positions to push the parties to the conflict
to return to negotiating table as soon as possible. To
that end, we reiterate our call, in line with the Security
Council press statements of 5 July (SC/13873) and
5 August (SC/13910), for all States to refrain from
taking measures that will exacerbate the conflict.

On the eve of Eid Al-Adha and in the light of the
acceptance of a truce, I would like to once again appeal
for the unity of the Council to keep peace in Libya and
prevent the further loss of life.

