Ms. Sison (United States of America): Three
years ago, the Council, in an extraordinary meeting
of our Heads of Government (see S/PV.7272), tackled
the problem of foreign terrorist fighters. In 2014, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) was ascendant.
Terrorists had just captured large swathes of territory,
and ISIS's ideology was inspiring thousands to travel
andjoin its ranks.

Today the tables are turned. ISIS is now on the run.
The United States, alongside the defeat-ISIS coalition
and its multiple partners, have liberated nearly all
of ISIS's territory on the battlefield. Its ideology is
discredited, but the threat of foreign terrorist fighters
remains. Indeed, today ISIS is going underground
and on the move. As its territory shrinks, some ISIS
supporters are returning home, while others are moving
on to other countries. We have seen hardened terrorists
travel around the world to carry out deadly attacks in
ISIS's name, and ISIS is calling on supporters - even
those who never set foot in a conflict zone i to launch
attacks from Jakarta to Manchester to the streets of
New York City.

In recent years, we have learned more about the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighter travel. For
example, today we see the return notjust of fighters, but
sometimes even their family members, some of whom
have committed crimes and others who were victims
of ISIS themselves. We also have learned lessons
about the essential role of international cooperation in
preventing, tracking and detaining traveling terrorists.

Given this evolving challenge, the United States
applauds the Security Council for taking decisive action
today. Resolution 2396 (2017), which was just adopted,
will give countries around the world new tools and new
obligations to protect all our citizens at home and the

international traveling public abroad. I will highlight
four of its most impactful measures.
First, the world has taken unprecedented steps in
this resolution to better detect and disrupt terrorist
travel across borders. All countries, not just a few,
will now develop the capability to collect and use
airline passenger information - specifically Advance
Passenger Information (API) and Passenger Name
Record (PNR) - data and biometrics to identify known
and previously unknown terrorists any time they may
try to board an aeroplane.

My Government has used API, PNR and biometrics
data to bring terrorists and criminals to justice and to
prevent them from carrying out their despicable acts
in the first place. We have used this data in ways that
respect the privacy, civil rights and civil liberties of all
Americans and those who travel to the United States.
Many other countries, including European Union
members, are in advanced stages of installing their
own PNR systems. A number of countries in the Middle
East and elsewhere have pioneered the use of biometric
technologies to ensure that even terrorists with false
passports can be identified and prosecuted.

The time has come for airline passenger information
and biometrics to protect not just those in America,
Europe or the Middle East but the entire international
traveling public, and to send a message to terrorists
that they are about to lose any hope of being able to get
on an aeroplane. We who have had the benefit of these
technologies since 11 September now look forward
to working with countries to make sure they have the
assistance and means to fulfill these critical obligations.

Secondly, today's resolution, drawing upon the
lessons of recent years, recognizes the need to counter
this threat in a tailored, nuanced way. This is particularly
key with respect to the prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters and
accompanying families. To do this right, we need the
involvement of civil society, including faith leaders
and youth; indeed, we need a true whole-of-society
approach. We cannot just rely on military and security
sector means to fight terrorism, since terrorists' false
narratives can live on, no matter how many terrorists
we put injail or kill on the battlefield.

We instead also need to mobilize whole societies
to counter violent extremism and fight terrorism while
respecting and promoting human rights, including the
freedom of expression. Indeed, the resolution reaffirms

that Member States must ensure that any measures taken
to counter terrorism comply with all their obligations
under international law and underscores that respect
for human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law are complementary and mutually reinforcing with
effective counter-terrorism measures. We must work
together and holistically to address and counter the
drivers of violent extremism as well.

Thirdly, the resolution puts a renewed emphasis on
the need for countries to share a range of information,
including lessons learned and threat analysis. The
foreign terrorist fighter threat is transnational, so
we ourselves must learn to work across borders and
improve international cooperation. This includes
sharing information and working with a broad range of
partners, including the private sector.

Fourthly, and finally, the resolution will boost
the United Nations own work addressing the foreign
terrorist fighter threat. We know that different United
Nations bodies have a vital role to play and all must
contribute. The resolution will pave the way for tighter
internal United Nations coordination, including on
capacity-building and technical assistance. We hope
the resolution will help the United Nations counter-
terrorism bodies continue to harmonize their efforts,
each focusing on its comparative advantage.

I would like to conclude by thanking all members
of the Security Council for their collaboration on this
technical resolution. This strong outcome shows that the
Security Council remains firmly and unquestionably
united in the face of the terrorist threat. We look
forward to working with countries, United Nations
bodies, civil society and the private sector to implement
this groundbreaking resolution.

