Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Allow me to
thank Nigeria, Sir, for organizing this important open
debate and for your excellent concept note (S/2014/238, annex), and especially for your leadership on the issue.
The lead role Nigeria has taken is of great importance
to my country.

The Netherlands also welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/480) and the
recommendations made therein. Both documents
emphasize, on the one hand, the importance of a
comprehensive approach to security sector reform
(SSR) within the United Nations system, and, on the
other hand, the need to focus SSR efforts on national
ownership. We fully support those notions.

The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.

My Government sees a close relationship between
security, the rule of law and development. Allow me
to note the fundamental formula of the World Summit
of September 2005, that there is no peace without
development, no development without peace and no
lasting peace or sustainable development without
respect for human rights. In post-conflict situations
that interconnection between the three elements is even
more manifest and security sector reform is relevant to
all three. In my statement I will address those, as well
as the position of women, fighting crime and the role
we see for the United Nations.

First, on the rule of law, security sector reform
(SSR) cannot be seen separately from the rule of law.
Security services must operate within the framework
of the law and be accountable to civilian authorities.
The civilian perspective should be the main focus of
SSR, to make sure that security services deliver human
security and not only State security. That will give them
legitimacy from a legal perspective and trust from the
perspective of society.

SSR must be inclusive at all stages. Governance
and national ownership of SSR efforts are crucial for
their success and legitimacy. Therefore, the political
realities of the countries involved must be taken into
account. Substantive roles for the relevant non-State
actors and structures, national reconciliation dialogues
and activities in the field of transitional justice must be
ensured. In that respect I would also like to stress that
non-governmental organizations, the media and political
parties can play an important role in the accountability
component of SSR agendas. By establishing SSR based
on national ownership within a rule of law context, a
foundation will be laid for sustainable development.

Secondly, on the position of women, the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, must be a principal guideline
in programming and reform in the field of SSR. Steps
have been taken to implement the resolution but more
remains to be done, as the open debate oflast Friday (see S/PV.7160), also under the able leadership of Nigeria,
made clear. Combating violence against women and
promoting the recruitment of female members of the
security sector should be at the core of the agenda.

Thirdly, with regard to crime, let me point out
another under-estimated aspect of SSR: international
crime. Around the world we witness the destabilizing
effects of criminal activities attracted by regions with
weak governance and poor security institutions. In such
situations, the smuggling of drugs, human trafficking
and corruption are thriving and criminal networks are
able to establish proxy security forces. That should lead
us to think about the link with international crime and
how to deal with it in terms of security sector reform.

On the role of the United Nations - my fourth
point - the Netherlands commends the report of the
Secretary-General for developing a more comprehensive
United Nations system-wide approach. The relevant
United Nations entities involved in SSR and the rule of
law and development should cooperate more effectively.
That applies both in New York and in the field. The
United Nations has a comparative advantage in playing
a coordinating role to assist communities in formulating
and asking the right questions concerning their SSR
processes and to support countries in building a human
rights-based security sector and working on sustainable
development. The comprehensive approach is therefore
crucial.

The last point I would like to make is that the
Netherlands has been a strong supporter of security
sector reform, both through bilateral cooperation
programmes as well as in the context of the United
Nations. We supported the development of a system-
wide United Nations approach. We are a strong
supporter of enhanced cooperation between the
United Nations Development Programme and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations through the
funding of SSR projects in the field. And we support
the activities of the Group of Friends of SSR, where
inclusive dialogue, policy development and building
bridges between a variety of international, regional and
national stakeholders are central themes.

In conclusion, effective security sector reform is a
result of synergy among efforts in the field in peace
and security, governance and rule of law, as well as
sustainable development. The Netherlands is proud to
be a partner of many countries in the world as well as
of the United Nations in each of those areas. We look
forward to our continued partnership to strengthen
peace, promote justice and foster development
worldwide.

