Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Japanese
presidency for having convened this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East.

Since this is the first statement of my delegation
in the Security Council after being elected as a
non-permanent member on the Council for 2017 and
2018, I would like to thank delegations for supporting
the candidature of Kazakhstan, which my country
considers a solemn and serious responsibility. It is
significant that one of our first statements to the
Council following the elections is on this challenging
agenda item.

We give great importance to the Middle East region
and pay particular attention to the resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian issue. In his latest report on assistance
to the Palestinian people (A/71/87-E/2016/67), the
Secretary-General points to the negative trends on the
ground which, according to him, make the two-State
solution more distant. We share his concerns and those
of the report of the Middle East Quartet released earlier
this month. My delegation therefore urges the Quartet
to pursue its mediation efforts even more robustly
and arrive at negotiations in order to ensure stability
however uphill the task may appear.

My delegation also shares the view of other Member
States that the two-State solution, recognition ofthe right
to self-determination of Palestinians and the creation of
an independent State of Palestine peacefully coexisting
with Israel within the 1967 borders are the only means
for achieving a durable peace. We also stand for
promoting Palestine's full-fledged membership in the
United Nations and encourage Israeli and Palestinian
leaders to demonstrate the political commitment needed
to reach a historic peace agreement.

The Government of Kazakhstan fully endorses the
long-standing proposal of establishing a zone free of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East. Establishing such a zone is dictated
by the pivotal role it would play in ensuring both
regional and global security. Once again, we call upon
all interested parties to exercise understanding and
trust to overcome the different viewpoints that militate
against the creation of such a zone.

Kazakhstan fully supports the Syrian peace
process within the Geneva III peace talks and the
full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). We
call on Member States to endorse the measures of
the Secretary-General, the Arab League and the
International Syria Support Group to find viable
solutions. To make our contribution, Kazakhstan
hosted two rounds of Syrian consultations in Astana in
2015. These were attended by the leaders of different
opposition groups and representatives of Syrian ethnic
and religious minorities.
Given the current trends, our world, and the Middle
East in particular, are once again in danger. The risks
cannot be underestimated. It is from this perspective
that, in April 2016, President Nursultan Nazarbayev
of Kazakhstan presented a new security paradigm
document entitled "Manifesto: The World. The Twenty-
First Century". The Manifesto is significant as it takes
a momentous stand on the issues of war and peace.
To implement it, President Nazarbayev proposed
establishing a global coalition of States for peace,
stability, trust and security under the auspices of the
United Nations. The shared task of this coalition for
the next decade would be to end wars and conflicts in
Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen, Libya, Syria and eastern
Ukraine, as well as the Palestinian-Israeli confrontation.

Our President also emphasized that if the world is
to be free of conflict, the injustices created by global
policies, which are the root cause of tensions and
which impede development, must be removed. At the
same time, the principles of international law must be
reaffirmed, respected by all countries and accompanied
by decisive steps towards demilitarization. All of
these aspects are highly relevant to the situation in the
Middle East.

As a step towards religious unity, at the recent
thirteenth summit of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, held in Istanbul in April, the leadership of
Kazakhstan, together with Turkey as the host country,
initiated the process of Islamic reconciliation as a new
paradigm ofrelations in the Muslim world. This process
is aimed at reaching a peaceful settlement of disputes
and strengthening the unity of the Islamic Ummah. We
therefore call on the Governments of all countries in
the region to take the necessary measures to prevent
the further escalation of sectarian tensions through
dialogue among and with religious leaders.

Finally, we reiterate Kazakhstan's commitment to
joining the multilateral effort to ensure peace in the
Middle East.

