Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I had wanted to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on beginning your duties on 9 January,
at our first regular Security Council meeting of the
new year, but the United States delegation has left me
no choice but to do it today. That also applies to the
Council's new members, whom I am glad to see in
the Chamber. I hope our collaboration will be close
and productive. I would also like to thank those of my
colleagues who have just left the Council whom I also
see here today.

Today, unfortunately, we are once again witnesses
to the misuse of the forum of the Security Council by
the United States. Why is the United States, a permanent
member of the Security Council and one of the authors
of the Charter of the United Nations, undermining
the authority of the Council as the principal organ
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security? After all, it is obvious to anyone that
the subject of today's meeting does not correspond to
the Council's prerogatives under the Charter. And the
references made today to Article 34 of the Charter with
regard to the situation are completely inappropriate. That
should be obvious to anyone reading Article 34 again.

We have repeatedly drawn attention to the
impermissibility of using contrived pretexts for
including purely internal political matters on the agenda.
Why has the United States resorted to this ploy today,
when the internal situation in Iran is already being
normalized? Incidentally, we should thank Washington
for that, considering that its energetic messages of
encouragement and motivation to the people of Iran
have gone a long way to helping to unite Iranian society
on a basis of anti-American feeling. It would seem that
an irrational allergy to Iran has blinded the United
States to what is actually going on there, replacing
reality with wishful thinking. Needless to say, we
deplore the loss of life that has resulted from the less
than peaceful protests. But let Iran itself deal with its
own problems, particularly since this is happening now.

The Council's energy is being dissipated. Instead
of directing it towards resolving the serious crisis
situations in Afghanistan, Syria, Libya, Iraq, Yemen,
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Africa,
the United States is proposing to interfere in the internal
affairs of States. But we do not want to participate in
the destabilization of Iran or anywhere else. We would
do better to conduct an objective assessment of the
situation with regard to a settlement in the Middle East,
including of the question of Palestine. If we were to
persist in this logic, we would have had to convene a
Security Council meeting after the notorious events
in Ferguson, Missouri, or when violent methods were
used to drive out the Occupy Wall Street movement
in Manhattan. Or perhaps we should call a Council
meeting when some Western country experiences a
wave of demonstrations?

We do not have to delve very deeply into history
to cite many examples that have resulted from short-
sighted actions involving interference in internal affairs
and attempts to change objectionable regimes and
impose recipes for democracy. Unfortunately, owing
to numerous instances of violations and disregard
for the founding principles of the Charter - such as
the independence and sovereign equality of States,
non-interference in their internal affairs and the
peaceful settlement of disputes - the situation in
many Middle Eastern countries that until recently were
stable has become a horror. The occupation of Iraq on
an openly false pretext, the results of which are still
a heavy burden to the people of Iraq to this day; the
crude manipulation of the Security Council's mandate
unleashing destruction and unremitting chaos in
Libya; the methodical incitement to internecine strife
in Syria and flirtations with terrorists there; the war
in Yemen - all of those gaping wounds will continue
to remind us of the pernicious ideology of geopolitical
engineering and attempts to control the destinies of
other States and peoples. However, they prefer not to
remember such things, and when we recall them, to
pretend that they have nothing to do with them.

We are sometimes asked why we maintain a cautious
approach to the concept of the prevention of violent
extremism. The United States delegation's attitude to
what is going on in Iran is an apt example, because it
illustrates the essence of our concerns. The source of
the problems is said to be the suppression of peaceful
protests and the cruel and undemocratic regime. Parallels
are drawn with the events in Syria in 2011; a threat to
international peace and security is declared; grounds
are thereby established for the necessity of outside
interferences in Iran's internal affairs. In this way,
the outline is laid down for the vision advanced by the
United States and a number of other countries of violent
extremism and its drivers. Meanwhile, incitement from
outside and calls for so-called changes can themselves
contribute to radicalization and violence, whether in
Iran or somewhere else.

The real reason for convening today's meeting
comes not from efforts to protect the human rights and
interests of the people of Iran but from a veiled attempt
to exploit current events in order to continue the policy
aimed at undermining the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) for resolving the situation regarding
the Iranian nuclear programme. Similar assessments of
the current situation were voiced earlier in Berlin and
Paris. In our view, deliberate attempts to weaken and
undermine the international community's adherence
to the JCPOA are unacceptable, considering that it
represents the fundamental achievement of the past
few years in the area of nuclear non-proliferation and
diplomatic efforts to preserve regional and international
peace and security. This is particularly true when
the International Atomic Energy Agency has been
consistently confirming Iran's full compliance with
its obligations. Instead, the United States continues
to introduce unilateral restrictions that run directly

counter to international law. We continue to ask
whether it has any means in its diplomatic toolkit other
than sanctions.
Instead of trying to involve the Council in
interfering in States' internal affairs, it would be a
good ideal for the Council to support helpful initiatives
for expanding the regional dialogue on security issues,
in a framework that could enable answers to be found
to many questions and concerns. Russia has proposed
an initiative for establishing confidence-building
measures in the Persian Gulf region. The relevant
provision of resolution 598 (1987), which directs the
Secretary-General to formulate measures for security
and stability in consultation with regional stakeholders,
is still unfulfilled to this day. It would be helpful to
consider the Secretary-General's ideas for launching
a political dialogue process for resolving existing
differences between key countries of the region.

I would like to think that there will be no more
meetings such as this one during your presidency, Sir,
nor during the next, and that the Council will occupy
itself with the work it is mandated to do under the
Charter of the United Nations.

