Mr. Sahovic (Yugoslavia): As another newcomer
here today, I should like to assure you, your
Excellency, and other members of the Security Council
that I am looking forward to our future cooperation.

I should like, first of all, to thank Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his very informative statement, as
well as for his report on the implementation of the
Peace Agreement.

I wish to assure Mr. Petritsch of my
Government's continued support for his work and its
readiness to cooperate with him in the future.

May I also on this occasion emphasize the full
commitment of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to a
consistent implementation of, and full respect for, the
letter and the spirit of the Dayton/Paris Agreement. We
expect that all other participants in the implementation
of the Agreement are also committed to that process.
This, we believe, is in the best interest of the three
constituent peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well
as of stabilization and the development of cooperation
in the region.

Since the last meeting of the Security Council on
the implementation of the Dayton/Paris Agreement, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has taken a number of
important steps which confirm, in word and in deed,
the resolve of my country to normalize relations with
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to address problems of
particular interest both for Yugoslavia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina and for the region as a whole. To begin
with, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina have established diplomatic relations
and will soon exchange ambassadors. Our two
countries are determined to develop all-round
cooperation based on good-neighbourliness and mutual
respect, as well as on respect for the principles of
territorial integrity, sovereignty and political
independence.

Several representatives have mentioned the
agreement on special relations between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska,
some of them expressing some concern over the issue.
Let me say a few words on that subject. As members
know, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Republika Srpska recently signed an agreement on the
establishment of special relations, in accordance with
the Dayton/Paris Agreement, which fully respects the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Agreement is not only based on the
Dayton/Paris Agreement, but provides also for its
further affirmation. It reflects the need of both the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika
Srpska to regulate mutual relations in the fields of the
economy, culture and science, as well as in other fields.
Certainly, transparency of cooperation is the essential
element of the agreement.

The harmonization and finalization of a
substantial number of inter-State agreements is under
way between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, primarily in the fields of
economic cooperation, trade, investment, customs and
transport, as well as with regard to providing legal
assistance in criminal and civil matters. The aim is to
make it possible for the citizens of the two countries,
tied by family, friendship or business bonds, to solve
outstanding problems, particularly in the sphere of
social and related issues that affect people's everyday
lives.

Also nearing completion are negotiations with
Bosnia and Herzegovina on establishing an inter-State
council at the level of State Presidents, aimed at
coordinating and encouraging overall bilateral
relations.

Finally, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is
vitally interested in the return to their homes of all
refugees and displaced persons from across the former
Yugoslavia. It is our expectation that the registration of
refugees and displaced persons now under way in
Yugoslavia will provide a complete picture of the
situation and important parameters for solving this key
issue.

We are convinced that there is no alternative to
the consistent implementation of the Dayton/Paris
Agreement in all its segments. All efforts and solutions
in the framework of the Agreement and serving the
interests of the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
peace and stability in the region will be supported by
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which is ready to
take part in those efforts. Well aware that the primary
responsibility lies with Bosnia and Herzegovina, its
leaders and its peoples, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, however, as a next-door neighbour, is
willing and ready, in the best possible way, to make a
constructive contribution, alongside other international
actors, to the well-being of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

