Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), Ms. Beerli, and Eveline Rooijmans of Oxfam
International for their briefings. It is really good to
have them both in the Chamber with us today.

In the period since we last held a debate on this
particular issue (see S/PV.7450), the change that has
happened during that period has been change in the
wrong direction, as the briefers have shown very clearly.
We have seen the tragic continuation and worsening of
several trends on the protection-of-civilians agenda.
Barrel bombs continue to fall, and human rights and
international humanitarian law continue to be violated
and abused. Women and children continue to be
abducted, trafficked or worse. There are also disturbing
new trends, such as the targeting of medical staff and
facilities, the increasing use of siege and starvation as
a method of warfare, and the distressing allegations
of abuse committed by United Nations peacekeepers.
Against that backdrop, the central issue that we should
all be addressing today is what will be different next
year. In that connection I took three particular things
from what our briefers all said today.

First, Vice-President Beerli of the ICRC said that
respecting the law is the single most impactful choice
that States and non-State groups can make to avoid
civilian suffering. Eveline Rooijmans of Oxfam said
that many elements to protect civilians have already
been agreed on but what is missing is implementation.
As the Deputy Secretary-General said, the bottom
line is that even wars have rules. You, Mr. President,
said to us that nobody discusses anymore whether the
protection of civilians should be a part ofpeacekeeping.
What we are discussing nowadays is the "how". And
that is what I wish to focus on today.

This year needs to be the year that we end the
most challenging issue with regard to the protection of
civilians, namely, the crisis in Syria. And I am not trying
to make a political point there. We must have a list of
priorities, and that must be at the top of it. The millions
of civilians fleeing their homes and the thousands
risking everything to cross the Mediterranean are all
doing so in search ofthe protection and security that has
been denied to them for too long. Whether at the hands
of Daesh or, more likely, at the hands of Al-Assad, the
brutality that they have fled is only being exacerbated
by the shortfall in the international response. We all
know that a political solution is the only way to end the
fighting, but until one has been found, more must be
done to protect those still caught up in the crisis.

That is why, on 4 February, the United Kingdom will
be hosting a conference in London, along with Kuwait,
Germany, Norway and the United Nations, to support
Syria and the region. The conference will not just be

the moment to address the funding deficit in the United
Nations appeal, although that is very important in itself.
It will also be the moment to address the long-term
needs of those affected by the crisis by supporting job
creation, providing education and, crucially, by putting
ever more pressure on all the parties to protect civilians
and respect international humanitarian law. We need a
comprehensive approach. In doing so, we hope to drive
improvements in daily life and increase the confidence
that is needed to underpin the political process. But let
me make just one thing clear: respecting international
humanitarian law is not in itself a confidence-building
measure. It is an obligation, and it is an obligation on
us all.

Secondly, let me look beyond Syria to the second
step that we need to take this year, which is to ensure
greater compliance with international humanitarian
law and respect for human rights more broadly and
to ensure accountability for those who have failed to
do so. Others have listed other key crises at the top of
the Security Council's agenda, and I think that they
bear repeating. Whether it is in Yemen, South Sudan
or Burundi, protecting civilians will improve the
prospects for political solutions, not be a substitute
for them. When national authorities refuse to comply
with international humanitarian law, when they fail
or are unable to prosecute individuals who commit
international crimes, we must ensure accountability
through domestic, regional or global mechanisms,
as appropriate. We should make better use of the
International Criminal Court, and we call on all States
to cooperate fully with it. When the Council has referred
a situation to the Court and States violate Council
resolutions by failing to cooperate, the Council must
follow up. The Council should also consider referring
more situations to the International Criminal Court.
We have failed on both counts in the past, we cannot
continue that failure in 2016.

Thirdly, there are the other tools at our disposal that
we must use more fully this year. The United Kingdom
is proud to support the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and we are actively involved, along with
the Swiss, in its initiative to support and strengthen
mechanisms of compliance with international
humanitarian law. We support a new meeting of States
to address that issue, and we encourage all States to
participate in the initiative. We also look forward to
the World Humanitarian Summit as an opportunity
to remind the world of the importance of protecting
civilians, ensuring compliance with international
humanitarian law and putting humankind at the centre
of decision-making. Closer to home, we should use the
tools of the United Nations itself to protect civilians
to the full. That would mean implementing the
recommendations on protecting civilians contained in
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding reviews that you,
Mr. President, mentioned.

As Ms. Rooijmans has just stressed, people and
the protection of civilians must play a central role in
mission-planning, mission-resourcing and activities
on the ground. The United Kingdom supports the
Secretary-General's commitments to inform the Council
of escalating risks to civilians and of any incidents
where peacekeepers have failed to implement their
mandate to protect civilians. We also look forward to
more frank assessments and recommendations on what
peace operations can deliver and how they can improve
reporting so that transparency and accountability are
both increased. At a time when the United Nations is
rightly being scrutinized because of the disturbing
allegations of abuse against those operating under its
mandate, we must demonstrate that we will do even
more this year to protect those who are in our care.

Above all, I wish to emphasize one point: protecting
civilians in armed conflict is at the core of the work
of the United Nations. It is the issue on which we are
most often judged by the world outside of the Council
Chamber and yet, it is the hardest on which to make
progress. We know that the challenges we face are
huge, but we cannot keep holding such debates year
after year, without taking concrete steps to stop the
suffering. This is the year to take action.

