Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, Sir, I
congratulate Azerbaijan on its presidency of the Security
Council this month under your able leadership. We also
express appreciation for Australia's skilled leadership
of the Council during the month of September. I also
thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing.

When we addressed the Security Council at the
most recent open debate, in July (see S/PV.7007), we
appealed to the international community to act upon
its political, legal and moral obligations towards the
question of Palestine and Palestinian-Israeli peace. We
stressed the need for meaningful steps to support the
peace process towards the fulfillment of the decades-
long promise to assist the Palestinian people to realize
their rights and justice, including a just solution to the
plight of the Palestine refugees, and to realize their
freedom in their independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security on the basis of the 4 June
1967 borders - the foundation of peace in the Middle
East.

Our message to the Council and our calls for action
to salvage peace prospects remain as urgent today
as prior to the launch of direct negotiations between
the parties nearly three months ago, on 29 July. If the
situation persists as is, marked by Israeli impunity and
recklessness, yet another opportunity to make peace a
reality will be lost.

This must be a matter of concern for the Council
and international community as a whole. Support
for peace negotiations, as resoundingly pledged just
weeks ago from the General Assembly rostrum, and
by the Quartet in its most recent statement, whereby
it "reaffirmed its determination to actively support
the pursuit of a comprehensive resolution of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict" (see SG/2202), requires
more than just commending the decision to resume
negotiations and encouraging perseverance. It requires
meaningful action to help the parties overcome the
persistent obstacles, including by ensuring respect
for the parameters of the solution, on which there is
international consensus, towards the actual achievement
of a final peace agreement.

In September, before the General Assembly,
President Mahmoud Abbas reaffirmed in the clearest
terms the abiding Palestinian commitment to a peaceful,
negotiated solution, based on the parameters enshrined
in the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map. He stressed, inter alia, that

"The goal of the peace that we seek is defined
and the objective of the negotiations is clear to
all, just as the terms of reference and the basis
and foundations of the peace process and of the
agreement we seek are longstanding and within
reach." (A/68/PV12, p. 26)

Moreover, he reconfirmed our readiness to engage in
good faith in the negotiations, stressing

"I assure Members that we shall respect all of
our commitments and foster the atmosphere most
conducive to continuing the negotiations seriously
and intensively, while providing guarantees for its
success and aiming at a peace agreement within
nine months." (supra)

The State of Palestine is upholding that commitment
and acting with seriousness of purpose in pursuit of the
Palestinian people's inalienable rights and legitimate
national aspirations. We have conducted ourselves with
the utmost responsibility, in line with international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and United Nations
resolutions, including of the Security Council, fully
cognizant of the high risks and consequences entailed
in the failure to seize the small opportunity that remains
for realizing the two-State solution.

We have seriously engaged in several rounds of
negotiation with Israel, maintaining our focus on the
overall objectives of peace and coexistence, despite the
striking imbalance of power and the cyclical distractions
and complications caused by the occupying Power. We
have done so despite the hardships being endured by
the Palestinian people under occupation and despite the
challenges faced by our Government in addressing the
needs of our people under such conditions, including
the deliberate impairment of our capabilities to meet
their needs and to allay their concerns regarding both
their daily subsistence and their future.

At this juncture, we reaffirm our gratitude for
all efforts made by the international community in
support of the negotiations and the goal of peace. We
recognize the efforts and leadership of the United
States, as well as the European Union, the Russian
Federation and the United Nations - as members of the
Quartet - by the ministerial committee of the League
of Arab States and by all other concerned States from
around the world. Moreover, we recognize the efforts
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee and the support of
the donor community, and we stress the importance of
such assistance to Palestine for alleviating the negative
impact of the occupation and the ongoing financial
crisis on our people and our Government institutions.

However, despite the genuine efforts being exerted,
tangible progress remains elusive and hopes are
diminishing, as the challenging situation on the ground
persists and provocative Israeli actions and declarations
undermine the spirit and intent of the negotiations.

The Security Council must be aware of the
vastly negative impact that unlawful Israeli policies
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem - the territory that constitutes the State
of Palestine - are having on the ground and on the
Palestinian conviction in the fairness of the political
process and the potential for its success. Illegal and
provocative Israeli actions, whether by the Government,
its occupying forces or its extremist settlers, are
raising deep doubts about Israel's true intentions in
the negotiations, reinforcing the notion that it is only
using this period to further entrench its settlement
enterprise and de facto annexation of Palestinian land,
while simultaneously attempting to ease international
pressure in that regard.

Over the past months, Israel has continued its
settlement activities, in grave breach of international
law, total contradiction to the objectives and spirit of the
negotiations and flagrant disregard of the global calls for
cessation. Moreover, it has done so with full knowledge
that those illegal actions are further undermining the
contiguity of the Palestinian territory and the viability
of the two-State solution and aggravating already high
tensions.

Since the resumption of negotiations, Israel has
advanced the approval of over 3,000 settlement units
and the confiscation of hundreds more dunums of
Palestinian land, in addition to a barrage ofprovocations
and incitement, including by Cabinet officials and
Knesset members. In that regard, we refer to a report by
the Israeli non-governmental organization Peace Now,
which exposed, among other things, a 70 per cent rise
in the construction of settlements in the first half of
this year.

Such illegal actions and tactics must be rejected
by the international community, which must remain
vigilant in its calls for a full halt to all Israeli settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The international consensus
on that issue must remain firm. We furthermore call on
all States to pursue measures to cease and prohibit any
support to settlement activities, in fulfilment of their
obligations under international humanitarian law.

We also recall in that regard the responsibilities
undertaken by the Quartet members, and highlight the
call, made in its 27 September statement, for

"all parties to take every possible step to promote
conditions conducive to the success of the
negotiating process and to refrain from actions that
undermine trust or prejudge final status issues."
(see SG/2202)

The Quartet also stressed the need for actions by all
the parties concerned, consistent with and supportive
of that call.

In that regard, we also draw the Council's immediate
attention to the dangers arising from constant Israeli
provocations and acts of aggression in occupied East
Jerusalem, particularly at Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
Al-Aqsa Mosque. Such actions, particularly by Israeli
settlers and Jewish extremists, have escalated and are
dramatically fuelling tensions. We condemn and reject
all reckless attempts to inflame religious confrontation,
which would have grave consequences for the region
and wider international community, endangering
international peace and security. We call on the
Security Council to closely monitor developments
in Jerusalem and to act responsibly, in line with its
Charter duty, to demand a halt to all such incitement,
provocations and inflammatory rhetoric and to avert a
further destabilization of that critical situation.

In addition to the illegal measures being
carried out in connection with Israel's settlement
campaign - whether the construction of settlements
and the wall, the confiscation of land, the forced
displacement of civilians, the demolition of homes
or the constant terror, violence and destruction being
perpetrated by Israeli settlers - Israel, the occupying
Power, also persists with its collective punishment
and systematic human rights violations against the
Palestinian people. Military raids, excessive force
against civilians, including peaceful protesters, the
arrest and detention of more civilians, including
children, and the abuse and maltreatment of the
thousands of Palestinians who remain captive in Israeli
prisons and detention centres continue unabated.
Moreover, the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
remains of grave concern, as Israel's illegal blockade,
now well into its sixth year, continues in collective
punishment of the entire population, exacerbating
poverty, widespread socioeconomic ills and despair.

We therefore reiterate to the international
community two calls in particular. We call for the
protection of the Palestinian civilian population in
accordance with humanitarian law, particularly the
Fourth Geneva Convention - an obligation long-
acknowledged yet unfulfilled. And we call for the
lifting of that inhumane blockade on our people and
for the sustained opening of the Gaza Strip crossings to
allow for the normal movement of persons and goods,
in accordance with humanitarian law as well as past
agreements between the parties.

It is against that backdrop that peace talks
continue - an environment hardly conducive to the
pursuit of peace. Yet, the Palestinian side remains
committed to the goals ofpeace,justice and coexistence.
We stress that peace and justice are two sides of the
same coin, interdependent and mutually reinforcing.
We are prepared to undertake our responsibilities
to resolve all final status issues - Jerusalem,
refugees, settlements, borders, security, water and
prisoners - for the achievement ofajust, lasting peace
and the independence ofa sovereign, contiguous, viable
and democratic State of Palestine, living side by side
with Israel in peace and security on the basis ofthe pre-
1967 borders.

For a credible process to be sustained, however,
the reality on the ground must be redressed. Serious
efforts are needed to close the wide gap between that
reality and the hopes, expectations and requirements
for a successful political process. Israel must show in
word and deed that it is willing and able to uphold its
responsibilities and legal obligations and act forthwith,
both at the negotiating table and on the ground, to
make peace possible. That obviously necessitates an
end to all of the illegal, destructive policies of the
military occupation. The international community
must be unrelenting in that demand. The alternative is
a continued rise of tensions and instability, sabotaging
the final opportunity to realize the two-State solution,
an alternative that we, along with the international
community, clearly seek to avert.

In conclusion, I am compelled to reiterate our grave
concerns about the situation of the Palestine refugees
in Syria. All are aware of the horrific impact of the
conflict on the civilian population in Syria, including
the Palestine refugees, and the massive suffering being
endured. We call again for intensive efforts, including
by the Security Council, to ensure the protection of
all civilians and to promote a political solution to the
conflict as rapidly as possible.

We stress that the vulnerability of the Palestine
refugees stems directly from the failure to resolve the
problem for over six decades, due to Israel's deliberate
denial of their rights, a fact that reinforces the imperative
of a just solution for their plight in the context of any
final peace agreement and regional peace. Until that day
comes, we recognize the extraordinary efforts of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and all humanitarian organizations working in Syria
and the neighbouring countries to aid and alleviate the
suffering of the refugees and displaced persons in this
time of crisis.

