Ms. Malcorra (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
echo Alain Le Roy's expression of appreciation for the
time that the Security Council has given us for topics
that are of great importance to us all.

(spoke in English)

This is a joint exercise of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support. The two Departments are fully synchronized
in that regard. The broad strategic outlines of this
initiative have major implications for the support side
of the house for the next five years.

Mr. Le Roy has outlined what we need in a new
partnership agenda to address the problems that we are
encountering in delivering increasingly complex and
varied mandates in difficult, often isolated and
inhospitable locations. I can only echo those needs on
the support side. We cannot move ahead with
innovations to the support model without the full
engagement and buy-in of Member States.

Let me further elaborate on some of the broad
support indications for the New Horizon initiative.
First, I must stress that we are not starting from scratch
here. The past decade has several useful innovations in
the tools and systems developed for peacekeeping
operations approved by Member States. The creation of
the strategic deployment stocks in 2002 have allowed
us to equip and supply missions more quickly than

before. The establishment of a Peacekeeping Reserve
Fund to allow for commitment authority of up to
$50 million in advance of a Security Council mandate
has also been an important capability.

However, neither of those innovations is
calibrated to current demand. Their ceilings remain
static, while the overall peacekeeping budget has more
than tripled, and their procedures have become more
convoluted than originally envisioned.

Secondly, I am convinced that more of the same
will simply not do. We envisaged a more nuanced,
targeted approach with elements of mission support
provided globally, others regionally and the rest at the
level of individual missions. The current model of
having a full support component for each and every
mission needs to be revisited. We need to explore
options that will lead to a lighter mission footprint;
faster turnaround without compromising accountability
and oversight; smarter deployment with new security
ceilings in a way that will bring about a better
relationship between substantive and support staff in
mission; greater use of local staff and local and regional
suppliers; development and continuity of staff in safer
and more stable locations; the creation of centres of
excellence that would allow us to better support the
missions; decision-making and supply closer to the
point of delivery; and a revisit of the current
contingent-owned equipment model, including the rates
of reimbursement, as mentioned by Mr. Le Roy.

Thirdly, it is becoming increasingly important to
calibrate support to the different stages of the mission
life cycle - startup, stabilization, maturity, surge,
drawdown and liquidation - with different priorities
in terms of deployment in each of those stages. Staffing
and equipment needs and financing are different in
each of them.

In particular, we have identified specific support
challenges in the startup phase. Clearly, one of the
biggest issues that we face in relationships with
Member States is the unspent balances, and that issue
is related particularly to delays in the initial phase of
deployment. Even if we introduce some of the
improvements I have mentioned, we are still up against
a system of financial approvals and procurement
timelines that puts limits on rapid deployment.

Possible ways to address those issues include
pre-positioned stocks and turnkey service contracts,
more modular approaches, fast-track standardized
resourcing approaches for the first year of mission
operation, some additional financial flexibility, and
more asset-sharing between missions. That is
particularly important in the case of aviation assets.

Fourthly, one way to build capability and
performance without increasing initial headcount is to
invest more in technology-driven solutions, including
some greening elements that could be very important to
our footprint in the countries where we deploy. Better
information analysis, better communications and
higher-performing equipment should be at the heart of
those aspects.

Fifthly, again, building on reforms that the
Member States have approved develops a truly global
and mobile workforce with faster, more targeted
recruitment, better skills and career development, and
greater agility across functions and locations.

We will be developing all those five lines in the
DES support strategy that is now being worked on. I
have already had informal exchanges of views with
representatives during the month of May and have
received some initial feedback. We will provide a more
detailed non-paper in July, in conjunction with the New
Horizon paper. My team is now drilling down into the
detailed building of business cases and examining cost
benefits, which we will be sharing and presenting as
part of a comprehensive set of proposals at the next
session of the General Assembly, seeking Member
States' approval.

That is going to be a major paper and it will be
presented together with the budgets of the
peacekeeping operations for approval, hoping that,
with Member States' approval, we will also seek initial
opportunities in the next cycle of peacekeeping
budgets.

I thank all present. We will provide further
information for further discussion in the near future.

