Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French): I
am pleased to express my support for the draft resolution
being considered today by the Security Council on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This draft resolution
authorizes the establishment of a Stabilization Force
(SFOR) and extends the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Both operations are
central elements in the international community's efforts to
consolidate peace.

We all recall that, less than a year ago, with resolution
1031 (1995), the Security Council authorized the
deployment of the Implementation Force in order to assist
in the implementation of the Dayton Accords. We have
made progress since last year's truce. Among the
accomplishments, we should emphasize the holding of
national elections last September and the formation,
however limited, of common Bosnian institutions.

Nevertheless, it is evident that much more remains to
be done to ensure lasting peace. One of the issues which
requires particular focus is the prosecution of war criminals.
Peace can be sustained only if accompanied by justice. In
our View, the success of the work of the International
Tribunal is essential to stability in the region. The impunity
of persons responsible for war crimes represents a threat to
the viability of the peace process. Efforts must be made to
ensure the success of the Tribunal and that the guilty are
brought to justice.

(spoke in English)

The Bosnian parties and the neighbouring States
have the main responsibility for turning over war
criminals to the Tribunal. At the same time, the
international community has a responsibility to encourage
and ensure that all the parties comply with their
obligations in this regard. It was agreed at the London
Conference that the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board would assess compliance with the war
crimes provisions of Dayton with a view to considering
possible additional measures by the international
community. We believe, in particular, that the parties'
compliance must factor into discussions concerning
ongoing international economic assistance.

Responsibility for implementing the peace has
progressively and appropriately shifted to the parties
signatory to the Dayton Accords. It will be up to the
Bosnians themselves to be the real peace builders. All
Bosnians must demonstrate the flexibility necessary to
make their country work. The international community
will of course remain actively engaged in these efforts.
The Paris and London Conferences set out the objectives
for the international community's involvement over the
next two years. For its part, Canada will continue to
provide significant assistance, with emphasis on
humanitarian programmes, democratic development, social
rehabilitation and economic reconstruction.

An ongoing military presence is an important and
necessary part of this international engagement. The
Stabilization Force which the Council is considering today
will help to ensure a stable security environment for the
consolidation period, provide support for municipal
elections next year, contribute to the achievement of
arms-control objectives, support civilian implementation
of the Peace Agreement and deter outbreaks of fighting.

In addition, we believe that SFOR can and should
take a more assertive approach to the issue of war
criminals. The participants at the London Conference
agreed that the continuing impunity of persons indicted
for war crimes represents a threat to the viability of the
peace process. Canada has proposed a series of measures
for SFOR, under its authorized mandate, that we believe
will increase the pressure on and isolation of indicted
persons, especially those actively involved in their

 

communities, and lead to their detention and transfer to the
Hague.

From the outset of the international community's
involvement, Canadian military and civilian personnel have
been present in Bosnia, first through the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and then the
Implementation Force (IFOR). We are committed to
ensuring that this investment produces a lasting, durable
peace. For this reason, Canada will participate in the
Stabilization Force, with an increased troop contribution of
1,200. We welcome the fact that the Stabilization Force -
as its predecessor, IFOR - will be truly international,
comprised as it will be of troops from 32 countries.

As IFOR draws down to become the smaller
Stabilization Force, civilian activities will take on
increasing importance in the peace-building process. The
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in
particular the International Police Task Force and the
United Nations Mine Action Centre, will continue to play
an essential part in these efforts. For this reason, we fully
support the renewal of the Mission's mandate.

Training and restructuring the police forces throughout
Bosnia and Herzegovina are essential tasks. To this end, the
challenge for the International Police Task Force will be to
help the various authorities in Bosnia to reduce the number
of police officers, while putting the remaining -
retrained - officers under transparent, civil, democratic
control. As the Secretary-General notes in his report on the
United Nations Mission's activities, there has been some
progress towards these objectives; however, the
International Police Task Force remains necessary to assist
the parties to this end.

Canada also welcomes the work of the Mine Action
Centre, to which we have made a contribution in both
resources and personnel. Demining activities in Bosnia are
essential to peace-building and economic reconstruction.

Through our contributions to the Stabilization Force
and the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and in reconstruction and reconciliation efforts, Canada
remains committed to helping the parties consolidate peace.
The draft resolution the Security Council is considering
today further underlines the international community's
continuing engagement in the peace-building process.
However, as we enter the second year of the
implementation process, the focus will primarily be on the
parties themselves; the fulfilment of their obligations and
commitments is indispensable for lasting peace.

