Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to thank
the Republic of Korea for organizing this open debate
on non-proliferation in commemoration of the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004).
Our meeting coincides with the third session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, and thus rightly shows the degree to
which the issue of non-proliferation is a serious matter
of concern for the international community. I would
also like to thank Mr. Eliasson for his comprehensive
briefing.

Algeria wishes to reiterate its full confidence in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) as the cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime, and considers that full
implementation of its provisions is a prerequisite for
ending both the vertical and horizontal proliferation
of nuclear weapons. I would like to emphasize that
non-proliferation should be pursued in all its aspects,
and I would also like to stress the importance of the
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards
agreements. We urge all States that have not yet done
so to put comprehensive safeguards agreements into
force as soon as possible in the interests of achieving
their universality and consolidating and enhancing
the non-proliferation regime's verification system. In
that regard, my delegation reaffirms that we accept
safeguards with the purpose of preventing diversions
of nuclear power, and that they should therefore be
implemented without affecting countries' inalienable
right, as set out in article IV of the NPT, to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy, and without obstructing the
economic or technological development of States that
are parties to the Treaty

Ten years ago, the legal framework of the
non-proliferation regime was strengthened by the
adoption, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, of resolution 1540 (2004). Affirming
that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery constitutes a
threat to international peace and security, the resolution
obliges States to refrain from supporting non-State
actors in developing, acquiring, manufacturing,
possessing, transporting, transferring or using such
weapons, and to pass and enforce effective laws and
establish domestic controls. Resolution 1540 (2004)
was unquestionably adopted at the right time, when it
became important to deal with the risk of the dangerous
nexus between weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
and global terrorism. Any increase in potential access
to WMDs for non-State actors who belong to terrorist
networks could have dangerous implications for any
State or group of States, and would constitute a threat
to international peace and security.

As long as the proliferation of WMDs remains
a great challenge, we should recognize that the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term
task that requires continuing efforts at the national,
regional and international levels. In that context, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) has a crucial role to play in facilitating the
provision of assistance, enhancing cooperation with the
relevant international organizations and reinforcing its
outreach efforts.

Since today we are assessing the status of the
resolution's implementation, I should mention that
Algeria, in fulfilment of its obligations, has already
submitted its national report to the 1540 Committee.
We have participated in the three Nuclear Security
Summits with a view to contributing to the international
efforts to strengthen nuclear security and reduce the
continued threat of nuclear terrorism. In that regard,
I would like to highlight Algeria's ongoing efforts at
the national level, whereby we submitted our national
progress report at the Nuclear Security Summit held
in March in The Hague. Algerian delegations also
regularly attend international events on implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), and in that regard, Algerian
representatives participated at a regional workshop held
last December in Addis Ababa by the African Union
Peace and Security Council, in collaboration with the
1540 Committee and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs.

I should also add that Algeria has been a member
of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism
since February 2012. Moreover, we have taken
various appropriate measures, such as ratifying
all the international legal instruments relevant to
nuclear security, including the 2005 amendment to
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. We have
also adopted the Code of Conduct on the Safety and
Security of Radioactive Sources of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

At the domestic level, in December 2013 Algeria
amended its penal code in order to criminalize the
malicious use of radioactive materials, including general
acts of nuclear terrorism, based on the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism. In that connection, Algeria is putting in
place a strong legislative and regulatory framework in
the area of the physical protection of nuclear materials
and facilities and the security of radioactive sources.
In addition, the import, detention and export regime
of radioactive sources has been strengthened through
rigorous border controls.

During the period 2012-2013, Algeria hosted
several IAEA nuclear safety and security workshops. In
the upcoming months we plan to organize more national
and regional workshops and training courses on nuclear
security, some of them supported by the IAEA. I should
also add that Algiers is host to the regional office of
the European Union's Centre of Excellence for North
Africa for chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
threat reduction. The Centre is involved in coordinating
several cooperation projects in that area, particularly in
capacity-building.

Finally, on behalf of my country, I would like
to stress that we feel this open debate is timely and
constructive beyond the expected adoption of today's
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7). Both will
strengthen the political will needed to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in our efforts
to combat the proliferation of WMDs.

