Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank our German colleagues for organizing today's
meeting, and we are grateful to the guest speakers for
their useful briefings and assessments ofthe state ofthe
protection of children in armed conflict.

It is clear that, despite the measures that have been
undertaken at the international and national levels,
along with the existence of a broad international legal
foundation, children continue to be among the most
vulnerable groups affected by armed conflict. Russia
condemns all serious offences committed against
children, regardless of who perpetrates them, and
advocates the prosecution of all such perpetrators. We
also firmly condemn intentional attacks on civilians,
including children, as well as the indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force that produces the same
results. The primary responsibility for protecting and
rehabilitating children belongs to national Governments,
while steps taken by United Nations entities should
be designed to support and complement those efforts.
United Nations representatives may be allowed to
engage with non-governmental armed groups only with
the consent of the Government of an affected nation.

The parameters for protecting children in armed
conflict and post-conflict recovery are laid out in
resolution 1612 (2005). They relate both to the operation
of the monitoring and accountability mechanism and
to the activities of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Those mechanisms must focus
primarily on the most pressing and large-scale situations
of armed conflict on the Council's agenda.

As far as other situations are concerned, they can be
considered by the Working Group only with the consent
of the State involved. Under Germany's leadership,
the Working Group has achieved a great deal in terms
of crafting recommendations on specific situations.
Implementing them effectively requires developing
close cooperation with the Governments concerned
in an atmosphere of trust and dialogue, which should
ultimately help to improve conditions for children on
the ground.

A key role in the Security Council's activity in
the area of protecting children in armed conflict
unquestionably belongs to the Special Representative of
the Secretary- General for Children and Armed Conflict.
In that regard, we welcome the appointment to the post
of Ms. Leila Zerrougui and hope that her considerable
experience in the United Nations system will help her
make a significant contribution to measures taken at
the international level to protect children affected by
armed conflict, and to make efforts in this area more
effective. Based on the experience already gained, we
would like to make some recommendations that we
hope will help enhance the effectiveness of the Special
Representative's work.

In recent years, we have unquestionably been quite
effective in achieving system-wide coordination of
efforts in the area ofthe protection of children in armed
conflict. Information and outreach activities have been
very successful. Here we should mention specifically
the active part played by the Special Representative in
the International Criminal Court's first prosecution of a
war crime for the recruitment and active use of children
in combat in the Lubanga case. At the same time, there
are still several issues concerning the implementation
of certain aspects of the Special Representative's
mandate.

First, we note that the Special Representative's area
of responsibility does not cover every issue related to
the protection of children in armed conflict, but only
those situations that are on the Security Council's
agenda. In that context, the concept of armed conflict
itself should not be too broadly interpreted, including in
the Secretary-General's reports. It is essential that the
information used be accurate and objective. Carefully
weighed evaluations, based on credible and reliable
information, will guarantee the subsequent practical
implementation of recommendations made, above all
by establishing mutually respectful dialogue with the
Government concerned. For example, with respect to
crimes committed against children in Syria, the report
(S/20l2/26l) of the Secretary-General accuses only
Government forces and their supporters. They alone are
mentioned in annex I to the report. Crimes perpetrated
by representatives of the opposition are referred to only
in passing in the same report.

With respect to Libya, we never received complete
information with respect to the situation of children
in that country and the investigation of the deaths of
children as a result of the NATO military operation in
that country. There are ample credible reports in this
case, not only on children's deaths but also on their
recruitment.
There is one other issue: elaborating specific
procedures and criteria for delisting parties to an
armed conflict from the annexes to the annual report
of the Secretary-General. It is our view that the current
inclusion of 32 such parties is evidence, inter alia, of
the need to devise understandable criteria for delisting
parties from such lists. It cannot be denied that States
on whose territory such parties are engaged in an
armed conflict are working very hard to remedy the
situation. The lack of simple and clear criteria not only
does not help the Governments of those countries but
continues to engender certain suspicions with respect
to the objectivity of the instrument as a whole.

Devising plans of action on putting an end to this
type of crime, as was proposed in the 2010 report
(S/2010/181) of the Secretary-General, is not, in our
view, the sole response to this issue. On the one hand,
certain parties to armed conflict have adopted such
plans but are still listed, and, on the other, it is well
known that the existence of this type of document in no
way ensures that it is being implemented in practice or
even that there is an intention to do so.

In conclusion, we deem regrettable that for the
first time a draft resolution on the issue of children
and armed conflict was not adopted unanimously by
the Security Council. As we see it, this has highlighted
once again the importance of ensuring that when such
important instruments are negotiated, the views of all
members of the Council, without exception, are taken
into account. In our view, consultations on the text
should have continued, since during those consultations
we saw positions converging, and prospects remained
for reaching a consensus on the text. We hope that in
future such situations will be avoided.

