Mr. Wittig (Germany): This is the first Security
Council resolution on Syria since the violent repression
by the Syrian security forces started. We welcome the
unity of the Council today. It comes deplorably late
but, hopefully, not too late. Thanks to the
commendable efforts of Joint Special Envoy Kofi
Annan, the cessation of fighting has by and large held
in Syria. However, as we speak, reports are coming in
of renewed attacks by the Syrian security forces. We
must therefore remain vigilant. Too many commitments
made by Damascus in the past have not been kept. We
must not tolerate further brinksmanship. The time for
delaying tactics is definitely over.

It is clear that the Syrian Government has yet to
fully comply with the commitments made to the Joint
Special Envoy and as demanded by the Security
Council. Damascus has yet to make the fundamental
change of course demanded by Kofi Annan to enable a
durable cessation of violence in all its forms.
Damascus has to halt military forward movements and
return troops and heavy weapons to their barracks.
Only when those steps are fully implemented will the
conditions for a sustainable cessation of violence exist.
Equally important, all other forms of violence and
human rights violations - such as arbitrary detention,
torture, abduction, sexual violence and violence against
children - must end immediately.

We applaud the fact that the opposition groups
have committed to a cessation of fighting despite
having been shelled by Government forces until the
very last moment.

The swift deployment of the advance observer
team will be an important element for the sustainable
cessation of violence. We look forward to the report of
the Secretary-General on a potential observer mission
next. But one thing is clear: the conditions for the
deployment of observers must be in place. The Syrian
Government must ensure that the advance team and the
possible follow-on mission can freely and effectively
implement their mandate. We know of too many other
examples where United Nations missions have become
a pawn in tactical games. We must not let that happen
again. The credibility of the Security Council is at
stake. We must send a clear message that any such
impediments would come at a high price.
3
The deployment of an observer mission should
also not lead to a mere freezing of the situation. A
United Nations mission on the ground cannot serve as
a substitute for the lack of will by the parties. Close
and early linkage with the political transition process
as foreseen in the six-point proposal by Mr. Annan is
required, not least as an eventual exit option for the
observers. One more thing: accountability for the
crimes committed must be a central element of the
transition process. There cannot be a return to the
status quo ante.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our full
support for the laudable efforts of Joint Special Envoy
Kofi Annan and his team.

