Ms. King (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his tireless
efforts to build a flexible and sustainable United
Nations peacekeeping force, able to respond not only
to the challenges of today but also to anticipate those
of the future.

Peacekeeping is at the very core of the United
Nations. We are all indebted to those who have served
as United Nations peacekeepers, and my country
acknowledges those who have given their lives in
pursuit of this noble cause. Over the past seven
decades, 1 million Blue Helmets have deployed in
over 70 operations across four continents, serving with
distinction to prevent the outbreak of conflict, manage
and contain violence and support countries in building
peace after conflict.

As we have heard this morning, including from the
Secretary-General, much has changed over the years in
terms of the context for United Nations peacekeeping
operations, yet the essential purpose of peacekeeping
has remained the same, as have many of the means
that peacekeepers employ to achieve their purpose. Let
us take, for example, the proactive use of force. The
United Nations has a history of using offensive action
to counter threats. The solemn phrase "by all necessary
means" has featured in mandates over many years as
a powerful statement of the Council's intent to uphold
international peace and security.

As the Ambassador of Jordan has referenced,
as far back as 1961 the United Nations Operation in
the Congo launched offensive operations against
Katangese forces. One could argue that this was the
genesis of multidimensional peacekeeping. In Sierra
Leone in 2000, troops of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone engaged in combat operations against the
Revolutionary United Front. Special forces, artillery
and attack helicopters were used in that operation - the
same capabilities being employed to excellent effect by
the Force Intervention Brigade of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) today, with strong
support from the Council.

The protection of civilians is now rightfully
established as a central tenet of United Nations
peacekeeping, reflected in the fact that the majority
of the Council's peacekeeping missions are clearly
and specifically mandated to protect civilians. The
Secretary-General's pronouncement in April that
United Nations peacekeepers should not wait for
instruction from Headquarters before taking action
to protect civilians was an unambiguous directive
affirming the need for proactive force measures for that
specific purpose. We must all now work to ensure that
the intent of the Council and the commitment of the
Secretary-General are operationalized effectively to
the benefit of the civilians who require protection.

One of the most pronounced new peacekeeping
trends in recent years has been the inexorable growth in
the demand for peacekeeping. Today, its scale and size
are unprecedented. A record number of United Nations
military, police and civilian personnel are serving on
more missions than ever before - deploying to vast,
remote and volatile environments where increasingly
they confront non-State actors employing deadly
unconventional tactics and where, as the Secretary-
General has said, there is in fact no peace to keep and
the risk of violence reoccurring is constant.

Yet public expectations are increasing about what
peacekeeping can achieve. Scrutiny of peacekeeping
effectiveness has never been more acute, the drive for
efficiency never more pressing. So as we mobilize to
confront those challenges, we must commit ourselves
to adapting, innovating and continually improving. We
must strengthen our capacity to deploy rapidly where
the lives of civilians are at risk. Facing uncertainty,
missions should be planned in a more flexible and
iterative manner.
By prioritizing mandate elements and sequencing
tasks using benchmarks, we can better meet mission
objectives. Recent experiences in Mali and South
Sudan show that we need to improve planning and
mission support, whether generating fresh troops or
through inter-mission cooperation. We must continue
to strengthen ties with regional and subregional
organizations whose member States are so often the
first responders when conflict erupts. We welcome
Rwanda's advice that we will have an opportunity to
examine this in more detail next month.

We must embrace new technologies in support of
peacekeeping. Unarmed, unmanned aerial systems
providing intelligence day and night have been crucial
in helping MONUSCO to neutralize armed groups
preying on civilians in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Simple measures, such as installing perimeter
lighting and cameras around United Nations bases,
can free personnel from static security tasks so they
may increase active patrolling, expanding further their
protective footprint.

Those cost-effective enablers will not lessen the
demand for boots on the ground or for other air assets in
the sky. Rather, they allow those in the field to achieve
their mandates in a safer, more effective and efficient
manner. We encourage the Secretary-General to deploy
those resources as he sees fit to meet the needs of each
mission. We must all work collaboratively with the new
United Nations Panel of Experts examining how other
technologies can be leveraged to support peacekeeping.
Of course, technologies only augment human capacity,
so we must redouble our efforts to improve training to
better prepare personnel to conduct mission tasks and
to confront the risks they face.

Ultimately, peacekeeping will only ever be a band-
aid measure without a stable peace. That is where
the coordination of peacekeeping and other Council
instruments is so crucial. The now routine partnering of
peacekeeping with preventive and protective sanctions
measures, such as arms embargoes, is a vital factor in
mitigating conflict and preserving the space for post-
conflict reconstruction. We must not lose sight of the
importance of the civilian side of peacekeeping to help
build national capacities to address local problems.
Done effectively, security sector reform; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; and reforms of justice
and rule-of-law institutions can be the glue that binds a
nation in the post-conflict phase.

The doubling of a number of United Nations police
authorized by the Council over the past decade reflects
a growing recognition that strengthening the rule of
law is the basis for lasting stability and security. United
Nations police are performing ever-expanding roles,
from combating sexual violence and transnational
crime to engaging communities to prevent conflict.
We believe that the role of police in peacekeeping is
something the Council should examine in a more
systematic way.

To conclude, we must all see today's debate as
an opportunity to take stock, revisit our assumptions
and question current practices in peacekeeping.
Collectively, as the peacekeeping partnership, we must
resolve to heed the lessons learned and we need to
continually refine our approach. We owe this to the men
and women who serve as United Nations peacekeepers
and to the many people they protect in our name.

