The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Dominican Republic.

I thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his report and
for the work that the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has been doing to meet the needs
of the more than 11 million people affected by the
conflict in Syria. As this is the first time I have taken
the floor on this subject, I should like to recognize and
commend Mr. Lowcock, his team and so many others
on the ground.

The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
alarming. There is a continuing crisis of displaced
persons and major challenges remain in terms of access
those affected. The number of people in acute need in
Syria continues to reach alarming levels, and women
and children continue to be disproportionately affected.
I believe that this situation has been made very clear to
us by Mr. Lowcock's briefing and the reports that reach
us from the various humanitarian actors on the ground
under truly difficult and complex circumstances, both
for the affected people and for themselves.

We have listened carefully to the constant warnings
about the challenges faced by humanitarian actors in
providing a humanitarian response that is sustained,
based on need and in strict adherence to humanitarian
principles, which on many occasions relate to very
high levels of insecurity. I also highlight the efforts
undertaken to assist the millions of displaced persons
and the thousands who continue to seek better living
conditions for their families. We also share the concerns
already expressed at this meeting with regard to the
protection of civilians, in particular in regions where
there have recently been hostilities and especially with
regard to the need to maintain sustained humanitarian
assistance in hard-to-reach areas and for humanitarian
access in general.

Against this background, I shall focus my comments
on the three points I have just mentioned.

First, we note with attention and great concern the
fact that the protection challenges that arise from the
displacement of civilians as a result of the hostilities
in several regions of the country, where an estimated
25,000 people have had to flee under terrible conditions,
which have been exacerbated by the impact of a harsh
winter and the rains in the region of recent weeks.
According to reports, these conditions have claimed the
lives of seven children. For that reason, we call in the
most urgent terms on the parties to the conflict to take
the measures necessary to save and protect the lives of
the civilian population, especially women and children,
in accordance with international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law. The parties to the conflict
must also allow the free movement of those people,
after having exhausted the due investigation processes
required for their relocation. Moreover, we believe
that the dignity of those people, as well as their right
to decide where to go after being forced to leave
their homes and abandon their belongings, must be
respected. Furthermore, it seems to us that by this year,
humanitarian action throughout most of the country
should support communities that are gradually hoping
to rebuild their lives and work towards creating an
enabling environment for their development and access
to basic services for vulnerable populations.

Secondly, with regard to the Rukban camp, we view
positively the arrangements under way for the delivery
of much-needed aid to the thousands of people there.
The deplorable situation seen last November has been
exacerbated by the onset of winter and the lack of health
facilities and personnel to care for the sick, in particular
children. Assistance must be delivered urgently. We
therefore urge the relevant authorities to pay the utmost
attention to that issue in order to alleviate the suffering
of those people in terms of health, food security,
medicines, drinking water and essential winter items.
Access to that very remote area must be sustained and
based on needs assessments so that such assistance can
reach those areas where it is needed.

Thirdly, in a new context, where 54 per cent of
those with acute needs are in areas controlled by the
Syrian Government, we believe that it is vital to work
hard to increase national capacities to meet those
needs. We believe that it is important to integrate the
affected communities into that process, making them
agents of their own recovery and providing them with
the necessary conditions to build a new future. I cannot
fail to mention here the key role that Syrian women will
play in that recovery process. As an important step,
we understand that it is necessary to be able to carry
out needs assessments. In that way, we will pave the
way for comprehensive rehabilitation and building the
resilience of those communities.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that the resolution
of the crisis situation faced by the Syrian people can be
found only once the conditions are in place for a political
settlement in the country, based on the principles of
inclusiveness and constructive dialogue, leading to
solutions for and by the Syrians with the participation
of all sectors of Syrian society.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

