South A frica today voted in favour of resolution 2532 (2020), on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as contained in document S/2020/607. We would, however, like to provide the following explanation of vote. South Africa reiterates its position that the role of the Security Council with regard to global public health emergencies should be clearly understood and linked to issues that fall directly in the ambit of the Council's mandate. I also wish to put on record the following observations regarding the substance of the text. It is unfortunate that the resolution before us excluded key elements related to the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic as well as its impact. The Secretary- General called for a global ceasefire and a humanitarian pause on 23 March in order to focus undivided attention on the fight against the pandemic and successfully mitigate its impact. He subsequently called for the waiving of measures and sanctions to allow affected Governments and societies to secure much-needed humanitarian aid, life-saving and medical supplies, and personal protective equipment. Following that call, the Council was briefed on numerous occasions by the Secretariat and civil society representatives about the severe impact of sanctions on ordinary citizens. We therefore regret that the resolution neglected to address the impact of sanctions or unilateral coercive measures, despite the Secretary-General's appeal. South Africa is further dismayed that the acknowledgment of the critical role and leadership of the World Health Organization (WHO) in combating the COVID-19 pandemic has been removed from the final version of the resolution. South Africa reaffirms the indispensable role of WHO and commends its work in assisting affected countries and regional organizations to overcome the COVID-19 pandemic. We underscore the vital need for national, regional and international coordination and cooperation with WHO in order to win the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. The resolution should have reflected that need.
