Mr. Cunningham (United States): The situation
in the Middle East is exceedingly precarious. We all
realize that. In this highly combustible atmosphere, the
international community needs to consider both its
words and its actions very carefully. We should
concentrate on developing ways to initiate, encourage
and support the parties' own efforts to end the
violence, to restore confidence and to return to
negotiations.

Unfortunately, violence breeds violence; actions
breeds reaction; mistakes are made; and tensions
mount. We wish it were otherwise, but violence cannot
and will not be halted from the outside. Nor will it be
ended by charges and counter-charges and heated
rhetoric.

Yesterday, Deputy Prime Minister Shimon Peres
met with the Security Council and conveyed several
important points. First, he underscored that security for
Israelis and Palestinians depended on the two parties,
not outside forces or an international presence.
Secondly, he reminded us that peace cannot be imposed
and asked the Council to support peace, not one side or
the other. As Ambassador Wang and others have
pointed out in our discussion already, both sides say
that they want the dialogue, the peace process, to go
forward. We should be encouraging that and not make
it more complicated by inopportune action by the
Council outside of a context that foresees a result that
the parties agreed to.

Mr. Peres reaffirmed the commitment of the
Government of Israel to the Sharm el-Sheikh
understandings and to the Mitchell fact-finding
commission, inviting them to conduct a thorough
review of the situation. That is certainly a welcome
step. He informed us that the commission will be in
Israel next week and urged the Council to postpone
deliberations on next steps until we have a report from
that body. He also confirmed that Prime Minister
Sharon will be in New York on 21 March to meet the
Secretary-General. We welcome these ongoing efforts
and the new Israeli Government's engagement with the
United Nations.

We want the Security Council to support peace
and dialogue. It cannot do so if it acts precipitously. It
can only do so in support of both Israel and the
Palestinians. The United States remains firmly
committed to ensuring that the Council does not adopt
any resolution that is not supported by both the
Palestinians and the Israelis.

Last December the Council wisely decided not to
adopt a resolution calling for the premature
establishment of an international presence in the
region. The Council sent a clear and unmistakable
signal at that time. The message was simple and clear.
It was that we all look forward to a time when the
parties reach an agreement and turn to the Council for
support and assistance in implementing it. It is entirely
possible that an international presence that has an
achievable mandate will be a part of that
implementation effort. At that time of prospective
peace, the United States will join with the rest of the
Council in giving full support to the parties' own
efforts to secure the final blessings of peace.
Much as we may hope otherwise, the road to
peace does not begin in this Chamber. It must begin
anew in the region. The Council has already expressed
its support for an end to all the violence and a return to
dialogue. For now, the Council's mission, and indeed
the mission of every member of the United Nations,
must be to encourage the parties to end the violence, to
come together in peaceful negotiations and to make the
difficult choices necessary to reach a final status
agreement. Suggesting that the Council can somehow
impose itself between the parties and play a
constructive role by observing violence only serves to
divert the parties from the absolute necessity to meet
and shape their shared destiny, which is a just and
lasting peace that provides security and dignity to
Palestinians and Israelis alike. The United States
Government is committed to that goal.

