Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea): In the
course of today's Council meeting we have listened to all
sorts of dismal statistics and have heard about symptoms
and diagnoses available regarding the AIDS problem in
Africa. Now is therefore the time for us to act, and to act
decisively with concrete measures to fight this
unprecedented tragedy and to turn the tide against AIDS.
We therefore commend the Security Council for its
willingness to become an additional partner in the
comprehensive and coordinated efforts of the international
community to combat AIDS in Africa, with particular
emphasis on the security aspect of the epidemic. We are
confident that the initiatives taken by the Security Council
at this juncture will generate momentum for a global
response by all actors on all fronts to combat this
pandemic, which threatens not only Africa, but also the rest
of the world.

Having said that, let me put forward several practical
suggestions related to today's topic of discussion.

First, my delegation believes that the international
community should address the problem of AIDS in Africa
with the full force of an institutional response. In this
context, we welcome the Secretary-General's suggestion to
the General Assembly at its last session that it set up a
working group that - among other responsibilities -
would forge effective partnerships with the goal of reducing
HIV/AIDS infection rates in Africa.

In the ensuing resolution, the General Assembly
requested its President to convene an organizational meeting
of the open-ended ad hoc working group no later than
March 2000. We hope that this working group will soon
begin its activities by monitoring the AIDS situation in
Africa and subsequently making recommendations
thereon, including the suggestion made today by my
colleague the Ambassador of Ukraine to consider holding
a special session of the General Assembly devoted to the
AIDS problem.

My delegation also considers it necessary that the
working group's mandate be further broadened to include
devising a more comprehensive and coordinated strategy
involving all actors within and outside the United Nations
system, in close cooperation with the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).

By the same token, we welcome the substantive
progress made at the meeting on the International
Partnership against AIDS in Africa held here in New
York last December. We look forward to an agreed plan
of action to be submitted by all the participating actors
next May.

Secondly, my delegation suggests that the Security
Council establish a mechanism for close cooperation and
coordination with UNAIDS, the focal point for a wide
range of actors devoted to fighting AIDS. To that end, the
Security Council may wish to arrange regular open
briefing sessions with the Executive Director of UNAIDS
to keep Member States up to date on the aspects of the
AIDS crisis in Africa that have peace and security
implications.

Finally, we believe that the social, economic and
political scale and dimensions of the AIDS epidemic in
Africa call for a comprehensive and integrated approach
that requires not only active participation but also close
cooperation and coordination among all major
stakeholders, namely, local populations, African leaders,
the United Nations system, non-governmental
organizations and donors. To echo Vice-President Gore,
independent initiatives to fight AIDS by the various actors
must be more focused and coordinated in order to take
maximum advantage of their synergy and success. We
therefore consider it essential that we reinforce the
leading role of UNAIDS vis-a-vis these crucial actors by
strengthening its mandate, providing it with greater
resources and enhancing the coordinating authority of its
Executive Director.

In conclusion, it is our sincere hope that the views
and suggestions put forward at today's meeting will create
momentum that will unite the global fronts to fight AIDS

 

in Africa and ultimately help prevent the spread of this
horrendous epidemic from threatening peace and security
on the African continent.

