Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would like to congratulate Kuwait through
you, Mr. President, on its accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February, to
wish it every success and assure it of Cote d'Ivoire's
cooperation. I would also like to thank Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her excellent briefing.

My delegation commends the work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
through its Fact-finding Mission with regard to the
dismantling of Syria's chemical-weapon stocks.
We encourage the Syrian Government to comply
with decisions regarding the destruction of its
chemical arsenal.

My delegation is seriously concerned about the
reports in the past week once again alleging the
possible use of chemical weapons in the conflict in
Syria, particularly in eastern Ghouta, where 21 cases
of suffocation have been reported. They represent a
significant reversal in our efforts to combat impunity
with regard to the use of chemical weapons in Syria. The
suffering inflicted on the Syrian people is intolerable
and must be ended. In that regard, my country calls for
continued efforts to implement resolution 2118 (2013),
which provides for the complete dismantling of the
Syrian chemical-weapons arsenal.

These new allegations of the use of chemical
weapons once again call into question the Council's
responsibility, particularly in terms of putting an end to
these acts as soon as possible and of clearly identifying
the perpetrators of such criminal acts. In its latest
statement on the issue of chemical weapons in Syria
(see S/PV.8164), my delegation warned against the
Council's failure to act, which could be interpreted by
those involved in the use of such weapons in Syria as a
weakness ofthis organ and licence to act with impunity.
Clearly, those who commit these despicable acts will
continue to do so as long as the Council remains divided
about the need to set up a consensus-based framework
capable of identifying perpetrators and bringing them
to justice. My delegation therefore encourages all
ongoing initiatives that support the establishment of an
accountability mechanism acceptable to all.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its strong
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons in Syria
and calls upon the relevant United Nations mechanisms
to shed light on the new allegations of the use of such
weapons. My delegation eagerly awaits the conclusions
of the report that will be submitted after the second
round of inspections conducted at the Scientific Studies
and Research Centre in Syria.

