Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
The United Republic of Tanzania joins my colleagues
in commending you, Minister Robertson, and your
country, Jamaica, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of July. In the
same breath, we wish to commend the Council and the
Secretary-General for their continued interest and
involvement in the prevention of armed conflicts. For
us, the view that there is no higher goal, no deeper
commitment, and no greater ambition for the United
Nations than the prevention of armed conflict is
nowhere more relevant than in the Council.

The United Republic of Tanzania, being one of
the countries of the Great Lakes region of Africa, is
painfully aware of the ravages of armed conflict - not
only in terms of its economic cost but, more
importantly, in terms of the humanitarian tragedy it
unravels. We have played host to thousands of
refugees. We have witnessed innocent civilians, mostly
women and children, running for their lives from their
own countrymen. We have experienced the
environmental degradation brought by such an influx
of refugees. We have been overwhelmed by the social
and economic dislocation associated with such massive
invasions. Needless to say, the security dimension is no
less serious. Because of these circumstances, the
subject of the Council's attention this afternoon has a
very special bearing on the real concerns of
Tanzanians.

Does the Security Council have a role? In our
view the Charter of the United Nations is clear: the
Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. While
the Charter may have its own flaws, it is quite
unambiguous on its commitment to preventing war, to
upholding human rights and to promoting social
progress. Needless to say, the role of the Security
Council is critical in this regard.

The role of the Security Council in preventing
armed conflict can best be examined in the light of
recent experience. With a few exceptions, the most
frequently occurring type of armed conflict - and the
one that takes the highest toll on the civilian
population- is of an intra-State nature. In Rwanda
and Kosovo, the Council failed. In Angola, Sierra
Leone and Ethiopia/Eritrea, it has tried to redeem its
failures and must be commended for its genuine
efforts, in spite of everything else.

Admittedly, the challenge of achieving peace and
security in the face of conflict or grave human
suffering is a challenge for the international community
as well as for the Council, for, under the terms of the
Charter, the international community acts through the
Council. However, we are concerned and distressed by
the fact that, in the face of armed conflict or obvious
atrocities committed against humanity, the Council
could fail to act in unison and in time, with tragic
consequences for its legitimacy.
The Council must therefore strive to prevent
potential conflicts from degenerating into actual
instances of armed conflict. We commend the measures
being instituted by the Secretary-General. Too often the
approaches have focused on consequences rather than
on causes, and we welcome the desire to reorient those
efforts. In our view, the following are critical areas of
focus.

First, the Council must continue to support the
Secretary-General's initiatives for durable and
sustainable peace by instituting timely responses to
early signs of trouble and by enlisting the cooperation
of other organs and institutions in a broad-based effort
to resolve the underlying causes of conflict.

Secondly, where processes have been instituted to
resolve conflict, either through the auspices of the
United Nations or through regional arrangements, the
Council must commit itself to extend its sustained
support to the process, including the provision of
adequate resources. In this regard, we commend the
Council for its efforts relating to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Thirdly, as we had occasion to state before the
Council last November, we continue to believe that the
United Nations, and the Council in particular, must
prepare contingency arrangements with respect to the
outcome of ongoing peace processes. Countries in
conflict will require the help of the Council as well as
that of the international community, not only to
reconstruct but also to build democratic institutions for
lasting peace.

Lastly, the Council needs to strengthen its
cooperation with regional arrangements. A deliberate
strategy must be pursued to enhance their capacity for,
and effectiveness in, preventive action at the regional
level within the context of Chapter VIII of the Charter,
for we believe that regional arrangements can act as an
effective spearhead for subsequent Council action.

The United Nations, and the Council in particular,
was established primarily to save humanity from the
scourge of war and to maintain international peace and
security. This continues to be the overriding desire of
our people. The extent to which this aspiration is
fulfilled is one of the primary measures of the
legitimacy of the United Nations and the Council. It is
our belief that this function can be discharged.
However, it can be fully discharged only if the
Organization is adequately funded and supported. This
is a challenge we all face. We cannot afford to fail.

