Mr. Stein: The situation in Venezuela has resulted
in a population outflow the magnitude of which is
unparalleled in the modern history of the region. At
present, we estimate that 3.7 million Venezuelans
have left their country, approximately 80 per cent of
whom have left since 2015. Although the vast majority
of Venezuelans who have left home can be found
in neighbouring countries and other parts of South
America, it is important to note that more than 20
countries are affected by those outflows, across the
hemisphere and beyond.

Last year, Venezuelans left the country at a net
rate of about 5,000 per day, and they continue to leave
the country, despite recent border closures on the
Venezuelan side. If the trend continues in 2019, we
estimate that the total number of Venezuelans outside
the country will exceed 5 million by the end of the
year. The testimonials and feedback from Venezuelans
arriving in countries of the region outline a range
of factors, often in parallel, that contribute to their
departure from the country. The stated reasons for
leaving include insecurity and violence; a lack of access
to food, medicine and essential services; loss ofincome;
and a lack of effective national protection systems.

Against that backdrop of deteriorating conditions
inside Venezuela, we observe individuals and
families leaving the country with increasing needs
and vulnerabilities. A disproportionately high rate
of family separation is already taking place as some
family members leave in search of opportunities to
support those back home or secure the means to later
bring their relatives.

The aforementioned border closures also make
it necessary for the majority of persons leaving the
country to cross the border irregularly and in very
dangerous conditions, exposing them to additional risks
of exploitation and abuse, including through human
smuggling and trafficking. The presence of illegal
armed actors in multiple border areas and the seasonal
rise in border river flows create additional challenges
and risks for the continuous population outflows,
including their possible recruitment, which also affects
children and youth.

In that context, it is important to highlight the
generosity of the countries that have been receiving
Venezuelans, both those in transit as well as those being
hosted. Those countries have largely maintained open-
door policies and, through the Quito process, continue
to work towards harmonized approaches on important
matters such as reception arrangements, regular stay
provisions, documentation and social, economic and
cultural inclusion.

The third meeting in Quito on the human mobility
of Venezuelans in Latin America, held this week,
brought together participants from 12 countries and
observers from 13 countries, as well as United Nations
agencies, international cooperation agencies and
financial organizations. Technical discussions during
the meeting indicated important advances in the
harmonization of approaches in the areas of entry and
stay requirements, access to rights and documentation.

Participating countries reaffirmed their
commitment to the continuity of the Quito process
and announced that Argentina will assume the leading
role in moving the process forward and host the next
meeting in Buenos Aires in July. Paraguay offered to
take over the process after Argentina. A priority issue
identified by all participants was the urgent need for
greater international cooperation and the involvement
of multilateral development and financial actors in that
unprecedented humanitarian situation that is affecting
many States of the Latin American and Caribbean
region, as well as other countries.

Despite those efforts, national capacities are
increasingly strained and, in some cases, carry the
risk of denial of entry or access to regular migration
schemes. The experience to date, however, demonstrates
that Venezuelans continue to move across the region,
regularly or irregularly, and it is in the best interest
of the receiving countries to avoid situations where
Venezuelans remain undocumented, invisible and
without access to basic rights, as well as exposed to
situations of violence, exploitation or abuse. Taking into
account those considerations, I would like to highlight
some implications for and requests to the Council and
the international community as a whole.

First, more support is needed for the States that
are employing open-door policies to receive, assist and
host Venezuelan outflows, including the initiatives of
the Quito process.

Secondly, the communities that are receiving
Venezuelans are in need of support. Many of the
communities receiving Venezuelans have needs of their
own, and support is also needed for the host population.
By addressing the needs of both, we can increase the
impact of the humanitarian response, mitigate the
possibilities of xenophobic expressions and create a
better climate for the local integration of Venezuelans
into their host communities.

Thirdly, stronger international cooperation
is critically needed. Despite some important
contributions to date, on the whole more is needed
in terms of financial support to countries and other
actors engaged in the humanitarian response. Those
contributions not only strengthen the humanitarian
response and socioeconomic integration solutions, but
also contribute to stability in the region as a whole as it
faces unprecedented humanitarian challenges.

