Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I should like, on behalf of my
delegation, to express to you, Sir, our satisfaction at
seeing you assume the presidency of the Security
Council this month. Our satisfaction is twofold, as you
represent a country united to Cuba by profound ties of
friendship.

The convening of this session was fully justified.
Despite international condemnation and the resolutions
that have been adopted, this week Israeli tanks once
again surrounded the Palestinian National Authority's
facilities in Ramallah. Ironically, that occurred as
President Bush was having a meeting with Prime
Minister Sharon in Washington for the sixth time,
whose unusual and sole outcome was to reiterate
demands for practical actions by the Palestinian
Authority's leader. Shortly before that, Bush had
stunned the world by calling Sharon a man of peace
amid the atrocities of Jenin. Since Sharon's provocative
visit to Al-Haram Al-Sharif, approximately 2,000
persons have died, nearly 1,500 of them innocent
Palestinian civilians.

The Government of Israel's attitude of open
defiance to the norms of international law and to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations is, in
large measure, the result of the impassivity with which
the Security Council has contemplated the flagrant
violations of its own resolutions. We all know why a
different standard is applied in the case of Israel. That
is what happens when a permanent member of the
Security Council, pursuing its national interests, uses
its powers and prerogatives arbitrarily. Hypocrisy and a
double standard continue to prevail, assisted by the
anachronistic and anti-democratic privilege of the veto.
On 24 occasions, the United States has already vetoed
Council draft resolutions concerning the question of
Palestine. This organ could not even react timidly to
the Sharon Government's decision not to cooperate
with the investigative team that was to have been sent
to Jenin, thereby failing to comply with resolution
1405 (2002).

Cuba commends the position maintained by those
Council members who have undertaken sincere efforts
to make the Council rise to the level of events. In
addition, we should like to recognize the importance,
as an effective contribution, of the visit to President
Arafat at the Palestinian National Authority's
headquarters in Ramallah by a Non-Aligned Movement
group of ministers, headed by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of South Africa.

A just and lasting peace cannot be achieved in the
Middle East until the Palestinian people can exercise
its legitimate right to establish an independent State
with its capital in East Jerusalem, until all the occupied
Arab territories are returned and until Israel withdraws
from the Gaza Strip, from the West Bank and from the
Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967. There will be
no lasting peace until the Israeli provocations in
Southern Lebanon cease, until the return of the
Palestinians is assured and until Israeli settlements are
eliminated, in conformity with Council resolution 465
(1980). There will not be a just and effective peace if
Israel does not renounce its policy of occupation and
does not comply with the many resolutions adopted by
the Council and by the General Assembly.

The Security Council should seriously consider
the Secretary-General's proposal to establish a
multinational force in the occupied territories. It is
simply unacceptable that this body continues to turn its
back on the Palestinian people's sufferings by trying to
make us believe that nothing can be done or by
adopting timid resolutions that say little and are
complied with even less.

Cuba appeals once again to the Security Council
to act without further delay, to rise to the occasion and
to discharge its responsibilities as it should.

