The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

One month ago, I stood on the Simon Bolivar
International Bridge that connects Venezuela with
Colombia, and watched an unending line of desperate
people trying to escape tyranny. The irony and the
tragedy of this bridge should not be lost on any of
us. Named for a great liberator, the Simon Bolivar
International Bridge is now an escape route for a people
starved and imprisoned by a dictator.

But there is also a lesson in the thousands of
Venezuelans who cross the Simon Bolivar International
Bridge every day. Fundamental human rights are denied
when a man's ability to feed his family is destroyed.
Human rights are denied when a woman loses her
voice in determining her own future and when human
rights are denied. The violence and instability that
follow spill over borders. One nation's crisis becomes
a region's crisis - even a global crisis. This process is
well advanced in Venezuela. To those who say that this
is only a matter of Venezuelan internal affairs, I would
say: "Tell that to the people of Colombia. Tell that to
the people of Peru. Tell that to the people of Brazil. And
tell that to the people of Ecuador". We are long past
the point at which the narco-State of Venezuela stopped
being a Venezuelan security problem.

And now we are seeing the start of this disastrous
cycle in Nicaragua. The spread of tyranny follows a
predictable pattern. Media and opposition parties are
silenced. Corruption chokes off economic opportunity.
Institutions that people rely on outside the State, such as
universities, trade unions and the church, are attacked
and demonized The regime unleashes its militants to
kidnap, torture and execute dissidents. The dictator
hides behind those forces that terrorize and surveil
their neighbours - all at the regime's instruction and
on its behalf. And when the people inevitably rise
up in protest, they are met with more violence, more
imprisonment and more death. Then the exodus begins.

All of this has already happened in Venezuela.
All of this is now happening in Nicaragua. Daniel
Ortega has adopted the tactics of the dictators he
once claimed to oppose. We should not be surprised.
Daniel Ortega and Nicolas Maduro are cut from the
same corrupt cloth. They are both students of the same
failed ideology, and they are both dictators who live
in fear of their own people. The Ortega regime has
long controlled the media by ensuring that television
and radio stations are in the hands of family, friends
and corrupt allies. Ortega banned opposition parties
and rigged the Nicaraguan Constitution to allow him
three uninterrupted five-year terms, and he named his
wife Vice-President to continue to hold the power and
dominate Nicaragua when he passes from the scene.

In classic authoritarian fashion, Ortegais attempting
to destroy the most respected institution that is rightfully
standing up for the Nicaraguan people - the Catholic
Church. Clerics have been attacked. Catholic charities
have been looted. Churches have been desecrated. Now,
he is clinging to power in an equally authoritarian
fashion by killing, detaining and brutalizing anyone
who dares to oppose him. According to the Nicaraguan
Association for Human Rights, over 448 people have
been killed and over 2,000 have been injured.

Predictably, the Ortega regime has unleashed
its allied forces and turned citizens against citizens.
Hundreds of the regime's opponents have been
kidnapped, including six national dialogue student
leaders who were taken just yesterday. Hundreds more
have disappeared, and just last week he expelled the
United Nations human rights delegation. All of the
detained students and other political prisoners should
be released immediately.

The result is the beginnings of the exodus of
desperate Nicaraguans out of their homeland. Over
25,000 Nicaraguans have migrated to Costa Rica
since the start of the crisis, with Honduras, Panama
and Mexico also receiving Nicaraguan migrants and
asylum seekers.

With each passing day, Nicaragua travels further
down a familiar path. It is a path that Syria has taken.
It is a path that Venezuela has taken. The Security
Council should not and cannot be a passive observer
as Nicaragua continues to decline into a failed, corrupt
and dictatorial State, because we know where this path
leads. The Syrian exodus has produced millions of
refugees, sowing instability throughout the Middle East
and Europe. The Venezuelan exodus has become the
largest displacement of people in the history of Latin
America. A Nicaraguan exodus would overwhelm its
neighbours and create a surge of migrants and asylum
seekers in Central America.
Today, the United States stands in solidarity with
the people of Nicaragua, not just because we believe
in fundamental human rights and expect them to be
honoured, but also because our future is bound up with
our neighbours in the Americas. Their prosperity is
our prosperity, and their security is our security. On
my trip to Colombia, I met with Venezuelan families
who walked three hours in the blazing heat every day
to cross the Simon Bolivar International Bridge forjust
a single meal - the only meal that they would have
that day.

Nicaraguan families are not that desperate yet, but
we know what is coming if nothing changes. We still
have the opportunity to prevent history from repeating
itself. We still have the opportunity to prevent tyranny
from threatening peace and security. The Nicaraguan
people are demanding a voice in their future. They are
calling for the release of arbitrarily jailed protesters.
They are calling for an end to the dictatorship. They are
calling for their own freedom.

On 18 July, the Organization of American States
(OAS) overwhelmingly adopted a resolution holding
the Nicaraguan Government responsible for ongoing
human rights abuses, and has since established a
working group to consider the situation in Nicaragua.
The OAS has shown great leadership in addressing the
tragic developments in Nicaragua. The United States
fully supports the efforts of the OAS.

For the sake of the people of Nicaragua, for the
security of the region and for the respect for human
rights that we are bound to uphold, I applaud the
Security Council for adding its powerful voice to those
calling for an end to tyranny in Nicaragua.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Nicaragua.

