Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
commend Spain's initiative in convening this debate
on enhancing international judicial cooperation in
countering terrorism. We welcome Justice Minister
Rafael Catala to New York to preside over the meeting.
We thank Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate; Ms. Dorcas Oduor, Deputy Director of
Public Prosecutions in Kenya; and Mr. Robert Strang,
Executive Secretary of the International Institute for
Justice and the Rule of Law, for their briefings.

We strongly condemn the terrorist attacks that took
place recently in Egypt and Turkey, and we express
our condolences to the Victims. We support affected
countries in taking action to combat terrorism and
safeguard national peace and security.

Terrorism is a common challenge faced by all
humankind. We must resolve to fight terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, wherever and whenever
it occurs. In the fight against terrorism, we must
avail ourselves of uniform standards. We cannot link
terrorism to any specific religion or ethnicity. We must
abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and allow the Organization and the
Security Council the central coordination role in taking
concerted action.

We must use multiple means, including political,
economic and cultural, in pushing for political solutions
to regional conflicts and address both the symptoms
and the root causes in order to eliminate the breeding
grounds of terrorism. Terrorist organizations are
currently running rampant. With tighter organizations
they are carrying out more frequent cross-border
activities. They are using new technologies, such as
the Internet, to disseminate extreme narratives. Their
threat is on the rise. Countries should strengthen legal
cooperation in the fight against terrorism in order to
weave a legal and judicial dragnet across all regions of
the world to ensure that terrorists have no place to hide.

First, strengthening counter-terrorism legislation
provides a domestic legal foundation for countering
terrorism and implementing cooperation among
international partners in this field. The international
community, in accordance with the Council's
resolutions, should support countries in developing
domestic counter-terrorism legislation and updating
it as required by current terrorist threats. At the
same time, we must bear in mind the various national
conditions and situations. The international community
should respect the legislative and judicial sovereignty
of all States.

Secondly, strengthening counter-terrorism
cooperation is an important channel for combating cross-
border terrorist activities. Countries must implement
fully the relevant Security Council resolutions and
multilateral and bilateral legal treatises on the mutual
use of legal assistance and extradition in order to
generate synergy in bringing terrorists to justice.
There should be no double standards or politicization
in carrying out judicial cooperation. China calls on all
countries, on the basis of equality and mutual benefit,
to step up cooperation in counter-terrorism activities
and intensify the negotiation and conclusion ofmutual
legal assistance and extradition treaties.

Thirdly, strengthening counter-terrorism
cooperation is an important way of joining hands in
counter-terrorism efforts. On the basis of equality and
mutual benefit, countries should carry out cross-border
enforcement cooperation in order to cut off supply
lines to terrorist organizations in terms of recruitment,
financing and weapons. In accordance with Security
Council resolutions, countries should step up
cooperation in areas such as intelligence sharing, border
control and enforcement support so that they can join
hands in fighting foreign terrorist fighters, especially
repatriated foreign terrorist fighters, in order to deal
with the threats they pose.

Fourthly, we must focus our efforts on suppressing
the use ofthe Internet for terrorist activities. At present,
terrorists are using the Internet as well as social media
and other platforms to spread both audio and visual
messages to disseminate extreme narratives and
ideologies, recruit people and raise funds. Those are
serious threats. The international community should
bear in mind the special features of cyberspace and
act in accordance with Security Council resolutions
to take effective collective measures to respond to
such threats. Countries should step up legislation and
reinforcement work and undertake judicial cooperation
in order to strengthen Internet-based monitoring and
surveillance activities and hold perpetrators of terrorist
activities accountable.

China is an important member of the international
counter-terrorism community. At the end of last year,
China promulgated its own counter-terrorism law: a
commitment for China to upscale its efforts to counter
terrorism and push for international counter-terrorism
cooperation. Our law clearly provides that China will, in
accordance with the treaties to which we are party and
on the basis of equality and mutual benefit, undertake
counter-terrorism cooperation with the relevant
countries, regions and international organizations in
areas such as policy dialogue, intelligence sharing,
enforcement cooperation and the monitoring of fund
flows. In accordance with the provisions of its counter-
terrorism law, China will continue its efforts to work
with international partners in order to prevent and
combat terrorism so as to ensure national security
and protect its people's lives and property and make a
positive contribution to the safeguarding of world and
regional peace and security.

