Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
you yourself have said, Sir, what we had in the
consultation room was a preview. My delegation is
eager that our discussion here today be set down in the
official record. I would therefore beg the indulgence of
delegations present to repeat and summarize what was
said earlier.

I said at the outset that when Costa Rica
presented its candidacy for Security Council
membership to the Members of the Organization, we
did so on the basis of a platform of clear and specific
principles that we have always upheld. We presented
ourselves as a country that was devoted to and
concerned about respect for international law without
restriction; it could not be otherwise for a country that
has staked its security on multilateralism and
international law for the past 60 years. We also
presented ourselves as a country that defends and
promotes respect for the human rights of all human
beings without exception, double standards or
politicization of the cause. That is our history as a State
and those are the fundamental values that we wish to
see strengthened in the Organization.

In our campaign, we also stressed our brief but
notable record of promoting the need to reform the
working methods of the Security Council. As early as
1997, a note from Ambassador Berrocal referred to the
Council's working methods. Alongside other Members
of the Organization, we formed the so-called small five
group, in which we made proposals with a View to
making the Council more efficient and to ensuring that
its actions enjoyed greater legitimacy. We called for a
more transparent and inclusive Council, and we
continue to do so, repeatedly and vehemently.

No one will be surprised, therefore, that Costa
Rica should feel obliged to express its concern at the
manner in which the draft resolution on which we are
about to vote was negotiated, or to convey our
difficulty in understanding the absolute refusal to
include elements that, in our View, should be an
integral part of the draft resolution.

It is especially difficult for Costa Rica to
understand the opposition to including a reference to
the human rights component in the text of the draft
resolution. During the negotiation process, we
proposed two options for incorporating such a
reference. Today, to our surprise, the representative of
the Russian Federation threatened to exercise a
08-32472
technical veto of any reference to human rights, despite
the fact that the issue of human rights is the object of
mutual accusations made by both parties, that it has
been raised in consultations by various delegations,
and that several references are made to it in the reports
of the Secretary-General. In his most recent report,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon himself refers to the
United Nations duty to uphold human rights standards
in all its operations, including in Western Sahara, and
to the need to coordinate action in that sphere.

Costa Rica cannot understand the reasons that
have been put forward for rejecting a specific reference
to the framework of international law when we are
calling on the parties to assume a realistic position in
the negotiations, nor do we understand the fact that the
Group of Friends should sideline the members of the
Security Council in the preparation of the texts of draft
resolutions and in the building of consensus. In this
case, just a week ago the Group of Friends provided us
with the text on which we are about to vote and in
which my delegation continued to insist that some of
its amendments be included.

Costa Rica believes that the Council should
facilitate solutions to the international issues on its
agenda. As we said in the debate on the Middle East,
the Council should be part of the solution and not part
of the problem. We should not come here to defend the
interests of certain parties to a conflict or the particular
interests of any delegation. Instead, we should promote
just, equitable and lasting solutions to problems that
touch on international peace and security.

If the Council is to be part of the solution in
Western Sahara, it must be united. That is what we
have worked to ensure and why we withdrew our
proposed amendments to the text. We will continue
clearly and decisively to advocate a political, just and
lasting solution acceptable to all parties, as requested
by resolutions 1754 (2007) and 1783 (2007). The
solution to the issue of the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara should be sought in the
framework of the ongoing negotiations between the
parties, which should be based on the principles and
provisions of international law, especially those that
have governed the Organization's decolonization work,
in particular General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV)
and 1541 (XV), which provide for voluntary
annexation to a State or the proclamation of
independence as the logical outcome of the process of
self-determination.
08-32472

Costa Rica has worked constructively and
demonstrated flexibility, creativity and, today,
humility, despite the particular negotiating dynamic
with which we were faced. Our proposals to improve
the paragraphs on human rights and respect for
international law were never reflected in the text or
negotiated in consultations. The implications of such a
negotiating process are many and do nothing to
strengthen the Council's legitimacy and transparency.
Progress may be slow, as they say, but we have
expressed our concern, maintained our position in the
negotiations and defended the ideas and principles that
underpinned our campaign to obtain the seat we now
occupy on the Council.

In our first proposed amendment, we suggested
adding the expression "within the framework of
international law" to paragraph 2, which would then
read as follows:

"Endorses the report's recommendation that
realism, within the framework of international
law, and a spirit of compromise by the parties are
essential to maintain the momentum of the
process of negotiations".

We also proposed an amendment to add a new
operative paragraph that would have read:

"Calls upon the parties to commit
themselves to a continuous and constructive
dialogue with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and
MINURSO with a view to ensuring respect for
the human rights of the people of Western
Sahara;".

We withdrew both of our proposed amendments
with a View to strengthening consensus and as a
demonstration of respect for those who listened when
we wanted to present our points of view.

