The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

I welcome the President of Somalia, His Excellency
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, to this meeting and
thank him for his statement. I also thank Mr. Keating,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia, and Ambassador Antonio, the Permanent
Observer of the African to the United Nations, for their
briefings.

With elections scheduled for later this year,
Somalia's peace process is entering a crucial period.
Recently, the Federal Government of Somalia has made
active efforts to promote social reconciliation, combat
terrorism, advance federal institution-building and
comprehensively implement Vision 2016. China highly
appreciates the able leadership of President Mohamud
and is confident that, under his leadership, the Somali
people will continue to achieve new progress on
national reconciliation. At the same time, the security
and humanitarian situation in the country remains
fragile and the attainment of peace and development
is still an arduous task. In that connection, I wish to
emphasize the following four points.

First, all parties should continue to push forward
the peace process in Somalia. China welcomes the fact
that President Mohamud and the leaders of all parties
in Somalia held a National Leaders Forum recently
and reached a consensus on the electoral process for
the 2016 elections. We hope that all the parties will
put the long-term interests of their nation and their
people above all else, strengthen dialogue, settle their
differences and work together for peace, stability
and development in their country. The international
community should adhere to the principle of Somali
ownership and Somali leadership, effectively help
the Federal Government advance the peace process,
reinforce federation-building, comprehensively
improve its administrative capacity, expedite local
institution-building, promote social reconciliation
and bring about lasting peace and the sustainable
development of Somalia.

Secondly, emphasis should be placed on
consolidating the security environment in Somalia.
The terrorist group Al-Shabaab still poses a grave
threat to security in the country. Recently, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
National Army have worked together to enhance
counter-terrorism cooperation and have achieved
remarkable results. China strongly condemns the
terrorist attacks against AMISOM. and appreciates the
important contributions made by the African Union and
countries in the region to the maintenance of security
and stability in Somalia. We welcome the summit of
the AMISOM. troop- and police-contributing countries
in February, and expect the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia and other parties concerned to work
together and continue to provide sustained and stable
logistical support to AMISOM. and the Somali National
Army, thereby creating external conditions favourable
to the advancement of the Somali political process.

Thirdly, efforts are needed to comprehensively
promote the development of the Somali economy.
Development is the only way to eliminate the root causes
of conflicts and achieve lasting stability in Somalia.
Somalia is endowed with rich natural resources and has
enormous potential for development. The international
community should increase its assistance to Somalia
aimed at building infrastructure and developing its
agriculture, boosting job creation and improving
development so that the Somali people can enjoy the
dividends of peace at an early date. China expects
the World Bank and other international financial
institutions and development agencies to honour their
commitments of assistance as soon as possible and
to provide effective support for Somalia's economic
development and the improvement of its people's lives
by focusing on strengthening the country's ability to
sustain itself, based on its development needs, in order
to lay a solid foundation for its future development.

Fourthly, the international community should
further improve its coordination with regard to the
Somali question and create synergy. China supports
a leading role played by the United Nations in
coordinating the international efforts aimed at assisting
Somalia. We also support the constructive help
provided by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia in promoting the political process and starting
national reconstruction in Somalia. China welcomes the
meeting held in February by the High-Level Partnership
Forum on Somalia, which further consolidated the
consensus of the international community for Somalia's
development. It is hoped that, in providing assistance
to Somalia, the international community will continue
to increase its consultation and cooperation with the
Federal Government of Somalia, fully respect its views
and focus on the priority areas and overall direction
of the country's development with a View to forging
synergy among assistance efforts.

China and Africa form a community of shared
destiny and interests. At the Johannesburg Summit
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation last
December, China's President Xi Jinping proposed 10
areas in which China wants to engage in pragmatic
cooperation with Africa: industrialization, agricultural
modernization, infrastructure, financial resources,
green development, trade and investment facilitation,
poverty reduction and public welfare, public health,
people-to-people exchanges, and peace and security.
China is ready to join hands with African countries,
including Somalia, in a concerted and active effort to
follow up on the Summit's outcomes and, in the light
of Africa's actual needs, help the continent to improve
people's livelihoods and enhance African countries'
own development capacities.

For many years, China has firmly supported
the Somali peace process and provided Somalia and
AMISOM. with assistance to the best of its ability. China
has also trained a large number of talented people for
the country's reconstruction under the framework of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation. We are ready to
work with the international community in our ongoing
and unremitting efforts for peace, stability, prosperity
and development in Somalia and the Horn of Africa.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.
