Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the latest developments
in the Yemeni peace process. With the Council's
steadfast support, I have continued to work with both
the Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah on the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and the
way forward to a comprehensive political solution to
the conflict based on the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
National Dialogue Conference outcomes and all the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015) in particular.

In Hudaydah, despite reports earlier today, in
general the parties have sustained the reduction in
violence across the governorate for the six full months
since the Agreement entered into force in the middle of
last December. That has continued despite the delays in
the implementation of the Agreement due to a number
of challenges and the frustrations associated with those
challenges, which we have all experienced. During the
five months prior to the ceasefire, the fighting resulted
in more than 1,300 civilian casualties in the governorate.
In the five months following the ceasefire, the number
of civilian casualties was reduced by 68 per cent.
Nevertheless, of course, I remain deeply concerned by
continued violence and civilian casualties. However,
it is clear that the overall de-escalation continues to
benefit the people of the city and the opportunities for
effective humanitarian response.

The Redeployment Coordination Committee
(RCC), set up by the Agreement, and its members
from both parties continued over the past months to
engage constructively with my colleague Lieutenant
General Michael Lollesgaard on the plans for the
first and second phases of the redeployments. He
remains positive that an agreement on both phases
of the redeployments can be achieved in line with
what the parties agreed in Stockholm, including in
particular with regard to the tripartite monitoring
mechanism. Once outstanding issues are resolved, joint
implementation can commence. Joint implementation
will allow for the parties to fully verify all elements of
the redeployments, including those previously executed.
I commend Lieutenant General Lollesgaard for his
relentless efforts to build relationships and confidence
between the parties throughout his engagements to
ensure the effectiveness of the RCC, amid challenging
logistical and political circumstances.

The economic aspects of the Hudaydah Agreement
regarding the revenues of the ports are also at the
forefront of our attention. I hope that achieving
consensus on those aspects will enable the payment of
public sector salaries in Al-Hudaydah governorate and
across all of Yemen. That would be a significant step
forward for the benefit of the Yemeni people. We have
had very positive exchanges with the Government of
Yemen on the matter, and I hope to build on last month's
Amman meeting and convene further discussions with
both parties in the near future.

I thank the Council for its continued support,
which has been instrumental for the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement ever since its inception.
Parties should take the necessary next steps to ensure
the full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
in its entirety, while ensuring full respect for Yemen's
sovereignty. I note the Government of Yemen's
flexibility and continued support to the Agreement in
its entirety and its continued constructive engagement
in that regard. I look forward to continuing my
close engagement with President Hadi Mansour, the
Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah to advance
the implementation of the Agreement. If I may, allow
me to brief members on where the parties stand on
the remaining aspects of the agreements reached in
Stockholm last December.

We all hoped that the statement of understanding on
Taiz agreed in Stockholm would open the door for the
parties to work together on a way forward for the city and
alleviate the suffering of its citizens. The military and
political situation in the city is extremely complex and
fragile, to the detriment of the population. I continue to
work with the parties to convene a meeting of the joint
committee agreed in Stockholm to identify a way out
of the current situation. The benefits of a de-escalation
of tensions and improved access for humanitarian aid
would be tangible, immediate and visible.

I am also disappointed by the lack of progress on
the implementation of the exchanges of prisoners and
detainees as agreed before the Stockholm meetings. That
is in essence a humanitarian issue that would provide
relief for the prisoners and detainees and reunite them
with their families and loved ones. As I have informed
the Council previously, the parties have held productive
sessions on the details on the exchanges in recent
months. With greater political flexibility, I believe that
they can translate those discussions into actions on the
ground. I believe passionately that, more than any other
issue, tangible progress on the exchange of prisoners
would indicate the seriousness of the parties to build
confidence and a significant humanitarian gesture of
good faith. That has yet to happen, despite the continued
efforts of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, with which my Office works very closely. I call
on the parties to prioritize the implementation of the
exchange of prisoners in good faith and to demonstrate
the flexibility required to make it a reality, for the sake
of peace and, perhaps even more importantly, for the
sake of thousands of Yemeni families that long to be
reunited and are extremely disappointed that this has
not yet happened.

The Council has recently expressed concern at
re-escalating violence across Yemen and at attacks on
civilian infrastructure in southern Saudi Arabia. I must
echo these concerns, including the recent drone attacks
on Abha airport. I have repeatedly warned that war can
take peace off the table, and in the context of wider
regional tensions, the risks to the political process have
never looked more stark. Naturally, I call for steps to
be taken to de-escalate tensions for the benefit of the
Yemeni people and regional security.

The Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah have
consistently affirmed to me, and continue to do so, that
a political solution is the only solution to this conflict.
The longer the conflict goes on, the more challenges
and the greater difficulties we will face in resolving
it and reversing its terrible effects on the people of
Yemen. The continued dialogue between the parties to
implement the Stockholm Agreement is significant, but
it is not enough for the Yemeni people. They want their
suffering to end now and not tomorrow.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity, if I
may, to reaffirm my personal commitment and that of the
United Nations to pursuing an impartial and inclusive
political process based on national ownership and in full
respect for Yemen's sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity, as underscored by the Council
on numerous occasions. Ending the conflict in Yemen
can be achieved only through a comprehensive political
solution. Opportunities for compromise are still readily
available to the parties and, with the support of the
Council, I remain confident that the parties can yet
reach a comprehensive and peaceful settlement to the
conflict in Yemen.

