Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): After the signature of the
Memorandum of Understanding by the Secretary-General
and the Government of Iraq last February and up to the
beginning of August, we witnessed a period of progress in
the disarmament activities in Iraq. This progress was due to
the cooperation lent by the Iraqi authorities to the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which was
acknowledged by the Council.
The Iraqi decision of 5 August put an end to what had
finally become a positive trend - a trend leading, we
thought, to the swift completion of the road map known to
Iraq as necessary to achieve the lifting of sanctions.

In a serious effort to re-establish such a trend, the
Council, with the assistance of the Secretary-General,
offered to engage, soon after Iraq were to rescind its
unacceptable decision of 5 August, in a comprehensive
review of Iraq's compliance with its obligations under the
relevant resolutions, in order to identify any tasks which
still needed to be undertaken to satisfy the remaining
requirements of those resolutions.

In View of those efforts, it was with dismay and
incomprehension that all Council members received the
decision of Iraq, last Saturday, to cease any cooperation
with the United Nations Special Commission and to
continue to impose restrictions on the work of the IAEA,
the effective operation of which is essential for the
implementation of resolution 687 (1991).

The draft resolution we have before us contains the
message the Council must now convey to Iraq. It expresses
a firm condemnation of the Iraqi decision of 31 October; it
renews the support of the Council for the Special
Commission and the IAEA; and it demands that Iraq
immediately rescind that decision, as well as the 5 August
decision.

Iraq must understand that it cannot continue to miss
the opportunities offered. Iraq cannot continue to delay
fulfilling the conditions that will enable the Council to act
in accordance with paragraphs 21 and 22 of resolution 687
(1991). Iraq cannot continue to delay the moment when the
Council will be in a position to act on the duration of the
prohibitions referred to in that resolution.

The draft resolution before us represents a firm,
unambiguous and determined reaction by the Council. It
also expresses, in no uncertain terms, the united response
of all Council members to the Iraqi stand.

It is up to Iraq now. Iraq must immediately
reconsider its position, re-engage once and for all on the
path of cooperation with UNSCOM. and the IAEA, and
ensure full compliance with its obligations. Only in this
way will Iraq enable the Council to lift the sanctions.

