Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I wish to begin by
thanking the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda for the comprehensive
briefings they have just provided. The work carried out
by both Tribunals since their very inception is of
considerable importance for the fight against impunity,
advancing the rule of law and paving the way for
reconciliation among the States concerned. We also
acknowledge the significant contribution the Tribunals
have made to the international criminal justice.

In spite of their dedicated work and continued
efforts to pursue the completion strategy, the Tribunals
will not be able to finish their work before the target
dates envisaged in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004). Thus, we are now at the point where we must
take all necessary steps to enable the Tribunals to
complete their mandates without further delay.
Meanwhile, we also urge the Tribunals to continue
their efforts to expedite the proceedings, without
compromising due process.

We noted the comments of both Presidents
concerning the terms and conditions of the staff and
judges of the Tribunals. As to the issue of extending
the mandates of the judges, the Council has already
expressed in earlier resolutions its intention to extend,
by 30 June 2010, the terms of office of all trial and
appeal judges. Further extensions are now being
considered by the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

The issue of the residual mechanism is also under
the consideration of the Informal Working Group.
Tribunals have undertaken several measures in
preparation for the transition to the mechanism, and we
ask them to continue such efforts. On the other hand,
the Working Group, under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Mayr-Harting of Austria and with the
significant support of the Office of Legal Affairs, has
made considerable progress in bringing the new
mechanism to life, which will be vital to the legacy of
the Tribunals.

Like others, we are concerned by the fact that the
number of fugitives remains unchanged since the last
biannual reports of the Tribunals. All States, especially
those in the regions concerned, should intensify the
efforts as to ensure that the remaining thirteen
fugitives, including Ratko Mladic', Goran Hadzie and
Felicien Kabuga, are apprehended and brought to
justice without further delay.

Effective cooperation by States in other areas,
such as access to archives, documents and witnesses, is
also an essential part of the completion strategy. We
take positive note of Croatia's continued and serious
efforts regarding cooperation on the missing
documents. In this regard, we are pleased to note that
the Prosecutor's report recognizes a general
improvement in the quality of Croatia's investigations.
We also welcome Serbia's continued cooperation,
including the submission of the notebooks of Ratko
Mladic', as well as adequate responses of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the requests of the Prosecutor. We
commend these countries for their improved level of
cooperation and hope that it will lead to the
achievement of full justice and reconciliation.
Similarly, we appreciate Rwanda's continued
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda in various areas.

In conclusion, let me once again offer our sincere
thanks to the Presidents, Prosecutors and all judges of
both Tribunals for their professionalism and dedicated
work.

