I would like to thank the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for organizing today's timely debate. I also wish to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly for their briefings. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/754) shows that close links between transnational organized crime and terrorism have increasingly been observed in several regions of the world. This adds to the complexity of the fight against terrorist organizations that States Members of the United Nations and the Organization itself have been conducting for several years now. The African continent is one of the most vulnerable areas affected by the development of the specific threats related to security and transnational organized crime, the most emblematic of which are trafficking in drugs, arms, persons and counterfeit cigarettes, smuggling of migrants, terrorism and violent extremism. In the Sahel region, the existence of a link between terrorism and organized crime is obvious, as there is substantial evidence of a partnership between the two types of criminals. Terrorist groups use criminal networks to finance their activities through kidnapping for ransom, trafficking in drugs, arms, cigarettes and precious metals, the exploitation of artisanal mines, and illegal migration. Similarly, informal taxation is imposed by terrorist organizations on goods that cross the territories under their control. Several studies have also reported that drug traffickers pay for services provided by the Organization of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb fighters to secure the trafficking of their goods through the Sahel region. In the Horn of Africa, it has also been reported that the terrorist group Al-Shabaab finances itself through human and drug trafficking, cattle rustling and piracy. All the foregoing threats take advantage of the weak presence of certain States in some areas of their territories, and, as the saying goes, nature abhors a vacuum. Indeed, terrorists and other highway criminals have come to replace legitimate State institutions, often providing basic social services to needy local populations that feel marginalized by the central Government. In such troubled areas, the restrictions triggered by the fight against the current coronavirus disease pandemic have exacerbated the already dire situation and have allowed terrorist armed groups to take of it to escalate their attacks, notwithstanding the Secretary-General's call for a global humanitarian ceasefire in order to focus on fighting the pandemic. Inthe Sahel, the upheavals in Libya and Mali between 2011 and 2012 accentuated the fragility of this region and strengthened the establishment of criminal networks. Local economies, totally controlled by terrorists and smugglers, have emerged in lawless areas. These activities thrive, thanks to the complicity of local populations that benefit from the income generated by these various illicit activities. This tangle of issues and interests between terrorist groups and organized criminal groups, while complicating the fight against terrorists by Governments in the region, is also progressively eroding the Governments' sovereign capacity to maintain law, order and public security. It also constitutes a threat to international peace and security. In response to these real threats, the Niger has, in accordance with United Nations recommendations, strengthened its legislative and institutional framework in order to effectively combat the gateway or enabling crimes that facilitate this union of criminals, such as money-laundering, financing of terrorism, trafficking in persons and cybercrime. My country has therefore set up several structures, including the Central Service for Combating Terrorism and Cross-Border Crime, the National Financial Information Processing Unit and the Judicial Centre Specialized in the Fight against Terrorism. It has also adopted a national plan to combat trafficking in persons. At the subregional level, the Niger is a party to the Drug Action Plan to Address Illicit Drug Trafficking, Organised Crime and Drug Abuse in West Africa, under the auspices of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). In terms of the regional fight against the sources of financing for these illicit activities, ECOWAS has created an institution that deals with that issue, namely, the Intergovernmental Action Group against Money-Laundering. That body, in collaboration with the relevant national institutions, is making a significant contribution to tracing and stopping those criminal and illicit financial flows. The global nature of these threats requires greater cooperation among States. Therefore, the United Nations has an important role to play, in particular through its specialized agencies. In that regard, we welcome the adoption by the Council in 2019 of resolutions 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019), which address the links between terrorism and organized crime. Let me also take this opportunity to welcome all the actions carried out by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Africa in the context of capacity- building for actors involved in the fight against illicit drug trafficking and against the gateway crimes of terrorism and organized crime, such as corruption and radicalization in detention centres. In conclusion, my delegation would like to appeal to all Member States, the United Nations and all partners to intensify and diversify their efforts to combat this threat. The Governments of the African States most confronted with these scourges must be accompanied in their efforts to secure their borders. They must also be supported in the implementation of their development programmes and projects, which will enable them to have an effective presence throughout their territories. That is why I call for the effective implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and all the development strategies and programmes adopted by the United Nations, including, inter alia, its Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
