The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

I would like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix, Permanent Secretary Sidikou, High
Representative Buyoya and Deputy Secretary-General
Serrano for their briefings. I would like to make four
points.

First, we must continue to support the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which
faces real difficulties, including the worsening regional
security and inadequate operational capabilities,
equipment and training, as well as funding shortages. As
an important mechanism for the countries in the region
to respond to the security challenges independently,
the Joint Force represents a significant contribution to
peace and security in Africa and the world in general.
It requires the continuing support of the international
community. We hope that the Joint Force will resume
operations as soon as possible.

Secondly, we must promote a political settlement
of the regional hotspot issues. The security situation
is closely linked to the peace process. On the basis of
respect for the sovereignty of the countries concerned,
the international community should actively support
the countries of the region in taking forward the peace
process and promoting national reconciliation so as to
continue to work towards the continued de-escalation of
the relevant hotspot issues and to resolve them, thereby
creating conditions conducive to lasting security and
stability in the Sahel region. Support should be given
to all the relevant parties in Mali in order to expedite
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and seriously address the
spillover effect on the Sahel ofissues outside the region,

such as the Libyan crisis, in order to minimize their
negative impact.

Thirdly, we must adopt a comprehensive approach
to tackle the root causes of conflict. The international
community should support the Secretary-General in
implementing the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan for
the Sahel. It should also support the priority investment
plan developed by the Sahel countries and, in the light
of the real needs of the countries and populations
in the region, help the Sahel to achieve sustainable
development and to enjoy the dividends of peace.

Fourthly, we must ensure that we leverage the role
of regional mechanisms. The international community
should support African countries in resolving African
problems through African solutions, encourage

regional and subregional organizations in Africa, such
as the G-5 Sahel, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, to play a leading
role in dealing with the challenges in the Sahel and help
the G-5 Sahel Permanent Secretariat to build capacity.

China is ready to work with the international
community in continuing to play a constructive role in
order to achieve peace, stability and development in the
Sahel region and on the African continent.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
