Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like start by strongly
condemning the heinous terrorist attack perpetrated
against the Afghan Parliament today. We express our
feelings of solidarity with the Government and the
people of Afghanistan and underline once again that
Turkey stands by Afghanistan in its struggle against
terrorism.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2015/422), and his
Special Representative, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, and
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for their briefings.

We welcome the completion of the formation of
the Cabinet in Afghanistan and reiterate our wish for
success to the National Unity Government. Afghanistan
has achieved significant progress in every field for the
last 13 years. In order to maintain those achievements
and continue to build upon them, the international
community's continuing support to Afghanistan,
especially during the Transformation Decade, is of
great importance. We believe that the withdrawal of the
international presence from Afghanistan should not be
calendar-based, but condition-based.

Turkey fully supports the Afghan Government in
its efforts to bring peace, stability and prosperity to
Afghanistan. The peace and reconciliation process is
of utmost importance for achieving lasting peace and
stability in that country. We hope that Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation efforts yield
positive results.

Turkey's commitment to Afghanistan is long-
term. We make comprehensive contributions to
Afghanistan both at the bilateral level and through
the United Nations and NATO. In the field of security,
Turkey assumed framework-nation responsibility for
the Kabul region within NATO's Resolute Support
Mission. Furthermore, as of 1 January, we took on the
management and security responsibilities for the Kabul
International Airport for two years.

We have confirmed our pledge of $60 million to
the Afghan national defence and security forces for
the period from 2015 to 2017, and have already put the
first year's commitment into effect. The Turkish armed
forces have trained some 17,500 Afghan National Army
personnel since 2001. Furthermore, to date a total of
1,956 Afghan police cadets have been trained in four
six-month programmes, and 494 Afghan policewomen
cadets have also been trained in similar programmes.
Additionally, a total of 1,374 Afghan police cadets were
trained at the centre attached to the Wardak provincial
reconstruction team, until it ceased to function. In
addition, Turkey organized 82 specialized training
programmes for Afghan law-enforcement officials on
various law-enforcement subjects, including counter-
narcotics, and plans to continue to do so.

Our development aid programme for the Afghan
people is the most comprehensive such programme
directed to another country in Turkey's history.
Through it, Turkey has completed around 800 projects
in Afghanistan, valued at more than $300 million, since
2001, and has done so in every province of Afghanistan
without giving priority to any particular ethnic group.
We have also committed $150 million to development
efforts in Afghanistan for the period from 2015 to
2017. With respect to humanitarian assistance, we have
completed 51 projects worth $1.7 million.

Lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan can
be possible only within a regional framework that
taps the positive energy and increased cooperation
within its region. On that understanding, Turkey will
continue to support dialogue between Afghanistan and
its neighbours. We look forward to the next ministerial
meeting of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, to be
held in Islamabad. While we welcome the Secretary-
General's report on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2015/422), we would like to complement the section
on regional cooperation by adding that within the
Istanbul Process, Turkey, as co-leader of the counter-
terrorism confidence-building measures section,
organized a three-day course on defence against suicide
bombing in Ankara in April 2015. Turkey will continue
to carry out similar activities within the Process.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that we will
continue to contribute to the security, development and
capacity-building efforts of Afghanistan.

