Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Germany would like to welcome to the Council all the briefers, in particular Ms. Heidi Grau and Mr. Halit Cevik, who follow their Swiss and Turkish predecessors, Heidi Tagliavini and Ambassador Apakan, to whom I would also like to pay tribute today. I welcome the fact that Russia requested a meeting under this agenda item today, since today marks the five-year anniversary of Debaltseve. I will come back to that. Today is a sad day for international law and for Ukraine and its people. I must briefly go back in history to recall the Memorandum on Security Assurances in Connection with Ukraine's Accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, concluded between Russia, Ukraine and others in 1994, whereby Ukraine gave up its nuclear weapons in exchange fora guarantee by Russia of its national sovereignty and territorial integrity. Six years ago, when the Ukrainian President fled Kyiv after he refused to agree to a European Union Association Agreement and there was public unrest, there was volatility in the country. Russia took advantage of the situation. It invaded Ukraine and occupied and annexed a part of it. Among other things, a Russian Buk anti-aircraft missile was responsible for the downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17 and the death of 283 civilians. Five years ago, the package of measures for the implementation of the Minsk agreements was adopted in Minsk and, as my Russian colleague underlined, were then put into resolution 2202 (2015) as an annex. The Normandy format has been active since then and met again at the highest level only a few weeks ago to make sure that the situation improves. Since the Minsk agreements five years ago, the situation has stabilized to a certain degree. There has been no further Russian occupation. However, the situation is still bad, although there have been fewer civilian casualties. I agree with what Heidi Grau said earlier with regard to each and every victim of this conflict being one too many. A couple of weeks ago (see S/PV.8714), the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation (OSCE) in Europe said that Ukraine remains the most pressing security challenge on the European continent. As highlighted in previous briefings by Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, there has been some progress since President Zelenskyy took office and the last Normandy Four summit. The prolongation of the special status law, the repair of the Stanytsia Luhanska bridge, the exchange of detainees, the written agreement on the Steinmeier formula and additional disengagement areas and new crossing points have been agreed but still need to be implemented. However, I want to come back to the main point made by my Russian colleague. He accused Ukraine, saying that it had not implemented the Minsk package of measures. In that connection, I would like to repeat what our American colleague just said and what I have said before, but has not sunken in - the first paragraph of the package of measures asks for an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire effective 15 February at 12 a.m. On 15 February at 12 a.m., Russian forces were still actively bombarding and attacking the village of Debaltseve, which is of strategic importance. So, from the very beginning, Russia has not implemented the Minsk agreements, and all of the challenges that the Ukrainian Government has had to face in the Rada to get all the laws implemented were related to the fact that Russia could not be trusted because it violated the first paragraph of the Minsk package of measures. The second point of the Minsk package is the withdrawal of all heavy weapons by both sides by equal distances. What we heard today and what happened today is very regrettable. The deaths were a result of the weapons that were not withdrawn in accordance to what is set forth in the Minsk package. The third paragraph of the Minsk package calls for ensuring effective monitoring and verification of the ceasefire regime by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We regularly look at the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine (SMM) reports, and there it is clear that the restrictions of movement for the SMM are due mainly to what the separatists are doing. Donetsk and Luhansk are responsible for 90 per cent of the documented incidents where Mission monitors cannot do their job. Paragraph seven specifies the need to "ensure safe access, delivery, storage, and distribution of humanitarian assistance" and also sets forth the agreement that the last Normandy Four format that the International Committee of the Red Cross should have full and unconditional access to all areas of Ukraine. To this day, there has been no access beyond the line of contact. Here too, it is the separatists that have not implemented that provision. In addition, the provision concerning the withdrawal of all foreign armed formations has also not been implemented. Let me finish by touching upon one key point in the remarks of my Russian colleague, where he differentiates between Russia, on the one hand, and Donetsk and Luhansk, on the other. I do not agree with my colleague on this point. By way of example, 10 days ago the head of the Donetsk People's Republic, Denis Pushilin, said on his website that Mr. Pashkov would be the acting Prime Minister of Donetsk. Previously, Mr. Pashkov was the Vice-Governor of Irkutsk, which, to my knowledge, is in Russia. As to the second incident with regard to Russia's role, according to the Acting Head of the General Administration for Migration Issues of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Russia, Ms. Valentina Kazakova, Russia has issued Russian passports to the 227,000 inhabitants of the separatists territories.Finally, let me explain to my colleagues Russia's influence on the separatists. I was in Minsk, where the agreements were negotiated all night and the Minsk package was concluded. Someone then said that it was between the Normandy Four, and someone else said that the separatists had to sign, after which Mr. Surkov, the negotiator at the time, said that he would secure their signature. It took him about 10 minutes to get the separatists to sign off on the package. So much for the independence of the separatists from Russia.
