Mr. Serry: I intend to dedicate today's briefing to
the Middle East peace process as the Security Council
will be briefed on Syria tomorrow and on Lebanon next
week.

We meet today, nine months to date since the
launch of United States-brokered negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians with the previously agreed
objective of achieving a comprehensive settlement on
all core issues by this time. In those nine months, we
have seen an unprecedented effort by Secretary of State
Kerry, assisted by Mr. Martin Indyk as his envoy, to see
the process through at long last. Quartet, regional and
international stakeholders, recognizing it as perhaps
one of the last chances to achieve a two-State solution,
have also been actively engaged in support ofthe effort.

Yet efforts have faltered, given the inability of the
parties to bridge the gaps on their substantive positions
or even accept with reservations a United States
framework that would attempt to do just that. As of
today, we know talks have been suspended. It behooves
the parties and all stakeholders to recognize that this
is another moment of truth. Inaction could see the
situation turn into a crisis. That is why joint reflection
is in order on how the current impasse came about and
ways to overcome it.

On 28 March, the Israeli Cabinet postponed its
decision to follow through with the release of the fourth
and last tranche of 30 pre-Oslo prisoners. On 1 April,
interpreting that as a breach of the quiet understanding
of a diplomatic truce in return for the release of 104
pre-Oslo prisoners, the Palestinians, by a unanimous
vote of the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO),
proceeded with submitting accession instruments
to 15 international treaties and conventions. The
announcements of 708 reissued tenders for settlement
units in Gilo on the same day added to the Palestinian
conviction that they had no other choice. Nevertheless,
President Abbas reiterated his commitment to
negotiations.

The Palestinian decision was met with surprise by the
Israeli side, which has since indicated its understanding
that they were nearing a deal to extend negotiations that
comprised more than the aforementioned prisoners. In
their interpretation, the original understanding was
valid as long as there was progress within the talks.

Despite those events, the negotiators continued
to meet in an effort to find a way out of the impasse.
We understand that among the issues discussed as part
of Palestinian demands have been the release of the
fourth tranche of prisoners and a freeze of settlement
construction, combined with an offer of continued talks
if the issue of borders is front-loaded. The international
community also remained active, urging both parties to
remain constructively engaged in talks and not miss the
opening presented by the United States. The Secretary-
General was in contact with both leaders on 13 and
14 April, and High Representative Ashton issued a
statement to that effect on 18 April. In an emergency
meeting on 9 April, Arab Foreign Ministers remained
appreciative of United States efforts and declared their
support for President Abbas, including by renewed
pledges of a safety net in the event of a loss of revenue
as a result of Israeli potential reprisals. Such support
is timely and welcome, while we urge Israel to adhere
to the punctual and transparent transfer of revenues it
collects on behalf of the Palestinian Authority, which is
essential for the stability of the Authority.

In subsequent developments, Palestinians reached
a unity agreement on 23 April, stipulating, inter alia,
that a national consensus Government would be formed
within five weeks and elections held no later than
six months after the formation of that Government.
Following the announcement of that accord, Israel
cancelled a meeting scheduled between the Israeli and
Palestinian negotiators and, after an emergency Cabinet
meeting on 24 April, took the decision to suspend the
talks. Quartet envoys remained in frequent contact
throughout, holding several telephone calls to discuss
the developments.

The political stalemate that I have been describing
poses great risks to the prospect ofa two-State solution,
which I will elaborate on later. It will also not be without
impact on the situation on the ground, which I will
briefly address, as it is already volatile, with negative
trends in the West Bank and a fragile calm in Gaza.
The year 2013 saw the highest number of Palestinian
fatalities in the West Bank since 2009. I was appalled
by incidents of violence in the reporting period, against
both Palestinians and Israelis, which we condemn. Two
particularly disturbing instances were the killing of
an Israeli man and the injury of two others, including
a child, in an attack near Hebron on 14 April, during
Passover, and the shooting by the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) of a 14-year-old Palestinian boy crossing the
Barrier on 19 March, which resulted in his death.

The rise in violence in the West Bank was reflected
by the following trends, inter alia: increased clashes
between Israeli security forces and Palestinians,
particularly in and around refugee camps; Palestinian
stone- and Molotov cocktail-throwing, resulting in
some injuries and material damage; and settler attacks
against Palestinians and their property, in spite of
some Israeli efforts to crack down on so-called price
tag attacks, which have also targeted Israeli security
forces. We should be under no illusion that the level of
violence would be higher still were it not for the work
of the Palestinian security forces to maintain law and
order, and continued security coordination.

Settlement activity continued. In two worrisome
developments on 13 April, the Government of Israel
retroactively approved legalizing a West Bank outpost
at Gush Etzion, appropriating private Palestinian
land, and granted settler access to a disputed Hebron
building that Palestinians have over the years argued
in court was purchased illegally. The United Nations
position on the illegality of settlements is well known.
The reporting period saw 88 demolitions of Palestinian
structures, including five residences and a mosque
today, and the dismantling of five settlement outposts
by the IDF.

The situation in East Jerusalem remains worrisome.
Tensions and clashes in the Old City have continued,
including during the holiday period. The Secretary-
General has reiterated the importance of respect for the
religious freedom of all, for worshippers of all faiths to
have access to their holy sites and for all sides to refrain
from provocations. He has restated the United Nations
long-standing position that the status of the Old City
and the religious sites within is an extremely sensitive
final-status issue that can be resolved only through
negotiations, and that the parties should refrain from
attempts to establish facts on the ground and alter the
character of the Old City.

All of that points to the fact that the situation on the
ground is serious and likely to further deteriorate if not
addressed. We must not forget Gaza, where practical
steps are urgently needed to improve the humanitarian
security situation. In Gaza, too, there are troubling
signs, with more rockets fired at Israel, border incidents
and Israeli operations, which have also caused death or
injury to civilians in recent months. Ongoing political
and security developments in Egypt have also led to
the continued closure of tunnels, the tackling illegal
smuggling and the frequent closure of Rafah.

The United Nations remains actively engaged,
together with the Palestinian Authority and donors,
in addressing some of the most pressing issues in
Gaza, including by ensuring that a safety net is in
place to allow the most critical water, sanitation and
health-related facilities to continue operating. In that
regard, I am pleased to report that the Government
of Turkey recently pledged $1.5 million to the World
Health Organization to address the shortages in a
number of key drugs, which we hope will help decrease
expensive referrals of patients outside Gaza. We are
still waiting for Israel to deliver on its commitment to
the full resumption of the previously agreed package
of United Nations construction works, where some
$26 million worth of projects are still stalled and
another $120 million worth of new work is pending
Israeli approval.

Political progress is crucial to address Gaza's
structural problems. In that context, I had an
opportunity on 24 April to discuss with President
Abbas the very important development towards
Palestinian unity. I was assured by the President that the
agreement would be implemented under his leadership
and on the basis of the PLO commitments. President
Abbas emphasized that those commitments would
hold the future Government of national consensus to
recognition of Israel, non-violence and adherence to
previous agreements. President Abbas also reiterated
his continued commitment to peace negotiations and
to keeping protests non-violent, a message he also
delivered to the PLO Central Council on 26 April.

On the basis of those commitments, the Secretary-
General is of the view that this development can
constitute an opening that offers at long last the
prospect of reuniting the West Bank and Gaza under
one legitimate Palestinian Authority, including by
holding long overdue elections. For this to have a
chance of success, it needs to be managed the right way.
The Secretary-General calls on all parties to cooperate
to that end. We now expect all factions to support that
process as described by President Abbas, meaning that
they must commit in deeds, not only words, to that
path - first and foremost by adhering to non-violence
in the West Bank and in Gaza.

We are also aware that Israel, facing a continued
rocket threat from Gaza, has reacted with acute
skepticism to this development, as manifested in its
decision to suspend talks and threats of reprisals.

We urge all parties to refrain from measures that
could turn a delicate situation into a full-blown crisis.
We will be following developments closely in the
period ahead, and continue to believe that if unity is
implemented on the terms described by President
Abbas, it is not contradictory with continued peaceful
negotiations, as the President himself has reiterated.
As such, it should be viewed as an opportunity, not a
threat.

Difficult choices are now required of the parties.
They should realize that not making a Choice is the
most detrimental choice of all, namely, to accept that
we are going down the path of a one-State reality on
the ground. This is a time for the parties to reflect on
whether they wish to live up to their stated commitment
to the two-State solution, or whether they will by
default let it slip further away.

First and foremost, they must refrain from steps
that will render futile any efforts to find a way back to
negotiations and salvage the two-State solution. Both
sides have to convince each other anew that they are
partners for peace. If Israel is serious about a two-
State solution, it must recognize the negative impact
of continued illegal settlement activity. Palestinians
in turn should be reflective of their actions in
international forums. The international community and
the region should also reassess its role, if we remain
convinced - as I do - of the importance of the two-
State solution, and ask what we can do to persuade the
parties to make the right choice.

It is important to avoid escalation, diplomatically
and on the ground. Yet it is equally important that
we work in concert to define a long-overdue political
horizon on the basis of principles already laid out, less
the Oslo paradigm is put in real jeopardy. This can no
longer be business as usual. Unrealistic and prescriptive
timelines may be counter-productive, as can rushing the
parties back to the table without having the necessary
framework in place. I believe we must use the current
moment of reflection for a discussion on a substantive
basis for an early resumption of talks, while building
on the United States effort of the past nine months and
relying on continued United States engagement.

The Secretary-General firmly believes there is
still a window for us, the international community
and parties, to act if we wish to realize the vision of
two States for two peoples, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition
of each other's legitimate rights and those of their
respective citizens, including self-determination. The
United Nations remains as fundamentally committed
as ever in helping parties bring this conflict to an end
with an end to the occupation that began in 1967, an end
to the conflict and an end of claims, in pursuit oflasting
peace and security for both Israelis and Palestinians.

