The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to recall that at its 3510th meeting, on 22 March 1995,
the Security Council adopted resolution 980 (1995), in
which it decided that the election to fill the vacancy in the
International Court of Justice should take place on 12 July
1995 at a meeting of the Security Council and at a meeting
of the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.

This morning the Security Council and the General
Assembly will proceed independently with the election, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Statute of the
Court, for the purpose of filling this vacancy. The list of
candidates nominated by national groups and received by
the Secretary-General as of 21 June 1995, the deadline for
receipt of nominations, is contained in document
S/1995/528. Document S/1995/556 and Add.1 contain the
nominations by national groups received by the
Secretary-General after 21 June 1995. Document
S/ 1995/529 contains the curriculum vitae of the candidate
nominated by national groups.

The Security Council also has before it a
memorandum by the Secretary-General (S/1995/527)
describing the present composition of the Court and setting
out the procedure to be followed in the conduct of the
election.
I should like to remind the Council that under
Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International
Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute majority
of votes in the General Assembly and in the Security
Council shall be considered as elected."

The required majority in the Security Council is eight
votes.

Article 15 of the Statute of the Court provides that

"A member of the Court elected to replace a
member whose term of office has not expired shall hold
office for the remainder of his predecessor's term."

Accordingly, the member elected to fill the
remainder of the term left vacant by the resignation of
Judge Sir Robert Yewdall Jennings will serve until 5
February 2000.

The voting will be by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will receive
a ballot paper containing the name of the candidate. No
withdrawal will be accepted once the ballot papers have
been distributed. However, it would be possible to
withdraw between ballots. Members of the Council will
be requested to place an "X" next to the name of the
candidate for whom they wish to vote. Votes may be cast
only for a candidate whose name appears on the ballot
paper, and each elector may vote for only one candidate,
otherwise the ballot will be considered invalid. When a
candidate has obtained the required majority, I shall notify
the President of the General Assembly of the name of that
candidate, and I shall request the Council to remain in
session pending the receipt from the President of the
General Assembly of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

I shall now draw lots to select two delegations to
serve as tellers.

>l<>l<>l<

The President (interpretation from Spanish):
Rwanda and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland have been drawn. I therefore request

 

each of them to appoint one member of their respective
delegations to serve as teller.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ubalijoro
(Rwanda) and Mr. Cambridge (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) acted as tellers.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): May I
take it that the Council is now ready to proceed with the
election to fill the vacancy caused by the resignation of
Judge Jennings?

It is so decided.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I would
ask the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in the
box next to the name of the candidate for whom they wish
to vote.

***


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I take it
that all members of the Council have now voted and I
request the Conference Officer to collect the ballot papers.

All the ballot papers have been collected. I should like
to remind the Council that, as we agreed during our
consultations, the ballots will not be counted until it has
been verified that the ballot papers in the General Assembly
have been collected. The Council will remain in session
pending the receipt of that information.

>k>l<>'r»


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I have
now been informed that the ballot papers have been
collected in the General Assembly. The counting of the
ballots in the Security Council will now begin. The tellers
will now count the ballots. As agreed in our consultations,
there will be two independent countings of the ballots, one
by each teller.

>l<>l<>l<


The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
result of the voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:

Ms. Rosalyn Higgins 15


The President (interpretation from Spanish): Ms.
Rosalyn Higgins has accordingly received the required
majority of votes in the Security Council.
I shall communicate the result of the vote to the
President of the General Assembly in writing. I request
the Council to remain in session while we wait for the
President of the General Assembly to inform the Council
of the result of the voting in the Assembly.

>l<>l<>l<


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I
should like to inform the members of the Security
Council that I have just received from the President of the
General Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that at the
105th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing one member
of the International Court of Justice, the following
candidate obtained an absoute majority of votes in
the General Assembly: Ms. Rosalyn Higgins."

As the Security Council and the General Assembly
have agreed on the same candidate, the distinguished
jurist Ms. Rosalyn Higgins of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland has been elected a
member of the International Court of Justice for a term of
office expiring 5 February 2000.

I should like to congratulate Ms. Higgins and wish
her every success in the high office to which she has been
elected. I should also like to thank the tellers for their
assistance.

The Security Council has thus concluded its business
for this meeting.

The meeting rose at 11.35 am.

