Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is particularly grateful for the
presentations we have just heard. I thank the speakers
for the work they are doing.

If I may, I should like to pay a particular tribute
to Carla Del Ponte for her work, what she has done and
what she will now do, with particular focus on the
situation in the former Yugoslavia. I thank Mr. Jallow
for his presentation, clearly proving himself a worthy
successor.

Bringing war criminals to confront justice is an
essential element of post-conflict situations and a basic
element of establishing the rule of law - a precondition
of creating peaceful, stable, democratic States. But there
is, too, a balance with reconciliation, with the
development of a community within the emerging
country. That, too, has to be put into the equation.

The obligation on us, as the international
community's representatives, and on our institutions is
evident. We all need to do everything we can to
delivery the indictees to the Tribunals and to give every
possible support to the two Prosecutors. In the former
Yugoslavia, I am conscious that British troops have
been involved in the arrest of more than one third of
those indictees who have been transferred to The
Hague. And in the former Yugoslavia, in the annals of
a very sad history, three individuals stand out even
among the most serious of criminals. Karadzic, Mladic
and Gotovina deserve to be brought to The Hague as
soon as possible. In the past, these individuals have
enjoyed protection from some - I am not quite sure
whom, but they certainly include some of the State organs
of the countries concerned. The United Kingdom very
much hopes that that is no longer the case.

Quite apart from the legal and moral obligations,
the international community and organizations like the
European Union have policies that will hold directly
accountable those countries and authorities that fail to
take any action which is possible and, still worse, that
afford protection to those individuals. We will all have
noted very carefully the words of Ms. Del Ponte in her
report when she described the degree of cooperation
which she is receiving and has received from the
authorities in Croatia, Republika Srpska and Serbia and
Montenegro. Essentially, those involved in the region
have to understand and accept that the fugitive status of
these individuals remains a major obstacle to the final
stage of reform and reconciliation across the region.
Indictments and the conduct of cases are properly
for the courts and for the prosecutors. Having said that,
I think I would welcome clarification of Judge Meron's
remarks that it is between the Council and the
prosecutor as to whether the subject of an indictment
meets the standards set by the Council. I think I have
quoted his remarks more or less verbatim. But the
Security Council clearly has a duty to encourage the
support of nations for the work of the courts and to
ensure that the means are found for the necessary work
to be carried out and that indictees with the gravest
charges against them are tried before the Tribunal.

So the Security Council legitimately comments on
the strategic framework for the International Tribunals,
the balance between reconciliation and justice, and the
evolving role of national courts as they gradually take
over the responsibility of the Tribunals. It may set a
completion strategy for the Tribunals and, indeed,
comment upon the efficiency of the delivery of justice.

I think we have all noted Ms. Del Ponte's
continuing commitment to completing the investigations
and to ceasing the issuance of indictments beyond 2004,
focusing on the most serious offenders. But we also
heard Judge Meron's clear - and, I thought, very
fair - statement on the implication for the calendar of
14 or so extra indictments. I welcome also the
assurance that, in both Tribunals, the need for reform
must be addressed, but clearly balanced out against the
essential dimension ofa due and fair legal process.

My conclusion is that we should pursue justice
with renewed vigour. We should aim to complete the
work at the same time within the proposed timetable.
The role of the domestic war crimes chambers will be
vital, and we should give them every support, not just
because they will contribute to the completion
strategies, but because justice delivered by such courts
will be a sign of a maturing political process, both in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Rwanda, and as such
may be more acceptable locally.

I do not think that what we have heard will
require a change of strategy so much as an
intensification of effort and the fullest cooperation in
practice between the Tribunals themselves and between
the Tribunals and the States. As the Security Council
keeps the issue under review, we will need to weigh
and remember Judge Meron's wise words about the
need to complete the process with regard to the most
serious crimes, and to do so in a way that is consistent
with due process.

The United Kingdom has a number of detailed
points. In my remarks I sought to address a general
strategic issue, but in the ongoing discussion in the
working groups my colleagues will bring out other
points.

