Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
congratulate you, Sir, on initiating this event today and on
bringing it to fulfilment. It is very good to see this subject
coming under your presidency on this day.

I think that Members of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina can understand that, for a diplomat who
has been associated with their country over the last eight
years, it is a particular pleasure for me to see the three
Members of the joint Presidency here in the Security
Council, united on their business and taking steps together
to bring the Dayton Accords into a further round of
fruition. I congratulate them on their presence here today.
The United Kingdom welcomes their strong commitment
to Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and united
State and to the enhanced implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement.

We were very pleased to see the recent effort of the
joint Presidency to promote the interests of Bosnia and
Herzegovina together overseas, including in their recent
visits to Slovenia and Germany. That was a good example
of what the joint Presidency should be doing.
We are nevertheless still disturbed, as is the High
Representative, that the common institutions as a whole
are performing poorly and that there is still a long way to
go before Bosnia and Herzegovina is able to function
effectively as a modern European State. I think here, as
President Izetbegovic has recognized, outside assistance
is still necessary. First and foremost in that must be the
High Representative and his Office. His presence there
and his proactive work are essential to the success of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a modern and united State.
Here, I think I must take slight issue with President
Radisic, in that the High Representative must be given
support in what he is doing. He must be able to take the
decisions that are necessary day by day, because he is
doing it for the sake of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is not
for nothing that people continue to work and, indeed, to
die for international interests in the Balkans. In this
context, I pay tribute to the victims of the recent air
crash.

The United Kingdom particularly welcomes the New
York Declaration reaffirming the Presidency's active
support for the implementation of Dayton. Again, I would
like to pay tribute to the input of the High Representative
in bringing this about, and also to the role of the United
States and Ambassador Holbrooke personally, who has
continued to work with huge energy to make sure that
Dayton is not just an event in history, but actually leads
to a success for Bosnia and Herzegovina. It was a

 

particular pleasure to see members of the United States
Congress with us this morning.

I would like to welcome the joint Presidency's
agreement to the establishment of a state border service on
the basis of the High Representative's proposals. We have
waited a long time for this and it is an essential part of
bringing Bosnia and Herzegovina together. We also
welcome the agreement to the establishment of a
Presidency secretariat and of a joint commission on returns,
which will report to the Security Council, as well as the
agreement to the principle of a single national passport for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

But the United Kingdom is particularly interested in
the role of the joint Presidency in looking forward to what
needs to be done next. I would like to hear the Members of
the Presidency state what their next priorities will be in the
series of accumulated steps for the permanent stability and
regeneration of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that context, I
particularly welcome the inclusion in the Declaration of
their commitment to action against corruption. This was an
issue that the United Kingdom Government raised in July
1997, as President Izetbegovic will remember, and that still
needs action if the work of Dayton and its implementation
is not to be vitiated by those who are working against the
State. I hope the Presidency will be sincere in taking
forward that particular commitment.

Beyond these individual issues, I hope that the
Members of the joint Presidency understand their important
moral and political role in leading Bosnia and Herzegovina
beyond the narrow issues of ethnic politics. I entirely agree
in this respect with the list of priorities which President
Izetbegovic gave us earlier this morning, including refugee
returns, the arrest of indictees, economic regeneration,
dealing with corruption and reducing the amount of money
spent on military matters. This is an important programme
and I think the time has come for a much more wide-
ranging commitment to reconciliation from the common
institutions of the country.

In our view, the joint Presidency's visits to refugee
return areas were a good start in that. The Presidency's
presence here today marks another important milestone. I
hope that the practice begun today of dialogue between the
joint Presidency and the Security Council will continue and
will mark a progressive accumulation of successes for
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a modern, united State.

