Mr. Wali (Nigeria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of Nigeria in this debate on the reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan. I would like to thank
the Council for having given me the opportunity to do
so.

Nigeria is pleased to observe that this special
meeting is taking place under the presidency of the
Congo, which currently holds the chairmanship of the
African Union, and against the background of the
breakthrough in the peace negotiations in Darfur,
hosted by my country since 2004.

The agreement between the Government of the
Sudan and the Sudan Liberation Movement - one of
the parties to the Abuja talks - is historic for a
number of reasons. First, it represents the triumph of
doggedness and determination to confront and resolve
fundamental problems separating all sides to the Darfur
conflict. Secondly, it opens a new vista of genuine
cooperation, without which the trust and confidence
needed to heal deep wounds and reconcile divided
societies, in Darfur in particular and in the Sudan as a
whole, will remain a distant dream. Thirdly, it signals
what can be achieved when members of the
international community unite and join forces with
regional leaders and institutions in the search for
peace, security, stability and development.

Permit me to recall the role of the African Union,
whose Special Envoy and chief negotiator for the
Abuja Inter-Sudanese Peace Talks, Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, has twice briefed the Council on the state of
negotiations. The role of the African Union signalled
the willingness of African leaders, in consonance with
the Constitutive Act of the African Union, to pursue
solutions to conflict situations in the continent. That
explains why all the parties, throughout the process,
welcomed the mediation.

We also pay tribute to the Secretary-General,
whose behind-the-scene efforts and those undertaken
through his representatives enabled the Organization to
stay engaged throughout. We also commend the
Council for its encouragement and support, without
which the clear resolve of the international community
would not have been brought to bear on the
negotiations. We believe, in particular, that the
presence of the representatives of Africa's partners,
including the United States, the United Kingdom, the
European Union and Canada, provided the additional
impetus that facilitated the breakthrough which was
celebrated at the signing ceremony.

Nigeria believes that we should look beyond the
signing of the agreement to its faithful implementation
in letter and in spirit. That will require the taking of
urgent steps to provide reassurance - especially to
those parties that withheld their signature - that the
path to peace and reconciliation mapped out for the
troubled region can best be pursued through a process
of engagement by all parties.

There is a need to relieve the leaders and the
affected population from their fear of tomorrow, and
encourage them to demonstrate faith in the Sudan's
future as a peaceful, united and prosperous country.

For its part, Nigeria is confident that the
Government of the Sudan will make the maximum
effort to prove wrong those cynics within and,
especially, outside the country who have cast doubts on
the ability of African leaders to rise to the challenges
of nation-building in multi-ethnic and multireligious
communities.

The international community has an important
collaborative role to play in that process. The
partnership which has worked so well in Abuja should
be deepened so that, working closely with the
Sudanese Government, other members of the
international community can address the socio-
economic challenges of Darfur. Nothing short of a
Marshall Plan-like mobilization of international
assistance will suffice. There should be a follow-
through to donor conferences on the Sudan through the
redeeming of pledges, so that the fundamental problem
of underdevelopment in the Darfur region can be
adequately addressed. We commend the European
Union for its pledge of €100 million as its initial
contribution to the implementation of the agreement.

There is also an urgent need to guarantee security
for the population in Darfur. The modest effort of the
African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS), which,
against overwhelming odds, has succeeded in winning
the hearts and minds of the traumatized population,
should be complemented by the speedy deployment of
a full United Nations force. Nigeria believes that the
presence of such an international force, in close
cooperation with Khartoum, would reinforce a sense of
security for the population on the ground. The steps
already taken by the Secretary-General to engage the
Government of the Sudan on that matter should go a
long way towards providing such assurance.
Meanwhile, the promise of logistical support to shore
up AMIS in the intervening period before the
deployment of a full United Nations force should be
met.
Finally, the Darfur peace agreement provides the
international community with a unique opportunity to
deepen the peace and reconciliation process in the
Sudan as a whole. The parties to the agreement have
committed themselves to a political solution to the
Sudanese problem within an assured constitutional
framework. Let us eschew the temptation to view
Darfur through the prism of individual interests.
Rather, the greater objective should remain what is best
for the Sudanese people as a whole. Nigeria is
confident that, as in the past, the Security Council will
send forth a clear message of interest and engagement
with the Government and the people of the Sudan in
that regard.

