Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I thank you very
much, Sir, for convening this meeting. While there are
only several hours remaining before the official
conclusion of your presidency for the month, I wish to
join other colleagues in congratulating you and your
team on the excellence with which you have lead and
conducted the work of the Council throughout this
month. I also wish you all the best of health and
happiness as you are about to leave us, and we will
certainly miss you a lot.

I also thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his updated and
straightforward briefing, and particularly for his
tireless and productive endeavours on the ground. I
thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan for his
statement to the Council.

It is truly heartening to learn of the major positive
developments in many fields in Afghanistan in the past
three months. As the centre of both national and
international political attention, the upcoming
presidential and provincial council elections have gone
through the very difficult phase of voter registration
without serious security incidents. The date of
elections has been determined and the list of candidates
finalized, and the powers of the President after 22 May
have been endorsed by the Supreme Court.

Efforts to expand the Afghan National Army and
to reform and strengthen the Afghan National Police,
coupled with preparations for the establishment of a
social monitoring mechanism with a view to ensuring
the role of elected organs and civil society in
overseeing police performance at the local level, are
also commendable. In the field of governance, progress
is visible in the fight against corruption and in the
enhancement of administrative accountability and
capacity-building, thus giving rise to the civilian surge
which is aimed at extending the Government's
presence to the whole country, avoiding duplication
and creating greater efficiency among existing
governance structures.

We acknowledge the closer and more effective
regional cooperation Afghanistan has enjoyed during
the past three months, which is pivotal in helping to
solve the conflict, combat cross-border crime and drug
trafficking, and generate economic growth in the
country. We appreciate the continued assistance of the

international community to the Afghan Government
and people. We especially commend the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for its
central role in better coordinating international action
and assistance.

Against that backdrop, we remain concerned by
the continued deteriorating insecurity and increased
levels of violence in Afghanistan. The expanded
fighting and insurgency activities in previously stable
areas, the intensified intimidation, abductions and
assassinations, and the continued deliberate targeting
of public officials, civilian contractors, religious
scholars and aid workers, and particularly attacks
against United Nations personnel, remain key sources
of concern. We recognize the commitment to reducing
civilian casualties, but regret the 24 per cent increase
in civilian casualties as compared with the same period
in 2008, and look forward to early concrete measures
to concretely and sharply bring down this figure.

With less than two months left before the
elections are scheduled to be held, we believe in the
critical importance of international assistance in
maintaining the positive momentum. We therefore
welcome the renewed commitment to Afghanistan's
peacebuilding process expressed by international
donors at The Hague Conference in March this year, as
well as the consensus on a more focused strategy to
meet the challenges in Afghanistan, which include
adequately funded and effective civilian capacity- and
institution-building programmes. More efficient
mechanisms should be developed to enhance donor
coordination, aid effectiveness and coherence in the
allocation and use of available resources. In this
connection, we look forward to the Secretary-General's
presentation of the benchmarks at the September
meeting of the Council.
At the same time, we share the Secretary-
General's emphasis on Afghan ownership, for no one
but the Afghan people could do better the work of
rebuilding and sustaining peace and ensuring the
stability, growth and development of their own country.
To this end, international assistance should fit into
Afghan structures and priorities and the process of
Afghanization should gradually be the ultimate answer
to all the challenges facing the country.

With that in mind, we call upon all Afghan
stakeholders to put the political stability of their
country above their partisan or group interests,
renounce violence, overcome divisions and advance
dialogue and cooperation in order to succeed in the
major political events ahead, and most immediately to
make sure that the upcoming elections are fair, free and
non-violent, with the broad voluntary participation of
the Afghan people.

To conclude, given the many similarities between
Viet Nam and Afghanistan in both conditions and
levels of development, and given Viet Nam's
comparative advantages in areas that agro-based
countries like Afghanistan may often need for
development, allow me to reiterate Viet Nam's
commitment at the Paris Conference last year to
staying prepared to contribute our experience and
expertise in post-war recovery and development to the
reconstruction process in the brother country of
Afghanistan.

