Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland welcomes this public
meeting of the Council. It provides a timely
opportunity for a more inclusive debate on a complex
and highly sensitive issue of central importance to all
of us. Ireland subscribes fully to the statement that was
made earlier in the debate by the representative of
Denmark on behalf of the European Union. We are
strongly committed to the Common Position of the
Union concerning the International Criminal Court
(ICC). Ireland has ratified the Rome Statute. We did so,
having amended our Constitution, following a popular
referendum.

The recent exchanges in the Council have
registered clearly with the broad international
community that the United States Government has
what it genuinely believes to be soundly based
problems with the International Criminal Court and its
impact on United States personnel serving in peace
operations.

At every stage during the past few difficult
weeks, Ireland has confirmed that it will work with
other members of the Council to achieve a pragmatic
and reasonable outcome in response to the concerns
that have been put forward by the United States
regarding the operation of the Court and the position of
United States personnel in peace operations mandated
or authorized by the United Nations.

While we understand the concerns of the United
States, we do not feel that they are well founded. Nor
can we agree to the mechanism that it has proposed,
hitherto, to allay them. We consider that the Rome
Statute of the ICC already contains adequate
safeguards against politically inspired investigations or
prosecutions before the Court. Military or diplomatic
personnel from any country, including those from non-
parties to the Rome Statute, who serve in United-
Nations-authorized operations, are covered by those
safeguards. The Rome Statute enshrines the principle
of complementarity, which rightly accords priority to
national judicial processes. In the context of
peacekeeping, that priority role falls to the national
judicial processes in the contributing State.

The Statute also allows for bilateral agreements,
such as those envisaged in article 98, paragraph 2. In
addition, the Statute allows for a deferral by the Court
of an investigation or prosecution pursuant to a request
by the Security Council, as provided for in article 16 of
the Statute.

The development of international law is one of
the great achievements of humankind in recent
decades. International treaties have their own integrity,
which must be protected. This, for Ireland, is a
fundamental principle. The Security Council must
respect the spirit and letter of this wider fabric of
international law and international cooperation. In that
connection, we are disturbed by the possibility that, if
it is not handled adroitly, the present exercise could
have adverse effects on the credibility and prestige of
the Security Council itself.

We greatly regret the uncertainty that has been
brought upon the functioning of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Stabilization Force. Beyond that, it would be a grave
matter indeed if the current impasse in the Council
were to affect a whole series of other operations as
their mandates come up for renewal.

There are a number of important, essentially
free-standing, but now politically intertwined, factors
involved here: the role of the Council and how it
functions; the primacy and integrity of international
law; the future of United Nations peace operations; and
the crucial role that the United States has to play in
support of those operations. Taken together, these
factors present a challenge. I have described briefly the
principles that guide Ireland's approach to that
challenge. I have also set out some of the
preoccupations of my Government, as well as legal
factors underpinning our position and approach. Taking
account of those principles and preoccupations, let me
reiterate that we are open to a reasonable way forward
that is legally and politically sound and that will
quickly resolve the matter while meeting valid
concerns.

Ireland will pay the utmost attention to the views
expressed by the wider membership of the United
Nations at this meeting, in the conviction that any
solution to the current impasse will need to preserve,
not harm, the standing of the United Nations as a
whole.

