Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I thank you, Sir, for the
leadership of Pakistan in convening this open debate.
This meeting today, which tackles the question of a
comprehensive response to terrorism, is of the utmost
importance because no country can stand alone in the
face of terrorist attacks.

As a country that has suffered the devastating impact
of terrorism, Indonesia fully recognizes the imperative
need for concerted national counter-terrorism efforts to
have a robust global counter-terrorism framework that
is versatile and cooperative and addresses terrorism in
a comprehensive manner so as to ensure that the results
are sustainable. We hope that, through this initiative
of Pakistan, the work of the United Nations, including
through the Security Council, will lead to more effective
steps in the global response to terrorism.

Before I continue, allow me to associate myself
with the statements of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement, delivered
by the representatives of Egypt and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, respectively.

Indonesia welcomes the third biennial review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which took place in June 2012. The four-pillar Strategy
is a strong key for enhancing and coordinating
international counter-terrorism efforts and assisting
Member States in taking a similarly integrated
approach. After the sixth year and third review of the
Strategy, we still need to see the imperative to balance
the implementation of the four pillars.

Indonesia therefore calls for an intensified
engagement of Member States in the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF),
as decided at the third review of the Strategy. Such an
approach will enable countries to better follow and
assess the work of the Task Force and provide guidance
on its work, including by identifying elements of the
main pillars that need strengthening.

The United Nations effort against terrorism has
increased significantly through the involvement of
various United Nations organs and their subsidiaries.
With this positive trend in mind, Indonesia supports
further deliberation of the idea of establishing the post
of counter-terrorism coordinator to see how it fits with
the need to boost synergy in the overall global counter-
terrorism efforts.

We fully support the idea that the comprehensive
counter-terrorism approach should be undertaken
at both the policy and the implementation levels.
Furthermore, it is essential that such a comprehensive
approach be without prejudice to human rights and the
rule of law.

At the national level, Indonesia has taken law
enforcement measures and established several important
legislative frameworks on counter-terrorism. Since
the enactment of Law No. 15 in 2003 on countering
terrorism, Indonesia has arrested and brought to justice
over 600 terrorists. Of those, more than 400 have been
convicted by the courts.

Building on its steady progress against terrorism,
Indonesia has continued to strengthen its law
enforcement institutions in order to enhance their
capacity to deliver timely and effective results. Through
the establishment of the Indonesian National Counter-
Terrorism Agency in 2010, Indonesia is not only
addressing the legal and technical aspects of counter-
terrorism, but also engaging with the equally important
social aspects.

Indonesia also welcomes the third ministerial
meeting of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum
(GCTF), held in Abu Dhabi last year. That meeting
stressed the need to do more on institutional capacity-
building and the sharing of best practices. Together
with Australia, as co-chairs of the Southeast Asia
Capacity-Building Working Group of the GCTF,
Indonesia has convened two productive meetings of
the Working Group in the past year. The most recent
meeting, held in Manila, addressed the issue of youth
radicalization and de-radicalization. It took stock of
possible future activities to facilitate coordination on
technical assistance programmes in Southeast Asia.

In a similar vein, Indonesia calls for stronger
cooperation among counter-terrorism centres, including
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre of the
CTITF, the Hedayah Center, and the Jakarta Centre for
Law Enforcement Cooperation (JCLEC) in Indonesia.
I am delighted to inform the Council, as stated earlier
by the representative of Australia, that JCLEC, which
was established in 2004 through cooperation between
Indonesia and Australia, has to date trained more than
10,000 law enforcement and counter-terrorism officials
from 47 countries in the Asia-Pacific region.

Indonesia believes that, in order to prevent
incitement to terrorism, it is essential that the root
causes of terrorism be addressed. The nature of those
root causes entail a need to promote dialogue, tolerance
and mutual understanding, as well as to empower
moderates. We would further like to reiterate that
terrorism must not be associated with any religion,
culture or group. No religion or religious doctrine
encourages or inspires acts of terrorism. None should
be portrayed as such.

In that regard, the international community must
work harder to reject the profiling of a particular
group, religion or civilization. We must promote mutual
tolerance, coexistence and respect for each other's
cultures and faiths. To that end, we should all help to
strengthen the practice of dialogue, consultation and
cooperation.

Finally, Indonesia pledges its commitment to
continue sharing experiences and thoughts on how
counter-terrorism should be effectively carried out for
the sake of our future.

