The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Foreign Secretary of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.

It is a great privilege for me to preside over
today's open debate. I thank the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his insightful
briefing. We deeply admire his leadership on United
Nations peacekeeping and his personal commitment
to making United Nations peacekeeping operations
efficient and effective.

Blue Helmets are recognized and respected all over
the world. They symbolize the United Nations quest for
regional and international peace, security and stability
around the globe. They underline the collective will
and endeavour of all Member States to make the world
peaceful and stable.

United Nations peacekeeping has saved and
protected tens of millions of lives around the globe.
It helps shattered communities and neighbourhoods
rebuild themselves. It replaces strife with harmony.
Brave women and men in the peacekeeping missions
have made tremendous sacrifices in the cause of peace.
More than 3,000 peacekeepers have laid down their
lives to save the world from the scourge of war. Today
we collectively pay homage to them. Today we should
all once again reiterate our commitment to their safety
and security

We are grateful to the members of the Council for
holding this debate on under the theme "United Nations
peacekeeping: a multidimensional approach" during
our presidency. We held wide-ranging consultations,
including with the Secretariat, to ensure that all
stakeholders were on board and all perspectives were
reflected in the preparation of this debate and the draft
resolution (S/2013/27) on a multidimensional approach
to peacekeeping. I am glad that today we will adopt a
draft resolution on this subject that has been sponsored
by all 15 members of the Security Council, which will
be the first comprehensive resolution on peacekeeping
after more than 11 years. Our motivation to hold this
debate and present the draft resolution is three-fold.

First, peacekeeping missions are the most effective
tool in the hands of the United Nations to deal with
conflicts.

Secondly, over the decades peacekeeping operations
have evolved from traditional to multidimensional
peacekeeping operations to better correspond to the
requirements of different situations. Their growing
capacity to build peace, in addition to their primary
role of keeping peace, needs to be harnessed.

Thirdly, in the past 52 years Pakistan has
demonstrated strong commitment to peacekeeping and
has served in missions all around the world.

We are grateful to the members of the Council
and to Member States for their warm response to our
proposal.

With regard to the debate today and the draft
resolution to be adopted by the Council later, I want to
highlight seven aspects of a multidimensional approach
to peacekeeping: first, early response in order to prevent
conflict, address its root causes and stem a relapse into
conflict; second, the nexus between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding - early mission assessment and planning
will ensure coherence and synergy; third, sound
planning and coordination in mandating and deploying
peacekeeping missions through consultations with all
stakeholders, especially troop-contributing countries;
fourth, professional excellence, demonstrated by
ensuring the deployment of trained, committed and
well-equipped peacekeepers; fifth, broader ownership
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities by
strengthening partnerships with national Governments,
regional organizations and development actors; sixth,
inclusive political dialogue for fostering national unity
and reconciliation; and seventh, tailoring missions to
local conditions within the general template.

Pakistan has been a proud participant in
peacekeeping missions. Pakistan has been a leading
military and police contributor to peacekeeping
missions, from Latin America to Africa and from
Europe to Asia. In more than five decades, we have
had the honour of contributing approximately 145,000
troops and of serving in 41 missions in 23 countries.
That has given our peacekeepers valuable experience
in handling diverse and difficult conflict and post-
conflict situations all over the world. One hundred
and thirty-two of our peacekeepers have given their
lives for peace. That is among the highest number of
casualties suffered by Member States in the service of
the United Nations.

Pakistan's peacekeeping role is rooted in our abiding
faith in the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. Our participation in United Nations
peacekeeping is underpinned by a national consensus
and is an integral part of our foreign policy.

Pakistan is also host to one of the oldest United
Nations peacekeeping missions, namely, the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan.
That mission has played an important role in monitoring
peace along the Line of Control in J ammu and Kashmir.

The complex and dynamic nature of contemporary
conflicts demands change in the nature and scope
of peacekeeping missions and a comprehensive and
integrated approach to peacekeeping. Multidimensional
peacekeeping missions are a manifestation of such an
approach. Accordingly, intricate crises are increasingly
seeing the deployment of multidimensional peacekeeping
missions. In such situations, keeping peace is as
imperative as building it. Such missions achieve the
twin goals of peacekeeping and peacebuilding by
preventing the recurrence of conflict, building local
capacities for sustainable peace and creating space
for development actors and financial institutions. The
enhanced efficiency and cost-effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping efforts are among the benefits of
a multidimensional approach.

Success in Burundi, Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Timor-Leste has demonstrated the value of
multidimensional missions. Yet, there are situations
where challenges are larger than the United Nations
wherewithal. That calls for a more calibrated response.

Shared responsibility and partnerships underpin
United Nations peacekeeping. It is a multilateral
exercise under one United Nations flag.

Continued success in peacekeeping will be ensured
by upholding the legitimacy bestowed on them by the
Charter of the United Nations and the guiding principles
of peacekeeping, that is, consent, impartiality and the
non-use of force except in self-defence or defence of
the mandate.

I am sure that our deliberations today will strengthen
those partnerships and enrich the discourse for a robust
response to the challenges of peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.

