Mr. Vrailas: Allow me to present apologies on
behalf of Ambassador Mayr-Harting, as he is not able
to deliver this statement himself.

I am speaking on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

We thank the Jordanian presidency of the Security
Council for the initiative to organize this high-level
debate on the role of youth in countering Violent
extremism and promoting peace. It offers us the
opportunity to further the discussions and to build
on the recent commitments we took at the Summit on
Countering Violent Extremism, convened by President
Obama in February.

The fight against violent extremism will be lengthy.
As we focus on immediate threats, we should also think
strategically, to our future. Younger generations are
the key to our success. Terrorist groups and extremists
capitalize on advances in technology to find new ways
of engaging with disaffected youth and take advantage
of social networking sites, online video channels and
radical chat rooms. They are spreading their propaganda
more widely, more rapidly and more effectively, and
youth are the main specific target through social media.
That is why it is important that we act together and in
a concerted manner, while upholding our core values.

The EU and its member States are very actively
engaged in countering violent extremism and have
identified anti-radicalization efforts as one of the
main areas in which to concentrate our efforts. A
particular emphasis is placed on prevention, and the
EU has defined its vision through the EU Strategy for
Combating Radicalization and Recruitment. We cannot
afford to lose the fight for our youth. This is why
education is so crucial. Let us not forget the words of
a brave young woman, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate
Malala Yousafzai: "The extremists are afraid of books
and pens. The power of education frightens them".

In Europe, we believe that public education is
a powerful tool to promote open-mindedness and
tolerance in youth. We are also engaging with local
communities, civil society and the private sector in
order to foster their resilience and prevent the formation
of parallel education networks, where extremist ideas
may thrive. At the initiative of the French Government
and the EU, the Union's Education Ministers met in
Paris on 17 March to discuss new measures to tackle
radicalization across the European Union.

In our partner countries, the EU also supports
initiatives aimed at identifying the motivations behind
youth extremism, at empowering women, at promoting
community policing, at strengthening local actors and
at improving the media and education capacities to
counter radicalizing ideologies. We have to make sure
that young people not only take advantage of education,
but that they can find their place in their own societies,
and an appropriate one. In that context, we also focus on
addressing the underlying factors of radicalization by
supporting initiatives with regard to youth, education,
vocational training, job opportunities, civil society,
security-sector reform and the role of women. That is
very much in line with the link between security and
development that the EU upholds, as is underlined
in the presidency's concept note. There is indeed no
security possible without the necessary development
conditions, and in that sense supporting programmes
that give opportunities to youth is a good way to counter
extremism in an effective way. As already announced
at the White House Summit on Countering Violent
Extremism in February, we will soon launch additional
programmes on how to link education and counter
Violent extremism, address the socioeconomic aspects
of conflicts and link them with the post-2015 agenda.

We therefore encourage States to engage with
members of the relevant local communities and
non-governmental actors in developing strategies to
counter the violent extremist narrative that can incite
youth to terrorist acts, and address the conditions
that are conducive to the spread of Violent extremism.
Strategies include empowering youth and women, as
well as religious, cultural and education leaders and
all members of relevant civil-society groups, adopting
tailored approaches to countering recruitment to
this kind of violent extremism and promoting social
inclusion and cohesion.

We are also constantly pleading with United
Nations entities to focus on terrorism prevention
in a more coordinated manner. The United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
have a crucial role to play in developing analyses and
programmes that involve youth and are dedicated to
youth for the purposes of effective countering-Violent-
extremism prevention. The Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum is also an appropriate forum to develop
such efforts further. We welcome the ongoing close
cooperation between the Forum and the United Nations
and encourage its further strengthening. Within
their respective competences, regional organizations
also have an important role to play, especially in the
effective implementation of initiatives emanating from
the United Nations.

The European Union will, therefore, continue to be
very active and cooperate with all countries to counter
Violent extremism. The United Nations is a key forum
for that endeavour, and we look forward to further
constructive discussions during the General Assembly
Ministerial week in September.

