Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand welcomes
the fact that Pakistan's Foreign Secretary has chosen
to be present for this debate, and we join Luxembourg
and others in applauding the fact that Pakistan, one of
the principal troop-contributing countries (TCCs) of
the United Nations, is taking the initiative to bring this
debate to the Security Council, thereby demonstrating
why it is so important to have strong TCC representation
on the Council.

It is also very fitting that this debate follows
closely on the December debate on peacebuilding
(S/PV.6897). As New Zealand stressed at that time,
effective peacebuilding activities are vital during the
peacekeeping phase, so we are very pleased to see that
point emphasized so strongly in Pakistan's concept note
(S/20l3/4, annex).

To enable the drawdown of costly peacekeeping
missions, real and effective work is needed to address
the root causes of conflict, and that requires a
genuinely multidimensional approach on the part of the
Council and the United Nations as a whole. Tasks such
as security sector reform, extending the rule of law,
establishing inclusive governance and creating early-
impact employment and economic opportunities must
all be part of the overall United Nations mandate. But
to be effective, they must also be very well integrated.
If they are not, we will continue to see the dreadful
United Nations silo problems that in the past have
sometimes rendered peacekeeping ineffective. The
multidimensional elements of a mission must therefore
be given the same prominence as is usually accorded
the military presence of the peacekeeping force itself.

The second key requirement is for peacekeeping
missions to be seen to deliver early and tangible benefits
to host country populations, thus helping to build the
mission's political capital with the host Government
and other stakeholders. We have unfortunately seen too
many instances where host Governments have simply
lost patience with peacekeeping missions.

So how can the Council manage United Nations
peacekeeping missions in a truly multidimensional
manner? Its mandate under the Charter is not
unlimited. It cannot and should not be seeking exclusive
competence over all aspects of a multidimensional
mission, but given the intimate connection between
the various causes of conflict, the Council still has a
critically important role to play. That said, its current
practice is not well suited to complex situations where
there are overlapping competencies and responsibilities.

Key stakeholders outside the Council, and not
least host countries, are often marginalized in its
consideration of multidimensional mandates, and we
join Egypt and others in saying that peacekeeping tasks
must be aligned with the strategies of the host country
in order to ensure national ownership. Better interaction
with the relevant peacebuilding configurations is one
potentially very useful step. But that is not always
possible, because most of the missions with Council
mandates are not countries that are on the Peacebuilding
Commission's agenda. We therefore need to go much
deeper in our search for effective tools for proper
oversight of effective integration.

We suggest that the Council could start with one or
two situations on its agenda where there is at present
no peacebuilding configuration, and could establish
a configuration-type of format of its own, based on a
partnership between the Council, the host State and
others, as appropriate, as well as with the relevant
United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations
Development Programme. A less formal configuration
of that character would be a very powerful tool for
better, collective United Nations engagement on the
multifaceted issues that face almost every peacekeeping
task.

The right mix of political inclusivity and
informality could permit the input of the relevant
stakeholders, including host countries, donors, troop-
contributing countries and United Nations agencies. It
would also provide a context for more sustained and
effective Council leadership on conflict prevention
and resolution, using, as we have urged in the past, the
Council's tools under Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. Above all, it would help to fulfil the
promise of truly multidimensional and effective United
Nations peacekeeping, which could address the root
causes of conflict, and would be a tangible expression
of the Council's commitment to Chapter VI and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. That is what we seek of
all peacekeeping missions, and with the right measures,
that is what can be delivered.

