Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Chambas for his excellent briefing.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/ 1175)
covers a broad and impressive array of issues. We
would like to comment on a few that are of particular
importance from our point of View.

First, we need sound international coordination as a
key element of success. As the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General pointed out, cooperation among
actors in the United Nations system, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
subregional organizations is key to success. Wherever
we can, Germany contributes to reaching that objective
through our own initiative. Special Representative
Chambas mentioned the High-level Conference on
the Lake Chad Region, held in Berlin in September
2018, which we organized together with Nigeria,
Norway and the United Nations and at which $2 billion
was pledged. The conference showed the relevance
of the humanitarian, development and peace nexus
and contributed to the implementation of resolution
2349 (2017). Regional cross-border cooperation is
also key to success. We welcome the adoption of
regional stabilization strategy of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and the African Union (AU). The strategy
will be essential for future cooperation.
Secondly, there needs to be a strategic focus on
crisis prevention across the board. We need long-term
sustainable development - economically, socially and
environmentally and after transitions and mission exits.
That also means effectively using the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) as an advisory body to the Council.
I would like to share a few thoughts on those issues.

Germany is one of the largest contributors to
conflict prevention and peacebuilding and development
activities within the United Nations system. We
strongly support the efforts of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Chambas to support African initiatives for sustaining
regional peace. In particular, we appreciate the holistic
approach that has been chosen, which is a combination
of various instruments in our toolbox - mediation,
reform processes, human rights and support to
transparent, credible and peaceful elections, while
urging States to ensure that basic democratic principles
and preconditions are fulfilled.

Small arms and light weapons are another concern
and are all too widespread in the region. We need to
effectively counter the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons in the region. We support regional
initiatives that aim to reach that very objective. That is
why we provide comprehensive support for the control
of small arms and light weapons in West Africa, as
part of our strategic cooperation with ECOWAS and in
building local capacity in Mali, the Niger and Nigeria.

With regard to the successful closures of the
missions in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire, to which Special
Representative Chambas referred, we feel that they
are possible models for future transitions and exits
but, at the same time, we must consider long-term
sustainable development, respect for human rights and
stabilization. The peace dividends we gained by closing
United Nations missions of that kind should be used to
strengthen crisis prevention measures at the same time.
In that regard, we advocate for the effective use of the
Peacebuilding Commission as an advisory body to the
Council. One example is the joint mission conducted
by UNOWAS and the PBC to Burkina Faso, C6te
d'Ivoire and the Gambia in October 2018. Germany is
one of the largest donors to the Peacebuilding Fund and
encourages member States to contribute to its budget.
My last point on crisis prevention is that, as
the Special Representative pointed out, we are also
concerned about the lack of effective participation by
civil society and opposition in democratic processes, in
some instances. We are also concerned about the arrest
of human rights defenders and the violations of freedom
of expression and assembly in a number of Western and
Central African countries. We would be very interested
to hear from the Special Representative about how he
will address those issues in his future work.

Thirdly, the promotion and protection of human
rights is an integral part of the overall prevention effort.
Counter-terrorism operations must also comply with
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. We strongly condemn all attacks carried out
by terrorist organizations, especially by Boko Haram,
and we are concerned about the increasingly complex
and coordinated attacks in the region, as outlined by
the Special Representative. Any security initiatives
must comply with international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. As the study by
the United Nations Development Programme entitled
Journey to Extremism in Africa has shown, one driver
of extremism is human rights violations by security
forces, which is of particular concern. Let me provide
some concrete examples in that connection.

We launched a United States-German initiative
within the Global Counterterrorism Forum against the
use of unmanned aerial systems by terrorists. West
Africa is one of the focus regions of that initiative. We
very much welcome regional initiatives to respond to
the terrorist threat and overcome the challenges. The
last example is the Multinational Joint Task Force in
the Lake Chad area, the Group of Five for the Sahel
regional cell for the prevention of radicalization and
violent extremism or the Joint Summit of ECOWAS
and ECCAS Heads of State and Government on Peace,
Security, Stability and the Fight Against Terrorism
and Violent Extremism, held in Lome in July 2018.
Those are very good examples that show steps in the
right direction.

For our fourth point, we would also like to highlight
what the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General mentioned, namely, the adverse effects of
climate change and the ecological impact on the stability
of West Africa, the Sahel and the Lake Chad region.
Therefore, we need to intensify our activities and
welcome the ongoing work of UNOWAS on the analysis
of climate-related security risks in West Africa and the
Sahel. We also feel that the Council needs to take the
latter into account and conduct the appropriate follow-
up. We commend UNOWAS on its completion of the
first stage of an analysis of climate-related risks in line
with last year's presidential statement S/PRST/2018/ 16.
There is a strong link between climate change and
security. There is competition over scarce resources,
water and land. That clearly underlines the need for
the Council to consider the effects of climate change
on security in a much more structured way. One such
example involving the upsurge in, and spread of, violent
conflict between herders and farmers due particularly
to the adverse effects of climate change was brought up
at as a source of concern at the joint ECOWAS-ECCAS
summit held last year in Lome. Germany has been very
active in providing support for the Lake Chad Basin
Commission since 2005 in the areas of organizational
development and transboundary water management.

My final point involves the particularly worrisome
situation of women and girls, as well as young people.
They are exposed to abductions, detention and sexual
violence by extremist groups, as outlined in the report
ofthe Secretary-General and the briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. Women and
girls face threats particularly by extremist groups.
One good example of how to counter that was, from
our point of View, the joint United Nations-African
Union mission led by Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and AU Special Envoy Bineta Diop to the
Sahel, South Sudan, Nigeria and Chad in July 2018, with
a focus on women and peace and security. We would be
interested to hear from the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General if he could provide us with some
of his reflections on the follow-up to that visit. Women
need to participate in all kinds of conflict resolution
and mediation phases and activities. That holds
particularly true for local mechanisms, and we would
very much welcome any further activity by UNOWAS
in that regard.

