Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Before I begin my statement on today's voting, I would
first like to acknowledge and express appreciation for
the presence of a number of family members of Pan
Am 103 Victims from several countries, who have
travelled to be with us today. We recognize the loss of
their loved ones and wish to convey our deepest
sympathy for their many years of suffering.

On 21 December 1988, the lives of 270 innocent
men, women and children, representing over 20
different nationalities, were tragically cut short when
Pan Am flight 103 exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland.
In 1992, after proof of Libya's responsibility for the
bombing had been uncovered, the United Nations
imposed sanctions on Libya. Since that time, the
United States Government has worked with the
Government of the United Kingdom, the families of the
Pan Am 103 victims and other members of the
international community to ensure that Libya fulfilled a
number of demands, including surrender of the two
suspects for trial, acceptance of responsibility for the
actions of its officials and payment of appropriate
compensation.

United Nations sanctions were suspended in 1999
after Libya fulfilled one demand by transferring the
two Libyan suspects for trial before a Scottish court
sitting in the Netherlands. One defendant, Abdel Basset
al-Megrahi, was convicted by the court of murder in
2001, and a Scottish appellate court upheld that
conviction in 2002. Megrahi is currently serving a life
sentence in a Scottish prison.

Libya has now addressed the remaining United
Nations requirements related to the Pan Am 103
bombing. Among other steps, it has formally stated that
it accepts responsibility for the actions of its officials
and made arrangements to pay compensation to the
families of the victims in accordance with an
agreement worked out directly between them. Although
nothing can bring back their loved ones, the hundreds
of family members who have suffered for the past 15
years can take some measure of solace from these long-
awaited steps.

In recognition of these steps, and to allow the
families' settlement to go forward, the United States
has not opposed the formal lifting of the United
Nations sanctions on Libya. As stated in the joint letter
from the United States and United Kingdom to the
President of the Council on 15 August, we expect
Libya to adhere scrupulously to the commitments it has
now made to the Council to cooperate in the
international fight against terrorism and to cooperate
with any further requests for information in connection
with the Pan Am 103 investigation.

Our decision, however, must not be misconstrued
by Libya or by the world community as tacit United
States acceptance that the Government of Libya has
rehabilitated itself. The United States continues to have
serious concerns about other aspects of Libyan
behaviour, including its poor human rights record, its
rejection of democratic norms and standards, its
irresponsible behaviour in Africa, its history of
involvement in terrorism, and - most important - its
pursuit of weapons of mass destruction and their means
of delivery.

Libya is actively pursuing a broad range of
weapons of mass destruction and is seeking ballistic
missiles. In those efforts, it is receiving foreign
assistance, including from countries that sponsor
terrorism. Libya's continued nuclear infrastructure
upgrades raise concerns. Tripoli is actively developing
biological and chemical weapons. The United States
will intensify its efforts to end Libya's threatening
actions. This includes keeping United States bilateral
sanctions on Libya in full force.

In its compensation settlement with the Pan Am
103 families, Libya has tied the payment of some of the
available funds to changes in United States bilateral
measures related to Libya, something clearly outside
the scope of the United Nations requirements.
Furthermore, Libya has imposed an eight-month time
limit during which these steps must be taken, unless it
agrees otherwise. We hope that, by doing this, Libya is
signalling that it intends to move quickly to address the
concerns that underlie the United States measures. We
also urge that Libya do so in order for the families to
receive the balance of the available funds.

Nonetheless, the United States cannot guarantee
that Libya will take the required steps and we would
not want our vote on the resolution lifting sanctions to
be misconstrued as a decision now to modify United
States bilateral measures, regardless of future Libyan
behaviour. After all, it has taken Libya almost 15 years
to address Pan Am 103. For this reason, and because of
the concerns I have stated, the United States has
abstained in the voting on this resolution.

