Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the presence of the Deputy
Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Nebojsa Covic'. We
welcome the specific measures, outlined in his
statement, that have been taken by Belgrade in order to
promote the comprehensive implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). We are also grateful to
Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his
briefing.
The situation in Kosovo is developing quickly
but, unfortunately, not always in the direction outlined
by resolution 1244 (1999) 4 indeed, far from it. The
international community's attention to the Kosovo
settlement should not flag if we want to prevent that
province from turning into the cancer of Europe. The
new head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), from the very outset, has
managed to accomplish quickly one of the important
tasks - breaking the political deadlock caused by the
inability of the Kosovar leaders to agree on the
distribution of the top leadership posts in the
province's Provisional Institutions of Self-Government.
However, it is clear that the institutionalization of
power in these organs has not helped accomplish the
main task - guaranteeing the security of the
province's population, primarily the non-Albanian
segment.

We believe that the priority efforts of the
international presences in Kosovo should focus on
creating the right conditions for security and equality
for all the province's inhabitants, irrespective of ethnic
origin or other characteristics. Although some positive
changes have taken place in this area, the international
presences in Kosovo still have many problems to face,
as was confirmed clearly by the facts that Mr. Covie
and Mr. Annabi mentioned in their statements.

Again, we must state that the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons is being intolerably
delayed. This situation is undermining the authority of
the international presences in the eyes of the local
Serbian and other non-Albanian communities and of
the international community as well. Refugee returns
will be an important indicator of readiness to hold the
new municipal elections planned for September.

In this connection, we are concerned that the
European Commission has postponed the donor
conference to raise funds for implementing the
programme for the return of refugees to the province.
That conference had been planned for April, and now it
has been postponed until October or even November -
after the planned election date. This will definitely
make it less possible for UNMIK to make normal
preparations for these elections, which should be fair
and just for all those who now live in Kosovo or who
lived there previously.

We are also concerned that the acuteness of the
problem of refugees and internally displaced persons is
not being valued properly in UNMIK's 2002-2003
budget. We know that UNMIK has stated several times
that the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons and the creation of normal conditions for
national minorities are Mission priorities. Nevertheless,
UNMIK is not asking for any additional human or
material resources for these purposes in the budget.
That is surprising, and we hope that the situation will
be redressed as a matter of urgency.

Other priority tasks of UNMIK and KFOR
include, in our view, the creation of the conditions for a
multi-ethnic society in the province and, to that end,
the establishment of an inter-communal dialogue, as
well as vigorous action against crime and criminal
organizations, the completion of demilitarization and
the disarmament of former Kosovo Liberation Army
combatants, and the blocking of any attempt by the
leaders of the Kosovo Protection Corps to give that
body a military role.

Today there is talk about the importance of
cooperation between UNMIK and Belgrade. We are
convinced that Belgrade should become a partner of
UNMIK in defining priorities and resolving practical
issues relating to the establishment of normal
conditions in Kosovo, in the context of the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). Vital tasks such as the creation of a basis for a
market economy, privatization, the involvement of
Kosovo in projects included in the Stability Pact for
South-Eastern Europe and the return of displaced
persons (which has already been discussed) all these
tasks must be carried out in close consultation with the
Yugoslav authorities. It is important to increase
specific contacts on these questions and others in the
context of the High-Ranking Working Group created
on the basis of the Common Document dated 5
November last year. In addition, the Document itself
must, of course, be implemented fully.

In the light of developments with which the
Council is familiar, we think it would be timely to step
up the joint actions of UNMIK, Belgrade and Skopje to
provide speedy practical implementation of the
Agreement on delineation of the border between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Macedonia dated
23 February 2001. We anticipate speedy action by
UNMIK's leadership, who should take the initiative
here.

We support the efforts by KFOR and UNMIK to
try to reduce the large numbers of illegal weapons and
explosive substances drifting around the province;
ideally, we would like such weapons and substances to
be eliminated. We think, however, that those efforts
have fallen short, particularly given the current level of
political extremism in Kosovo. Moreover, KFOR and
UNMIK should provide proper control over the
Kosovar section of the border between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, Albania and Macedonia.

As the Council knows, the representatives of the
international presences are not ruling out the possibility
that, with the onset of spring, the Albanian extremist
groups in Macedonia, with support from Kosovo, may
become more active. We hope that these issues are
being constantly addressed by the international
presences.

The problem of curbing extremism is an acute
one, not only in Kosovo but on a regional scale as well.
We believe that this merits our attention, as it is a
regional threat.

We believe that, at this stage, the focus of all of
the efforts ofthe international community should be on
the tasks I have just spoken of, which relate directly to
facilitating normal living conditions in Kosovo and to
creating conditions that will allow for a genuine multi-
ethnic society. All those who lived in Kosovo earlier
should be able to live there now, in their homes, and to
coexist normally as human beings. Until these
conditions are created, it would be not merely
counterproductive but downright politically dangerous
to start talking about any final status for Kosovo.

The province is facing many problems, which we
have to resolve urgently. Here I fully agree with the
points made by Deputy Prime Minister Covie. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Steiner, is well known as a very energetic and
persistent person who is able to get results. We hope
that all of these qualities will be demonstrated actively
in Kosovo - strictly in keeping, of course, with
resolution 1244 (1999).

We think that in April the Security Council
should carry out a comprehensive assessment of the
implementation of that resolution, with the
participation ofthe Special Representative.

