The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now resume its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the continuing and full
implementation of its resolution 1325 (2000), and
welcomes the increasing focus over the last two
years on the situation of women and girls in
armed conflict, and recalls the statement by its
President of 31 October 2001 (S/PRST/2001/31)
and the meetings held on 25 July 2002 and 28
October 2002 as expressions of that commitment.

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on women, peace and
security (S/2002/ 1154) and expresses its intention
to study the recommendations contained therein.
The Council also welcomes the efforts of the
United Nations system, Member States, civil
society and other relevant actors to promote equal
participation of women in peace and security.

"The Security Council remains concerned
about the slow progress in the appointment of
women as special representatives and envoys of
the Secretary-General, and urges the Secretary-
General to increase the number of women serving
as high-level representatives to achieve the
overall goal of gender balance. The Council also
urges Member States to continue to provide
candidates to the Secretary-General for inclusion
in a database.

"The Security Council, reaffirming the
importance of gender mainstreaming in
peacekeeping operations and post-conflict

reconstruction, undertakes to integrate gender
perspectives into the mandates of all
peacekeeping missions, and reiterates its request
to the Secretary-General to ensure that all reports
submitted to the Security Council in accordance
with such mandates systematically address gender
perspectives. The Council also requests the
Secretary-General to provide systematic training
of all staff in peacekeeping operations on gender
perspectives, and to integrate gender perspectives
into all standard operating procedures, manuals
and other guidance materials for peacekeeping
operations.

"The Security Council considers that the
appointment of gender advisers at sufficiently
senior levels at Headquarters is necessary. The
Council notes that some progress has been made
in gender mainstreaming at mission level,
specifically through the establishment of gender
units and gender advisers, but that more remains
to be done in order to ensure that gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping operations and
post-conflict reconstruction is thorough and
effective, and applied systematically.

"The Security Council undertakes to
integrate gender perspectives into the terms of
reference of its visits and missions to countries
and regions in conflict. To that end, the Council
requests the Secretary-General to establish a
database of gender specialists as well as women's
groups and networks in countries and regions in
conflict, and to include gender specialists in the
teams where relevant.

"The Security Council recognizes the vital
role of women in promoting peace, particularly in
preserving social order and educating for peace.
The Council encourages Member States and the
Secretary-General to establish regular contacts
with local women's groups and networks in order
to utilize their knowledge of both the impact of
armed conflict on women and girls, including as
victims and ex-combatants, and of peacekeeping
operations, to ensure that those groups are
actively involved in reconstruction processes,
particularly at decision-making levels.

"The Security Council, recalling its
resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000), 1325
(2000) and 1379 (2001), encourages Member

States, the entities of the United Nations system,
civil society and other relevant actors, to develop
clear strategies and action plans with goals and
timetables, on the integration of gender
perspectives in humanitarian operations,
rehabilitation and reconstruction programmes,
including monitoring mechanisms, and also to
develop targeted activities, focused on the
specific constraints facing women and girls in
post-conflict situations, such as their lack of land
and property rights and access to and control over
economic resources.

"The Security Council deplores the
continuing occurrence of sexual exploitation,
including trafficking, of women and girls in the
context of peacekeeping operations and
humanitarian activities, and calls for the further
development and full implementation of codes of
conduct and of disciplinary procedures to prevent
such exploitation. The Council encourages all
actors, in particular troop-contributing countries,
to enhance monitoring mechanisms, and to
investigate and prosecute effectively cases of
alleged misconduct.

"The Security Council condemns all
violations of the human rights of women and girls
in situations of armed conflict, and the use of
sexual violence, including as a strategic and
tactical weapon of war, which, inter alia, places
women and girls at increased risk of contracting
sexually transmitted infections and HIV/AIDS.

"The Security Council decides to remain
actively seized of this matter and requests the
Secretary-General to prepare a follow-up report
on the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) to be presented to the Security Council in
October 2004."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/32.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

Statement by the President

The President (spoke in French): As it comes to
the end of its presidency of the Security Council,
Cameroon would like to express its gratitude to the
members of the Council and its sincere thanks for their
excellent support. Individually and together, they have
confirmed my country's conviction that the United
Nations and, particularly, the Security Council are for
the world, particularly for Africa, an irreplaceable
diplomatic forum for cooperation and a strong bastion.
The Council epitomizes the manner in which the world
is evolving.

I would say that often, at decisive moments in the
history of humanity, the Council alone holds the key to
a solution. Without its wisdom and experience and its
resolve to promote peace and security, might would
make right in many parts of the world.

The mission of the United Nations and of the
Security Council in particular is to ensure that all
States Members of the United Nations, working
together, actively contribute more and more each day
to the promotion of peace.

It is clear that the future of the world will be
shaped by the United Nations and the Security Council
in particular. Cameroon is aware of how much Africa,
especially Central Africa, owes the Council. That
subregion, despite the end of the cold war and in part
because of the historical crossroads we are at, is
experiencing a great deal of upheaval, which has made
it a primary hotbed of political crises and armed
conflict on the continent.

Even before joining the Security Council,
Cameroon was aware of the priority accorded, in the
deliberations and the work of the Council, to its quest
for appropriate and peaceful solutions to the dangers
threatening us. The contributions it made during the 22
October debate on Central Africa, which Cameroon
initiated with the Council's full support, and the
commitments undertaken demonstrate - if indeed we
needed further demonstration of it - the Council's
continuing interest in our subregion.

Once again, I wish to thank my colleagues; the
Secretary-General; the staff of the Secretariat, in
particular the Security Council Affairs Division; and
the interpreters and the translators.

The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

