Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank the Egyptian
presidency for convening today's open debate, which
is in line with the strategic discussion taking place in
the Security Council about how the United Nations
and its peacekeeping missions can contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

At the outset, allow me to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ambassador Gert Rosenthal and
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud for their insights, which serve
as a source ofinspiration for our discussion today.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
later by the delegation of the European Union. We
would like to make some additional remarks in our
national capacity.

Thanks to parallel Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions on sustaining peace, the concept of
the peace continuum is embedded in our daily narrative.
It must now be implemented. In that regard, we encourage
the Secretary-General to move forward with his vision
and review of the Secretariat's structure, including
through a new distribution of roles and responsibilities.
We commend the reforms already undertaken and look
forward to further recommendations, which will focus
on peace and security.

The pursuit of political settlements should be the
overall aim of the United Nations when it intervenes to
restore peace and security. In our opinion, preventive
diplomacy and working towards a negotiated, inclusive
political solution before a crisis erupts is the yardstick
for our work. Once a crisis erupts despite such efforts
and after the United Nations has failed to prevent
escalation, it may become essential to avoid a relapse
into conflict. I should like to make a few points on
that issue.

First, with regard to mandates, a core objective
of the mandates of peacekeeping missions should be
to contribute to creating the conditions for inclusive
political processes aimed at national dialogue and
reconciliation by defusing domestic tension and
violence. It is therefore key to define an entry strategy,
clear and achievable objectives and measurable
benchmarks, as well as a responsible at coordinated
strategy to prevent mission creep and a potential
relapse into conflict. Such benchmarks must take into
full consideration the longer-term objective of a peace
continuum. As a result, mandates should not be seen
as set in stone. They should be flexible in order to
evolve, not only as the situation in a country or region
evolves but also as new challenges and threats to peace
and security emerge. In that context, regular mission
reviews are also key.

Secondly, with regard to capacity to implement
mandates, we should not refrain, when possible and
appropriate, from phasing out a military mission
towards a more agile and lighter footprint operation
based on specialized police and civilian units.
Such a step would help us to better focus on the so-
called bridging tasks between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, such as stabilization, the rule of law,
justice and the protection of civilians. Such tasks are
essential to anchor the initial progress made and to
contribute to truly sustainable peace. In that regard,
we should also take into consideration tasks that can
enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping missions,
thereby helping to pave the way towards sustaining
peace at the end of the transition - to include the
protection of cultural heritage, which is part of the
mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and enhancing
vigilance with regard to the environmental footprint of
a peacekeeping mission, such as in the United Nations
Organizational Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Equally, institutional consolidation is key to
bridging peacekeeping and sustaining peace efforts. In
that connection, the transition from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti is a model case and
test of the United Nations ability to shore up national
authority in the critical shift from crisis management
to a durable peace, while envisaging a responsible
exit strategy from peacekeeping towards strengthened
development assistance.

It is also key to ensure that peacekeepers are
reliable points of reference. It is essential to adopt a
zero-tolerance policy against those Blue Helmets
who have committed sexual exploitation or abuse. Of
course, it is a matter of full respect for fundamental
human rights, but also a matter for the United Nations.
In that context, training, in particular mandatory
predeployment training, is key. Allow me to recall
Italy's role via its training and logistics hub facility in
Vicenza - the Center of Excellence for Stability Police
Units ~ and the Brindisi Global Service Center and the
Turin Staff College.

Thirdly, with regard to partnerships, the United
Nations should work in close partnership as an enabler
for peace with entities and individuals that can
contribute to our common objective. The involvement
regional organizations, in implementation of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, is crucial to
addressing international crises and finding sustainable
solutions. In that regard, the Council's visit to Addis
Ababa to meet its African Union counterpart is an
important step to furthering strengthening cooperation
between the two organizations. I would also like to
recall the initiative of the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel and the role of the European Union,
both of which can have a major role in complementing
United Nations efforts on the ground.

There is clear evidence that civil society's active
involvement in peace processes is essential, in particular
by women. The full and sustained implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent such resolutions,
in particular resolution 2242 (2015), is therefore key. The
United Nations and its States Members should redouble
their efforts to that end. Making greater use of women's
capacities as agents of change when it comes to conflict
prevention, mediation and preventive diplomacy will
lead to greater peace dividends in dispute settlement.
That is at the core of the initiative promoted by my
country to establish a network of women mediators in
the Mediterranean region in order to reduce the existing
capacity gap in this area.

Fourthly, with regard to better use of the tools at
our disposal, I will limit my remarks to the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the need for the
Council to constantly improve the use of that advisory
body to break the silos between our pillars of action
and between Headquarters and the field. The overall
objective must be strengthened United Nations capacity
to deliver as one.

Finally, on resources, we all know that they
are limited and should be used in a cost-effective
way. Nonetheless, savings cannot be an objective in
themselves, but a means, when appropriate, to enhance
the efficiency of peacekeeping operations and of
United Nations activities. That includes the need to
progressively close the gap between the resources
that the Organization spends on peacekeeping and the
budget for mediation and special political missions.

As for peacekeeping missions themselves, the
different options for providing financial support
envisaged in the report of 2 January can be chosen
on a case-by-case basis. Already by 2008, almost 10
years ago, the report prepared by the panel of experts
chaired by former Italian Prime Minister Romano
Prodi (see S/2008/813) called for predictable and
sustainable financial support to United Nations-
approved African Union peacekeeping missions. We
are therefore in favour of exploring the use of assessed
contributions, provided, of course, that the appropriate
set of requirements in terms of troop quality, training,
equipment and high accountability standards are met,
especially when it comes to effectively countering
exploitation and abuse cases.

This new approach requires strong collective
efforts and political commitment. Italy will work to
build consensus together with the Secretary-General,
the Secretariat, our partners in the Council and the
broader membership.

