Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for your accession to the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October and for
having convened this debate on the issue of peace and
security in Africa and support for peacekeeping
operations of the African Union (AU), to which our
two countries attach particular importance. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
honoured us at this important meeting with your
presence.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his exhaustive presentation and to pay tribute to
him for his commitment to the service of strengthening
the capacity of the AU to meet the challenges facing
the African continent in the areas of maintaining peace
and security.

I would like to recognize the presence of
Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union, and thank him for his edifying
statement.

I would also like to welcome the presence at this
important meeting of His Excellency Mr. Henry Odein
Ajumogobia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria,
and Mr. Yusuf Hasan Ibrahim, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia.

My delegation has looked with great interest at
the report introduced by the Secretary-General
(S/2010/514) on supporting peacekeeping operations of
the African Union authorized by the United Nations
and we welcome the development of cooperation
between the AU and the Organization, which reflects
our wish to have a strategic relationship between these
two organizations that can develop on an equal and
harmonized footing.

We also note with satisfaction the concrete
measures taken to strengthen cooperation between
these two organizations, be it between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council or
between the United Nations Secretariat and the AU
Commission.

In that regard, we also welcome the fourth joint
consultative meeting between the members of the
Security Council and the members of the AU Peace and
Security Council held this past June and the creation on
1 July of the United Nations Office to the AU in Addis
Ababa, as well as the much welcomed appointment of
Ambassador Muburi-Muita to head that body.

Often seen as the main theatre for peacekeeping
operations, Africa is now becoming a stakeholder in its
own operations. The African Peace and Security
Architecture has now made progress and is
experiencing an increase in influence, thanks to further
AU efforts to develop a strategic vision and military
capacity to meet the challenges of peacekeeping.

These efforts are clear proof of the commitment
and determination of African leaders to back-up
decisions taken at African meetings and summits with
operational actions that will accelerate their
implementation on the ground. An important example
of this is the special African Union Summit, held in
Tripoli on 31 August 2009, at which, among others
things, a courageous decision was taken to double the
part of the AU budget devoted to peacekeeping
operations from 6 to 12 per cent.

Far from being sufficient to justify full autonomy,
the actions of the AU are still facing a lack of resources
and capacity weaknesses, while the demands for urgent
response are increasingly great. It is in that spirit that,
in January 2010, the Assembly of the AU requested the
United Nations to consider, under Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter, the possibility of financing
through mandatory assessments to the peacekeeping
operations led by the AU or those under its authority
with the consent of the United Nations.

The AU Peace and Security Council reiterated
that request at a recent meeting. The adoption of such
measures would guarantee the AU the capacity it needs
to carry out its activities and to ensure success of its
missions under a Security Council mandate.

The outstanding work done by the joint task force
of the AU and the United Nations, including the
recommendations in the report, have identified actions
that need to be undertaken. For, despite numerous
positive signs in the area of cooperation between the
organizations, much remains to be done in terms of
role-sharing and defining the modalities for
intervention.

As a point of fact, the Secretary-General clearly
stated in his report that

"without a truly strategic relationship and clear
guidance, our efforts to work together will
continue to be short-term, ad hoc, more
complicated and often more costly" (S/2010/514, para. 55).

In this context, the report that the Secretary-
General intends to submit soon and which will, among
other things, further define a strategy for cooperation
between the Organization and the AU in the area of
peacekeeping, could provide us with guidelines for a
better partnership between our two organizations.

Before concluding, allow me to reiterate the
commitment of Algeria to cooperate with the
international community to establish lasting peace and
security at the regional and international levels and, at
the same time, to pay a powerful tribute to those
working on the ground, who courageously work for
peace and the achievement of the principles and
purposes of the Organization, often at the cost of their
own lives.

