Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): We thank Special Envoy Ian Martin for his
excellent report on the situation in East Timor and the
Permanent Representative of East Timor for his
detailed presentation from Foreign Minister Ramos-
Horta. We also thank the representatives of Australia,
Malaysia, New Zealand and Portugal for their reports,
and we commend their forces on the ground for their
efforts to consolidate peace and stability in East Timor.
We are pleased that coordination among the
international forces in Dili continues to improve and
that their collective efforts have led to a substantial
reduction in the level of violence in Dili. Finally,
thanks are due to Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the job
that he and his colleagues in the United Nations Office
in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) continue to do in East
Timor, and to Special Envoy Ian Martin for his
productive efforts in the past few weeks.

We recognize that, even when the violence is
quelled and the situation is brought fully under the
control of the central Government, formidable
challenges will remain for East Timor.

Under the current circumstances, the mandate of
UNOTIL should not be allowed to expire on 20 June.
But given that it was not structured to deal with the
current unrest, we believe that it should be extended
only for another 30 days, until 20 July, to give the
Security Council time to work out the structure of the
United Nations follow-on mission.

Because resolving the current crisis will require
sound, credible information regarding its causes, and
because of the urgent need to investigate the deaths
that took place in Dili on 28 and 29 April and from 23
to 25 May, we concur with the Government of East
Timor's request that the United Nations conduct an
independent inquiry into those matters and believe that
the resolution extending UNOTIL's mandate should
include provisions for it to commence immediately.
While the details of such a follow-on mission will be
the subject of much discussion in the coming weeks,
one thing is already clear: the disintegration of the
Timorese national police during the crisis stemmed
directly from its politicization and the lack of a central
doctrine and training plan. The police will need to be
retrained from the beginning, with one country

S/l'V.5457

 

assuming that responsibility so that training will be the
same across all ranks and units. In addition, Chapter
VII authority may be necessary for the international
community to provide the robust assistance needed to
help East Timor overcome the current crisis.

The recommendations of the United Nations
electoral needs assessment mission for East Timor
illustrate how the United Nations can be most helpful.
In order to ensure that East Timor's democratic
development continues smoothly, we believe that the
United Nations Electoral Assistance Division should,
in cooperation with the Government of East Timor,
organize and administer the upcoming national
elections. We also continue to strongly support credible
accountability for the crimes against humanity
committed in East Timor in 1999.

We deplore the pilfering of the files of the
Serious Crimes Unit during the current unrest and call
on the Government of East Timor to assist in
safeguarding that vital evidence. We also strongly urge
that copies of the Unit's files be promptly sent to the
United Nations, as directed in the resolution
establishing UNOTIL's mandate (resolution 1599 (2005)). We look forward to further progress by the
bilateral Truth and Friendship Commission and are
hopeful that it will pursue a credible process that is
transparent, identifies the names of perpetrators,
protects witness confidentiality and involves the
international community.

