The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank His
Excellency Minister Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, in
his capacity as Chair ofthe Peacebuilding Commission,
for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru.

I am grateful for the insightful briefings by
Secretary General Antonio Guterres, the representatives
of the World Bank and the African Development
Bank and Minister Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia of
Colombia, in his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I also welcome the presence oer. Fidelis
Leite Magalhaes, Minister for Legal Reforms and
Parliamentary Affairs of Timor-Leste, and Mr. Bocchit
Edmond, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship
of Haiti.
The holding of this meeting is motivated by the
importance and priority that Peru attaches to the
establishment of partnerships to promote peacebuilding
and sustaining peace through greater cooperation
and coordination among the Security Council and the
various actors involved in the promotion of peace,
development and human rights.

In line with the twin resolutions adopted by the
Council and the General Assembly in 2016 (Security Council 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution
70/262, respectively) and reaffirmed by both organs in
2018, through the adoption of resolution 2413 (2018),
under the Peruvian presidency (see S/PV.8245), and
General Assembly resolution 72/276, we emphasize the
need to rely on national institutions that are responsible
for those processes and capable of preventing and
resolving conflicts, while building national consensus
to foster good governance, focusing on the population,
particularly those who are most vulnerable, and leading
the struggle against impunity and corruption. Over
the past several days at Headquarters, the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development has been
paying particular attention this year, for the first time,
to Sustainable Development Goal 16, which commits
us all to building peaceful and inclusive societies with
transparent and accountable institutions.

We believe that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development represents the appropriate universal
framework for the support that the United Nations
system lends to national peacebuilding and sustaining
peace efforts. The evidence shows that the participation
of various national actors is crucial to creating a system
built on the rule oflaw capable of overcoming conflicts
and promoting sustainable development, while paying
special attention to political and social inclusion,
macroeconomic stability and access to justice.

As part ofits own responsibilities in the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Council must
ensure that United Nations peace operations are planned
and managed so as to lead to adequate transitions
culminating in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
To that end, we have a acquired a valuable collection
of lessons learned in various parts of the world. We
also know that there are no one-size-fits-all solutions.
It is necessary to establish innovative partnerships to
support countries affected by conflict, while taking
into account their particular circumstances, needs
and priorities.

To that end, every situation must be considered
according to its own independent criteria, indicators
and evaluation parameters. But the results of such
consideration must make it possible to address the
root causes of conflicts in accordance with national
development priorities and establish effective
mechanisms to prevent their recurrence. In that
regard, we emphasize the importance for various
national actors to become involved and lead their own
transition processes.

The support and empowerment of women's and
youth organizations are vital to building a shared vision
for the future. In that vein, I highlight the progress
made in Haiti - a country of our hemisphere that
hosted the largest peacekeeping operation in which
more than 7,000 Peruvian troops served. We hope that
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti will be
strengthened and that it will, in turn, strengthen the
transition process. Peru and the region as a whole will
continue to support that country's efforts to achieve
development and stability.

We also acknowledge the successful case of Timor-
Leste and the continuous process of institutional
strengthening and promotion of its development dating
back to 2012 with the conclusion of United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste. We are interested
in hearing the lessons learned that Minister Leite
Magalhaes will share with us today.

The establishment of multi-stakeholder
partnerships, with the assistance of international
financial institutions, humanitarian actors and the
relevant regional and subregional organizations, is
equally vital in order to link the action of the private
sector and civil society with national efforts to build
and achieve sustainable peace. In that regard, we
highlight the World Bank's strategy to address fragility,
conflict and violence, as well as the work of the
African Development Bank to promote the provision
of required resources in a coherent, predictable and
sustainable manner.

Similarly, we believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission is the right political platform to accompany
transition processes and to promote synergies among
the United Nations system and other international
agencies, as well as to offer strategic guidance for the
consideration of the Security Council. We underscore
in particular the importance of quick-impact projects,
through the Peacebuilding Fund, which contribute
to the main objective of sustaining the legitimacy of
the process by supporting areas of greatest need and
visibility, based on adequate risk analysis and the
involvement of the local population, especially women
and young people.

Lastly, we hope, that today's meeting can contribute
to reflections on the subject and on the establishment of
coordinated partnerships with the various actors of the
international community involved in all phases of the
transition process until its successful completion. That
will allow them to achieve lasting peace, which is the
ultimate objective we all long for.

I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to other members of the Council
who wish to make a statement.

