Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like to
express our appreciation and respect for the historic
Lithuanian presidency of the Security Council.
The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.

This debate is timely and important. The legal
basis for the protection of civilians in armed conflict
is of course strong, but a lack of clarity surrounds
the concept and its operationalization in practice, as
Lithuania mentioned in its excellent note for this debate
(S/2014/74, annex).

In our View, a close relationship exists between
the two concepts of the responsibility to protect and
the protection of civilians in conflict situations.
Conceptually, the responsibility to protect and the
protection of civilians are distinct. The responsibility
to protect is focused on four specific crimes: genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, in conflict and non-conflict situations. The
protection of civilians is different in scope, as it aims
to protect the general safety, dignity and integrity of all
human beings in conflict situations.

At the same time, the two concepts are also closely
related, as they share a similar normative foundation:
the protection ofindividuals is a primary responsibility
of the State, and prevention and early warning are key
to both concepts. The international community plays a
supportive role in both principles.

I would like to focus my comments today on
the protection of civilians on three issues, namely,
prevention, protection and accountability.

On prevention, it is obvious that the best way to
protect civilians in any situation is to prevent a conflict
from happening. The means of the pacific settlement of
conflict, as defined in Article 33 of the Charter of the
United Nations, are crucial.

Therefore, the Netherlands supports the United
Nations as a global actor in the field of mediation.
When it comes to the judicial settlement of conflicts,
the International Court of Justice and the Permanent
Court of Arbitration, which are both housed in the Peace
Palace in The Hague, are global icons of the pursuit of
peace by means of the law and of conflict prevention.

Another crucial element is early warning. My
Government fully supports the initiative of the United
Nations under the action plan entitled "Rights up
front", which of course is also closely linked to the
responsibility to protect. We believe that interaction
between the countries in the Security Council and other
United Nations States Members should be improved so
as to strengthen early warning and early response.

When it comes to protection, international
humanitarian law should be respected by all parties
to a conflict. That is why, in January in Kenya, the
Netherlands organized a training course for military
and civilian representatives from 11 African countries
on gender awareness and the prevention of sexual
violence in peacekeeping.

Secondly, peacekeeping mandates, as has been
stated by other speakers, must be clear on the protection
of civilians, and implementation must be a priority.
New concepts, such as civilian-harm tracking, the
appointment of civilian-harm mitigation advisers and
ways to make amends, are being tested, and we believe
that the results warrant further assessment and use.

Peacekeeping missions must be better prepared and
outfitted for that part of their mandate, and we must
all chip in. The Netherlands is sending a peacekeeping
unit to Mali, and we deploy experts in the protection
of civilians and sexual and gender-based violence in
various United Nations missions.

Thirdly, the Security Council should act decisively
when civilians are at risk. In South Sudan, the Council
was united and swift. It is crucial that the Security
Council adopt the draft resolution on humanitarian
access in Syria. We are gravely concerned about
the situation in Homs and call for access on the part
of humanitarian organizations to all besieged areas
in Syria. Furthermore, my Government supports
initiatives aimed at voluntary restraint in the use of
the veto by the permanent members of the Council in
situations of mass atrocities.

I now come to my last point: accountability.
The perpetrators of crimes must of course not go
unpunished, and accountability is also crucial in view
ofthe preventative effect it has. In our View, the Council
should refer Syria and the crimes perpetrated there to
the International Criminal Court (ICC). In anticipation
of that, the Netherlands supports the Syria Justice and
Accountability Centre in The Hague. We do so with the
conviction that, even though the world at this moment is
unable to stop the tragedy, the foundation must be laid
for bringing the perpetrators of the atrocities in Syria
to justice when sufficient stability returns to Syria.
The Council could more consistently use its ability to
impose sanctions, or refer a situation to the ICC. That
would send a strong signal to perpetrators.

Together we can bring the concept of the protection
of civilians into practice. In our view, the Council's
Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians should
intensify its work and its interaction with rest of the
membership. Protecting civilians in armed conflict is a
fundamental objective that we must all work tirelessly
to achieve together, and the Kingdom of the Netherlands
stands ready to be a part of that effort.

