Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Sir, for having convened this meeting and Mr. Serry for
his briefing.

Despite the passage of more than six decades
since the Arab-Israeli conflict began and despite
the many efforts made and initiatives proposed to
reach a comprehensive and lasting solution thereto,
unfortunately unilateral stances are prolonging the
illegitimate occupation and attempts to change the
demographic nature of the Palestinian territories,
especially the Judaization of Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
continue. The arrest and detention of Palestinians,
the continued unjust blockade against Gaza, measures
to strangle the Palestinian economy, especially the
withholding of tax revenues owed to the Palestinian
Authority, and other illegal and illegitimate practices
and measures - all of these factors have undermined
international efforts and returned us time and again
to square one. Tensions have thus spread throughout
the region and the chances of conflicts escalating
increased, with ramifications not only for the Middle
East but the entire world.

My country has a well-established record of
engaging in international and bilateral efforts to
achieve a just, comprehensive and peaceful solution to
the conflict that would take into account the interests
of the various parties and lead to the establishment
of an independent and viable Palestinian State, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, on the basis of the
pre-l967 borders and a withdrawal from occupied Arab
territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan and the
remaining occupied Lebanese territories.

In the light of all of this, we see the current
efforts of the United States to end the deadlock in the
negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians as
a reaffirmation of the importance that the international
community attaches to negotiation, dialogue and respect
for the resolutions of international legitimacy. This
was reaffirmed at the Arab summit held in March in
Doha, which reaffirmed its support for the Arab Peace
Initiative and efforts to achieve its implementation in
cooperation with the international community.
We take this opportunity to express our readiness
to spare no effort to support these international efforts,
and we look forward to seeing similar support from the
international community so that we do not waste this
opportunity, which promises so much in the midst of
such complicated events in the Middle East.

In this context, we welcome the recent decision
of the European Union (EU) to withhold financial
assistance from Israeli organizations that are active in
the occupied Palestinian territories and not to recognize
any changes in the pre-1967 borders. This is a clear
decision to support the internationally legitimate
resolutions and international law in general, and
indicates the rejection by the international community
of the illegal settlements and of any developments that
may threaten the prospects for a two-State solution. We
hope that other States will follow suit and emulate the
EU precedent in this context.

When discussing the situation in the Middle East,
we must recognize that the current situation in Syria
poses a clear threat and challenge to the international
community. The Syrian regime's insistence on pursuing
a security solution and State terrorism, in the light of
the failure of the international community to achieve
a swift and decisive solution, may have dangerous
repercussions and could unleash a spillover that would
threaten the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
social unity of Syria, as well as peace and security in
neighbouring countries and beyond.

The Syrian regime is holding the Syrian people
hostage and using them as fuel for its continued
existence, with no regard for the grave results of such
a policy. In this regard, it is relying on the existing
division within the Security Council. The number of
victims among the innocent civilian population has
exceeded 100,000, in addition to the millions ofrefugees
and internally displaced persons, and the systematic
destruction of homes and facilities and countless other
violations. The Security Council must therefore adopt
effective and swift measures based on its responsibility
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

The international community, as represented by
the United Nations, has issued numerous resolutions
addressing the various violations committed against
the Syrian people. The world is therefore confused
and frustrated, and questions how long the regime
will continue its killing, destruction and displacement
of innocent civilians and why the resolutions of the
international community are being ignored.

An objective review of the substance of the more
than 15 resolutions of the Security Council, General
Assembly and Human Rights Council concerning the
situation in Syria reveals the extent and variety of the
violations against the Syrian people. It is very clear
that the regime is willing to resort to any means, even
at the price of destroying the entire Syrian nation and
imperiling the peace and security of the region and the
world.

Since its inception, the United Nations has played
an international humanitarian role that has made
us proud. The Security Council has moved very
quickly to end many violations. Therefore, the Syrian
people - children, women, men, the elderly and all the
victims of the conflict - are looking impatiently to the
Security Council for an effective solution that will bring
about a just resolution based on international law and
international legitimacy and bring those responsible
for crimes and violations to justice so that the Syrian
people can define their own future and exercise self-
determination following their prolonged suffering.

The international community deals with such
violations, wherever they occur, on the basis of
internationally defined criteria and standards. The
Security Council has the responsibility to intervene
wherever such violations take place and to end them
in a manner that enjoys international legitimacy and
preserves human dignity.

The violations and horrors being committed by
the Syrian regime on a daily basis would lead any fair-
minded person to wonder whether that regime actually
believes in the Charter of the United Nations and in
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Why does it pursue its aggressive and irresponsible
policies, in violation of human and divine law? Should
not the United Nations therefore take a firm position
to assist the Syrian people and hold responsible those
who continue to inflict such suffering? How can the
international conscience bear any more sorrow?

