Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Today, Latin America and the Caribbean is the setting
for persistent threats that are incompatible with the
Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a
Zone of Peace, which was signed by Heads of State and
Government at the second summit of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, in January 2014.
This commitment enshrines a duty to fully respect and
uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law; to refrain from
interfering, either directly or indirectly, in the internal
affairs of any other State; and to uphold the principles
of national sovereignty, the equality of rights and the
free self-determination of peoples.

The current Administration of the United States
of America has declared the Monroe Doctrine to be in
effect and, in a fresh extension of its imperialist policy
in the region, it is threatening Venezuela with particular
malice and has declared that all options are on the
table. The region today is like a vast prairie in a time of
drought. A single spark could set off an uncontrollable
fire that would damage the national interests of all.

We categorically reject the statements made by
the representatives of the United States of America in
the Council Chamber today. We regret the fact that the
Government of the United States of America is seeking
to exploit the Security Council in order to legitimize
its international campaign against the constitutional
Government presided by Nicolas Maduro Moros. The
main threat to peace and security in Latin America and
the Caribbean is the bullying of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela by the United States and its allies, which
is a flagrant affront to the will of the people and to
the institutional framework of Venezuela, which were
expressed in the elections held on 20 May 2018, in
which the Venezuelan opposition voluntarily refrained
from participating.

We reiterate our unwavering support to the
Chavista and Bolivian revolution, to the civil-military
union of the Venezuelan people and to their legitimate
and democratic Government, led by the constitutional
President Nicolas Maduro Moros. We vigorously
condemn the attempt to impose, through a coup d'etat,
a Government that will serve the interests of the United
States in Venezuela and the recurrent calls to Bolivarian
military members to join that effort. The sovereignty of
our peoples is seen in the attitude towards Venezuela.
Support for the legitimate right of our sister nation to
define its own future is to defend the dignity of all.

We must not forget other attempts, such as the 2002
military coup and the 2003 oil coup; the United States
aggressive executive order, which described Venezuela
as an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national
security and foreign policy of that super Power; the
unilateral corrective measures; the call for a military
coup d'etat against the constitutional Government of
Venezuela; the warning of the President of the United
States with regard to the possible use of a military
option; and the attempt to assassinate President Maduro
on 4 August 2018.
The acts of a group of countries and the shameful
role played by the Organization of American States
constitute a new and desperate attempt to implement
a failed policy of regime change, which has been
frustrated time and again by the unbreakable resistance
of the Venezuelan people and their determination to
defend their national sovereignty. We reaffirm our
unwavering respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and of international
law, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
the non-use or non-threat of use of force in international
relations and the non-interference in the internal affairs
of States. The sovereign will of the people of Venezuela
will prevail in the face of imperialist intervention.
History will judge those who encourage and recognize
this coup.

