Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): I would like to express
my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for your leadership
in convening this open meeting and thus providing an
opportunity for us to present Japan's views on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I would also like to express my appreciation to
the Security Council mission that visited African
countries to assess the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As is evident from the
comprehensive report on their meetings with the
Presidents of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe, as well as
with several faction leaders, the members of the
mission worked tirelessly to advance the peace process.

Our recent experiences in Sierra Leone may cast
a negative shadow upon the future course of action that
the Security Council may take in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, we must not allow
the experiences in Sierra Leone to deter us from
resolving the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The ceasefire agreement of 8 April provides an
important basis for future peacemaking efforts,
although as the subsequent incidents in Kisangani
between the forces of Rwanda and Uganda have
demonstrated, it is a fragile agreement. I wish to take
this opportunity to call upon Rwanda and Uganda to
withdraw from Kisangani, in accordance with their
agreement. The recent hostilities between their forces
are an infringement of the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and cannot be
tolerated.

Our experiences in past peacekeeping operations
have taught us that the observance of a ceasefire must
be confirmed before a peacekeeping force is deployed.
In this connection, Japan fully supports the mission's
recommendation that the Secretary-General obtain
from the parties to the Lusaka Agreement their
commitment, in writing, to maintain the ceasefire and
support the deployment of phase II of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). In our view, the
special meeting of the Political Committee established
by the Lusaka Agreement, to be convened in New York
next month, would be a very appropriate occasion to
obtain such commitment.

I sincerely hope that the international community
will extend its strong support to the facilitator, Sir
Ketumile Masire, in his efforts to engage the
Congolese parties in a national dialogue. Most
importantly, he needs solid financial backing. Only half
the amount he requires to carry out his planned
activities has been pledged so far, and we would like to
call upon Member States to do their utmost to help
meet the shortfall. For its part, the Government of
Japan has contributed $300,000 to the United Nations
Trust Fund to assist the facilitation activities of Sir
Ketumile Masire. We have recently learned that he has
had some difficulty drawing on those funds. We hope
that he and the United Nations Secretariat will work
together to resolve this issue in a mutually satisfactory
manner.

Japan supports the proposition of holding the
inter-Congolese dialogue in Kisangani and hopes that
preparations for the dialogue will commence as
planned by the facilitator. In this connection, I would
like to suggest to the facilitator that he consider
convening several dialogue meetings at the regional
level with a view to consolidating the democratization
process at the grass-roots level, for the success of the
inter-Congolese dialogue in Kisangani.

Finally, I would like to stress that the
international community should focus on the positive
achievements made so far in the peace process for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and encourage the
parties concerned to implement in an orderly manner
the steps that have been agreed upon.

