Mr. Cerdenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): The Argentine Republic will vote in favour of the
draft resolution now before the Council, since we believe
that the international community must actively support the
opportunities for peace now emerging in Liberia and
redouble its efforts to contribute to the consolidation of the
peace agreements reached by the Liberian parties.
While we know that on several occasions in the past
the parties have reached an agreement only to set it aside,
unimplemented, soon after, we believe that this time the
underlying commitment is firm and that peace is a more
certain prospect. This position is supported by what we see
as a substantive change in attitude by the parties, which,
thank God, seem more determined than ever to take specific
steps to restore peace and stability in their country, as well
as by the consistent political advances they have achieved.

We cannot fail to mention the positive and
praiseworthy role played by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), and especially the
Governments of Ghana and Nigeria, in the creation of these
new circumstances.

This is why my delegation agrees with the revision of
the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) proposed by the Secretary-General and
with the increase in the number of military observers to
160. However, the new concept of UNOMIL's operations
can be implemented only if the ECOWAS Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) is fully operational, since ECOMOG is
entrusted with guaranteeing the security of UNOMIL's
observers and civilian personnel. We therefore hope that
with the financial and logistical support of the international
community ECOMOG will, as soon as possible, be able to
discharge its mandate properly. This will also guarantee the
implementation of the various military aspects of the
agreements and make it possible to deliver humanitarian
assistance to people in need, the importance of which we
wish to stress.

In our view, in this new stage it will be necessary to
strengthen contacts and coordination between UNOMIL and
ECOMOG at all levels in order to ensure that the tasks are
carried out in a better coordinated, and therefore more
efficient, manner.

We wish to place special emphasis on the
importance of the disarmament and demobilization of
former combatants, which should be concluded by the end
of next January. However, we believe that for those
processes to be truly effective they must be accompanied
by realistic programmes envisaging the reintegration of
former combatants into the normal life of civil society
and providing them with alternative means of livelihood.

We wish to recall the essential responsibility of the
Liberian National Transitional Government (LNTG) for
respecting and ensuring respect for the legal status of the
international personnel and for guaranteeing at all times
their full freedom of movement and freedom of access.
We trust that the various factions, continuing to
conduct themselves with prudence and calm, will be able
to take advantage of and consolidate this new opportunity
by implementing without delay the agreements already
reached, which, step by step, should lead to presidential
and legislative elections in August of 1996. This is the
road agreed upon, and at its end we shall find
reconciliation.

