Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Russian presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this debate. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative for Afghanistan, Mr. Jan Kubis,
for their detailed quarterly briefings. I also welcome
Ambassador Tanin and thank him for his statement.
Finally, I also wish to thank Australia, represented today
by its Minister for Foreign Affairs, for its leadership
within the Security Council on this matter.

The report before us today (S/2013/133) comes at a
critical moment in the history of Afghanistan, one year
before the presidential and provincial elections set for
April 2014 and only a few months before the withdrawal
of the International Security Assistance Force from
Afghanistan. During the reporting period, the security
situation in Afghanistan improved significantly. For
the first time in six years, there has been a fall in
the number of civilian casualties, at a time when the
Afghan security forces have begun the fourth phase of
the transition, taking control of territory that is home to
the majority of the country's population.

The falling number of casualties can be attributed
in part to the Afghan Peace and Reintegration
Programme, which continues its roll-out, and to the
significant role of the High Peace Council. By late
December 2012, more than 6,000 combatants had
joined the programme with the aim of laying down
their arms and joining the Afghan National Army. In
that context, the High Peace Council continues to strive
to establish conditions conducive to reconciliation by
launching direct dialogue with representatives of civil
society, women's groups, religious leaders and political
figures.

The year 2014 will be a watershed year for
Afghanistan. Two major electoral dates have been set
that are of particular importance because they will
open a new chapter of Afghan history. In that regard,
we must ensure that the elections are organized
successfully by insisting that they be inclusive, reliable
and transparent. In that context, we welcome the efforts
of the Independent Election Commission to prepare
the elections. In that vein, the participation of political
parties and civil society in the electoral process will
have a positive impact on the coming elections,
endowing them with greater legitimacy and credibility
in the eyes of Afghan citizens.

Afghanistan has made great strides, although many
challenges remain. Cooperation between Afghanistan
and neighbouring countries will be critical in
particular to resolving such issues as the fight against
drug trafficking, counter-terrorism, trade, education,
natural disaster management, and investment. Morocco
commends the many initiatives launched in that respect,
including the high-level meeting on the Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan, held in Baku.

Cooperation between Afghanistan and the
international community is equally important, inter
alia, to fulfilling the commitments undertaken in the
framework of the Tokyo Conference. The commitment
of international donors and financial institutions to
rebuilding Afghanistan is necessary ifthe country is to
implement its national priorities.

In conclusion, my country believes it important for
the process to continue the process that has been under
way for several years to stabilize Afghanistan, which is
emerging from a lengthy conflict, and to help it to stand
on a more solid footing and to rebuild. That will require
the international community's support, but it must be
Afghan-led and for the benefit the Afghan people. We
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan for their outstanding work in Afghanistan.

