Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking our briefers, Mr. Miroslav Jenea, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and Mr. Filippo
Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for their informative briefings.

We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation of the displaced Rohingya community. It is
up to the international community to maintain the
humanitarian and development assistance to both
Rohingya refugee camps situated in Bangladesh and
to Myanmar's institutions, which provide assistance to
Rakhine state.

We would like to see the report of the Fact-
Finding Mission of the Human Rights Council, which
is due in March. However, we regret that the Fact-
Finding Mission was not allowed to visit the country.
While we appreciate the agreement concerning the
voluntary repatriation of the Rohingya community and
understand the desire to proceed rapidly, we can support
only returns that are safe, voluntary and dignified. We
understand that at this moment, regrettably, there are
no such conditions on the ground for returns. However,
it is the responsibility of the Government of Myanmar
to ensure that the displaced Rohingya will have a safe
place to return to and live in peace. We believe that
foreign humanitarian assistance will be key in fulfilling
that obligation.

We are of the view that the Rakhine Advisory
Commission's recommendations remain essential
to addressing the ongoing security, human rights,
development and humanitarian crisis situation in
Rakhine state. We hope that the Government will
implement them without delay.

Poland remains ready, through the new United
Nation system, to provide the assistance needed to find
a long-term solution to the crisis for all communities
in the Rakhine state. We are deeply troubled by the
news of the existence of previously unreported mass
graves near the village of Gudar Pyin. We have to
remain focused on making sure that the perpetrators
of such criminal acts are held accountable. We urge the
Myanmar authorities to cooperate with an independent
and credible investigation into allegations of atrocities
in northern Rakhine.

In a situation of this kind, the most vulnerable
suffer the most. The situation of Rohingya women and
children is heartbreaking. We urge the Government to
fully comply with its national action plan to address the
grave violations against children, particularly to end
and prevent the recruitment or use of children in the
national army. Furthermore, we urge the authorities to

grant access to the United Nations Country Task Force
on Monitoring and Reporting to armed groups listed in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/1099).

In the light of these circumstances, we wish to
recall the importance of the freedom of the press and
the need to comply with resolution 2222 (2015), on
the protection ofjournalists in armed conflict. I wish
to underline that Poland and the European Union
are strongly committed to supporting Myanmar's
democratic transition, peace, national reconciliation
and socioeconomic development.

I wish to thank and commend the Government
and the people of Bangladesh who have opened their
borders and homes by providing relief and refuge to the
Rohingya community. I would also like to repeat what
has already been said in this Chamber multiple times:
history will judge our actions as well as our inaction.

