Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Sir, to the
presidency of the Security Council, and we thank the
Lebanese delegation for its initiative to convene
today's meeting on the important and topical theme of
intercultural dialogue. We are also grateful to the
Secretary-General for his statement, which enriched
our discussion.

A sweeping analysis of the path of world history
leads us to the conviction that approaches to current
international problems, including peace and security,
must be linked to the cultural diversity of global
civilizations. In this regard, the Russian Federation
welcomes the creation of relevant and various
platforms for dialogue within and on the margins of the
United Nations. Two important initiatives, we believe,
are the Alliance of Civilizations, sponsored by Spain
and Turkey, and the trilateral forum on Interfaith
Dialogue and Cooperation for Peace and Development
sponsored by the Philippines. We believe that the
potential of these and similar initiatives is their
complementary nature, which should rule out any
element of competition.

As was emphasized by the Secretary-General,
today's meeting is also very timely in the light of
tomorrow's opening in Rio de Janeiro of the third
Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations and the
declaration of 2010 as the International Year for the
Rapprochement of Cultures.

The Russian Federation is a country that brings
together many ethnicities, cultures, religions and social
groups, and we therefore strongly believe that
encouraging tolerance among cultures and their mutual
enrichment is of tremendous significance in today's
world, which faces the exacerbation of inter-ethnic,
political, economic and social clashes in which existing
differences are used to justify terrorism and extremism.

Factors promoting the growth of extremism are,
of course, uninformed or distorted views of religion,
history and the cultures of other peoples, as well as the
skilful manipulation of these concepts. That, in turn,
leads to mistrust, alienation, often hostility and
sometimes even confrontation. For our part, we hold to
be false and erroneous the notion of a conflict of
civilizations and cultures, which is based on false
cultural and civilizational views and stereotypes. The
Russian Federation therefore categorically rejects any
attempt to associate any specific religion or culture
with such global threats as terrorism or transnational
organized crime.
Achieving sustainable peace and security
undoubtedly requires mutual familiarity and

understanding, tolerance and respect for the diversity
of national cultures, traditions and religious customs.
That, in turn, is the basis for effective joint efforts of
the members of the international community to
confront today's global challenges, including in the
area of security, to which the Council pays a great deal
of attention.

One of the time-tested ways for the international
community to react diplomatically to conflict situations
is mediation. The work of mediators requires not least
deep knowledge of historical, cultural and other
specificities of conflicts. Of course, the work of
mediators must be duly transparent and, if under a
Council mandate, accountable to the Council.

The United Nations does not possess a monopoly
on mediation, so the use of regional agencies,
arrangements and agreements is an important
mechanism called for in Article 33 of the United
Nations Charter. Chapter VIII of the Charter focuses
Member States on the priority resolution of so-called
local disputes with the help of such agencies,
arrangements and agreements before referring them to
the Council.

The United Nations must leverage the experience
and expertise of regional organizations in its work and
approach questions of mediation on the basis of the
principle of reasonable division of labour with these
regional and subregional bodies. Due to objective
factors, it is the regional players that are the most
receptive to the cultural and historical dimensions of
conflict, and that of course promotes the success of a
mediation mission.

In addition to the acknowledged partners in this
area - in particular the African Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Council of Europe and organizations on other
continents - we believe that there are good prospects
for United Nations cooperation with organizations that
are actively gaining experience, such as the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.

The universal nature of the United Nations
dictates the need for each Member State to consider the
religious traditions and diversity of world cultures and
religions. The cultural wealth of humankind in and of
itself possesses significant peacekeeping potential that
is capable of preventing the so-called clash of
civilizations and of making a significant contribution to

conflict resolution. We believe that the United Nations
is, in fact, the unique platform for building bridges and
overcoming prejudices and misunderstandings that
inherently threaten to peace and security. How
effectively we use this capacity will, to a significant
degree, determine our success in implementing the
major purposes of the Organization - ensuring global
security, development and respect for human rights.

