Archbishop Auza: The region of the Middle East
continues to be the epicentre ofmultiple armed conflicts
driven by various causes and by interests of a multitude
of actors who participate in them in one way or another.
Among those conflicts, which have been of deep concern
for the international community for the past 70 years,
are the unachieved Israeli-Palestinian negotiations.
The Palestinian question remains paramount among all
the problems affecting the Middle East. Its resolution
would have a beneficial, cascading effect on the other
crises in the region, thereby favouring the advent of
durable peace and mutual respect among the diverse
components and stakeholders in the Middle East.

For that reason, as it has done since 1947, the Holy
See once again reaffirms its unwavering support for the
right of both Israel and Palestine to live in peace within
secure and recognized borders in an atmosphere of
mutual respect and cooperation. The Holy See reiterates
its support for the solution of two independent States,
convinced that it is the only option that would allow for
the peaceful coexistence of Israel and Palestine.

The Holy See calls on the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities to show determined political will to reach
a solution and give their peoples the precious gift of
living in peace and security. Such determination would
involve refraining from provocative actions, incitement
or inflammatory rhetoric in order to de-escalate tensions
on the ground, rebuild trust and create the conditions
necessary for negotiations. The impartial support of
the international community is needed to assist the two
parties in negotiating with confidence and respect for
mutual rights and helping them to realize that sincere
negotiation is the most effective way towards an
honourable and mutually beneficial outcome.

The Holy See acknowledges with satisfaction the
recent agreement among the Palestinians, which seems
to indicate firm will towards reaching a durable solution.

The Holy See wishes to reaffirm the historic status
quo of Jerusalem, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, and rejects any unilateral
measure aimed at changing it. My delegation believes
that the Holy City should be a place of convergence and
peace and that the followers of the three monotheistic
religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam - indeed,
all people of goodwill - should be guaranteed free and
unhindered access to the holy places.

My delegation wishes to convey the deep
appreciation and strong encouragement of Pope Francis
to all who tirelessly toil to find fair political solutions
to the many conflicts in the Middle East and to assist
in every way the victims of untold violence. Given the
continuing overwhelming humanitarian needs in the
region, the Holy See continues to add its voice to the
appeals for increased funding to help refugees and the
host countries affected, in particular Jordan, Lebanon,
Iraq, Turkey and Egypt.
The rights ofevery citizen everywhere in the Middle
East must be respected. In that regard, the rule of law,
including respect for religious freedom and equality
before the law based on the principle of citizenship,
regardless of one's race, ethnic origin or religion, is
fundamental for the achievement and maintenance of
peaceful and fruitful coexistence among individuals
and communities in the region and beyond.

For 2017 to be the start of an era of peace for all the
peoples of the Middle East, all the parties concerned
in the conflicts in the region, their foreign allies and
the entire international community must spare no
effort to silence the clamour of war and to start serious
negotiations to achieve lasting political solutions to the
problems in the Middle East, both recent and ongoing.

