Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): In View of time
constraints, and in response to the appeal of the
President, I shall limit my intervention to just a few
observations. First of all, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's public meeting on
the subject of refugees, which is of direct relevance to
the work of the Security Council. Members of the
Council will agree that hardly any report of the
Secretary-General discussed in the Security Council
fails to address the issue of refugees.

I wish also to join other delegations in extending
a warm welcome to Mr. Ruud Lubbers, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and in
thanking him for his comprehensive briefing. We
commend the High Commissioner for his sustained
efforts in addressing refugee problems. I also take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the invaluable work of the
staff of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which helps
more than 21 million refugees and internally displaced
persons worldwide.

Let me begin my observations by saying that it is
important that refugees and internally displaced
persons not be denied basic human rights and human
dignity. That can be possible only if humanitarian
agencies and local non-governmental organizations
work together with a View to preventing abuses,
especially to children, women and vulnerable groups,
in the countries concerned.

Secondly, advancing human security, especially
for refugees and returnees, should not be the
responsibility solely of UNHCR or the humanitarian
agencies. There should be greater awareness among
world leaders about addressing the conditions of
refugees. In that regard, I think it is pertinent to
reiterate that there is a need for practical burden-
sharing, as the High Commissioner rightly pointed out
in his statement this morning. We were happy to learn
that at their December ministerial meeting, the States
parties to the Convention and Protocol Relating to the
Status of Refugees adopted a declaration. We hope that
the declaration will be put into effect and will result in
better protection for refugees and returnees.

My delegation believes that there should be a
comprehensive international and regional approach that
would ensure a seamless transition from humanitarian
assistance to a development strategy. It is well known
that the absence of integrated peace-building strategies,
particularly in refugee situations, often diminishes the
chances for achieving a sustainable peace. It is
therefore time to bridge the gap that exists between the
provision of emergency humanitarian assistance during
conflicts and the beginning of long-term development
programmes in post-conflict situations.

Finally, my delegation would like to ask the High
Commissioner for Refugees a question in respect of
Afghanistan. Bearing in mind that major refugee
problems exist in Afghanistan, what kind of
coordination with other United Nations agencies is
being envisaged to ensure not only a safe return but a
safe stay for the refugees? It is undeniable that safety
and security should be provided on all fronts, or else all
efforts to alleviate the suffering of vulnerable groups
may come to naught.

