Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, and your
delegation for your initiative of convening this meeting
and this dialogue at such a timely moment. This will
enable the Council to direct its decision-making and
activities on humanitarian issues in Iraq based on the
opinions, judgements, points of view and very valuable
information that have been provided to the Council by
the individuals invited to this meeting. We would like
to thank Mr. Mark Malloch Brown, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) Administrator;
Mr. James Morris, Executive Director of the World
Food Programme; the representatives of the World
Health Organization and the United Nations Children's
Fund; and the President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC). Believe me, I certainly do
not envy them the daunting task that confronts them in
Iraq.

Looking at the situation from the distance of the
Security Council Chamber, it is very difficult for the
Council even to imagine the magnitude of the work
involved in reconstructing Iraq and attending to the
humanitarian situation. I do not think that there is any
precedent for this kind of situation, in which a State
structure has totally collapsed. There have been many
cases in which changes of Government as cataclysmic
as the present case still left behind some sort of
institutional structure - or possessed structures that
were so precarious that it little mattered whether they
existed or not. But in the case of the Iraq, we are faced
with a situation in which, due to the nature of the Iraqi
regime, with its authoritarian character and its strict
control over the entire structure of the Government, the
collapse of the regime represents not merely a change
of individuals but the total destruction of a structure,
accompanied by great economic and social impact and
the physical destruction of institutions, including
buildings and records, which will be extremely hard to
reconstruct. Therefore, I believe that in the
humanitarian and support tasks that the United Nations
will carry out based on the resolution that the Council
has adopted today, the extent of the reconstruction
effort is almost physically indicative of the
circumstances existing in that country.

My delegation is therefore attentive to, and
concerned about, the type of institutional capacities
that the United Nations will have to deploy and the
relationship that will be created between the United
Nations agencies responsible for attending to the
humanitarian situation and the Authority representing
the occupying Powers, because they are going to be
operating in the same space and will have to work side
by side as they lay their bricks. For the institutions will
need to be rebuilt in order to enable Iraq to attend to its
humanitarian needs.

There is another topic that has already been
touched upon: the intimate relationship between
security on the ground and the capacity of the United
Nations to provide humanitarian services. I would
therefore like to ask what the prospects are for the
emergence of Iraqi civilian institutions - even nascent
ones - that could eventually to some extent take over
those efforts and that would represent Iraqi society's
efforts to organize in order to provide for its own
needs. In other, comparable situations in which
disasters involving such thoroughgoing collapses of
institutions occur, civil society has shown a certain
ability to respond by getting organized. In Iraq, it
seems that such abilities are attributable to religious
elements and to those belonging to certain groups. But
I wonder whether there is any sign of an emergence of
civilian entities whose underlying purpose is simply to
attend to specific humanitarian situations and the
concrete needs of communities.

We are also facing a phenomenon of violence and
social disruption of whose magnitude we are just
beginning to have accurate readings. The looting and
the lack of security in Iraq seem linked to widespread
disorder and the complete loss of authority by the
institutions entrusted with ensuring public law and
order. We are confronted with the emergence of
phenomena that could have a deeply rooted dimension:
criminal organizations that may emerge and certain
patterns of violence that may have to be clearly
identified in order to counteract them.

In that respect, we have heard non-governmental
organizations speak about kidnappings and the abuse of
women. We would like to know whether the
humanitarian organizations and the United Nations
agencies can inform us about the nature and scope of
those phenomena. Are they associated with acts of
revenge, the massive settling of scores with the
Saddam Hussain regime, or are they linked to the
emergence of other phenomena related to the
breakdown in authority and the ensuing social
dynamic?

We are also interested in the issue of the
protection of humanitarian workers. What work plans
are being developed to increase the capacity to address
humanitarian issues, once there are more staff to deal
with those issues and once they have greater mobility
throughout the territory of Iraq? That would, of course,
require specific security measures to be taken and
specific security criteria to be established. What can
our guests tell us about progress in that field as well as
about relations between the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and the Authority of the
occupying Powers?
In conclusion, we would like to ask whether the
role of the Special Representative will also include
coordinating all the United Nations agencies as they
fulfil their commitments and their work plans. Do we
anticipate a single joint work programme being crafted
to cover the efforts of all the agencies and all the tasks
of the Special Representative?

Once again, I would like to express my gratitude
for the information and views provided by those who
have briefed the Security Council today. We wish them
luck in their work in Iraq; they will need it.

