Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African States members of the Security Council, namely, the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). At the outset, on behalf of the A3+1, allow me to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, on convening this meeting. Additionally, the A3+1 would like to thank our briefers today, Under-Secretaries- General Rosemary DiCarlo and Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for their enlightening briefing on the developments pertaining to the Sudan and the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). The A3+1 would also like to express our appreciation to the UNITAMS planning team for its efforts and consistent consultations in order to bring life to the envisioned special political mission. We are confident that it will successfully navigate the mammoth task ahead of it. The A3+1 also welcome our colleague, the Permanent Representative of the Sudan, to today's Security Council meeting, and we are looking forward to his statement on the latest developments from home. As the international community, we have been steadfast in our commitment to assisting in bringing about peace, stability and prosperity in Darfur for over a decade. Although it has been a turbulent journey, significant strides have been made in the process. It is in this context that, as we start a new chapter with the new special political mission, we wish to ensure that we will work to preserve the gains and continue to assist in bringing forth the peace for which ordinary Sudanese have yearned and for which they still urgently yearn. In this regard, the Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and South Africa welcome the efforts of the Sudanese transitional Government as it continues to pursue political reforms, make progress in the peace process and tackle the rapidly deteriorating economic situation. Furthermore, the A3+1 is also encouraged by the signing of the 29 August agreement with the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi and the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and of the 3 September agreement on principles, which mark significant steps forward on a trajectory towards achieving lasting peace in the Sudan. The A3+l recognizes that the transitional Government is operating amid conditions characterized by a dire economic situation, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and a tense political climate. The report of the Secretary-General clearly highlights that "[s]piralling inflation, continuing shortages of key commodities, a growing public deficit and dropping revenues have placed the country's economy in a critical state" (S/2020/912, para. 41). Consequently, the A3+1 call for the lifting of all sanctions against the Sudan, as they have outrun their course. In fact, they are further hindering prospects for progress in the country. The Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and _ the Grenadines and South Africa welcome the pledges made during the High-Level Sudan Partnership Conference to assist with the socioeconomic situation in the country. We trust that this support will aide in alleviating a number of the hardships with which the Sudan is currently grappling. On the security front, we welcome the transitional Government's efforts aimed at working with the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to tackle the increased levels of intercommunal violence in the country. We also welcome the steps the transitional Government has made towards the national plan for protecting civilians. As UNAMID draws down, the A3+1 encourage it to continue working with national- and local-authority stakeholders, as well as the United Nations country team and other partners, in protecting civilians, facilitating mediation and addressing underlying issues of access to land and resources. The A3+1 look forward to the urgent appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General to assume overall authority, provide strategic direction for all activities of UNITAMS, fulfil an advisory and advocacy role at the political level and coordinate the efforts of the international community in support of the strategic objectives of the UNITAMS mandate. As it shares borders with key countries in its region of Africa that are pivotal to unlocking the peace and security of the region and the whole African continent, the Sudan is of geostrategic importance. It is therefore imperative that the Security Council continue to ensure stability in the Sudan. As Chair of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the Sudan is critical in building cohesion in the Horn of Africa. It is the considered view of the Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and South Africa that the global environment remains difficult and uncertain. Thirty-two million people have been infected by COVID-19, and a million have perished. All of our economies have been battered, with no exceptions. None of us in this Chamber - the permanent five and the elected ten alike - could have predicted in September 2019 that in September 2020 we would be living through the turbulent times occasioned by the pandemic - no one. The Sudan is part of this world that we are talking about, as are Africa and the Caribbean, and all our countries and regions.
