Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
update.

Ijust want to make a couple of points. The first is
to note that there is good news, and that progress is
being made, as set out in Mr. Guehenno's briefing. All
the problems are still there, but we are seeing some
forward movement along the path that we charted some
time ago and that Mr. Steiner has helped put into a
framework, as Ambassador Mahbubani just outlined.

The United States supports the continuing rule-
of-law efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and its
zero-tolerance concept. We welcomed the news of last
week's arrests, which really mark a positive step in
strengthening the rule of law and promoting a safe and
secure environment in Kosovo. This, we continue to
believe, is an essential foundation for progress.

Another positive development is the arrival of
Kosovo last week of Susan Carnduff, who will be the
director for the 26 October municipal elections. We
wish her and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission in Kosovo
success in their efforts over the coming weeks in the
run-up to the vote. They have a lot of work ahead of
them.

We support the efforts of the OSCE Mission in
Kosovo to ensure broad registration and participation,
including by Serbs and other minorities, in those
elections. This will be a particularly important vote,
because the elected municipal officials will serve for
four years. In addition, there will not be any minority
set-asides. We applaud the provision for appropriate
gender representation built into the presentation of
party lists.

Finally, I would simply like to express again our
support for the work being done by Special
Representative Steiner. In particular, we note that his
promulgation of the Kosovo Trust Agency regulation
enables the important process of privatization in
Kosovo to now move forward. We look forward to
receiving the Secretary-General's quarterly report in
July.

