Mr. Jallow: This year is an important landmark
in the completion strategy of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), having regard to
resolution 1503 (2003), adopted by the Security
Council.

Although a significant number of accused persons
will have been brought to account before the ICTR by
the end of the year for their role in the commission of
serious violations of international humanitarian law in
Rwanda, and although many of the cases currently on
trial will have been concluded, it is now evident that
there will still be pending trial activity at the ICTR by
the end of 2008.

This situation has arisen essentially because of
the three new arrests, of Callixte Nzabominana,
Dominique Ntawukuriryayo and Augustin Ngibatware,
respectively effected in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in France and in Germany. All these three
accused are considered of such a high level as to
require trial at the ICTR rather than transfer to a
national jurisdiction. I join the President of the ICTR,
Judge Byron, in assuring the Council that the tribunal
has indeed spared no effort over the years in taking all
possible measures to meet the target date set by it in
resolution 1503 (2003) and that, due to these new
circumstances, an extension of the trial mandate of the
ICTR to 2009 needs to be granted.

Much has been accomplished in the past decade
in combating impunity by bringing to account before
the tribunals those persons suspected of committing
these serious violations. The gains of the past and the
need for a proper completion would be best sustained
by permitting the ICTR to continue with trial activity
beyond the end of 2008 in order to conclude pending
cases.

Although the Trial Chamber has recently rejected
one of the five requests by the Prosecutor for
the referral of the case of an indictee to Rwanda for
trial - that was in the case of Prosecutor vs. Yussuf
Munyakazi - the final decision on these requests may
well come only later in the year, as the Prosecutor has
decided to file an appeal against this decision with the
Appeals Chamber of the ICTR. In the event that
referral of these cases to Rwanda turns out to be
impossible, these five cases would constitute additional

work in 2009 for the ICTR, given that so far no
country other than Rwanda has indicated a desire to
receive any of these cases.

The cases of the fugitive indictees would pose a
special problem as our rules do not permit trials in
absentia. On the other hand, an acceptable national
jurisdiction cannot so far be found to receive these
cases.

The Tracking Team of the Office of the
Prosecutor continues to prioritize its activities and
intensify its efforts to secure the arrests of more
fugitives. The number of fugitives currently stands at
13, including Felicien Kabuga and a number of other
persons who, because of their status or level of
involvement in the genocide, have been earmarked for
trial in the ICTR. With the cooperation of Member
States, we hope to be able to effect more arrests of
such figures in the months that lie ahead.

The case of Felicien Kabuga has been a constant
issue in the Council. Indeed, in resolution 1503 (2003),
the Council called on all States - but especially
Kenya, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Congo - to intensify cooperation with and render all
necessary assistance to the ICTR in connection with
efforts to bring Fe'licien Kabuga and all other such
indictees to the ICTR.

For the past three years, my Office has been
engaged with the Government of Kenya in the Kabuga
case, largely through the joint Kenya-ICTR task force.
The task force has now submitted three reports to the
ICTR and to the Government of Kenya. Those reports
indicate that there is documentary evidence of
Kabuga's entry into Kenya in 1994 and of the grant of
a resident Visa to him, as well as a business permit in
1995. Since then, there have been several reported
sightings of him in Kenya. On two specific occasions,
in 1997 and 2005, efforts to arrest him in Kenya were
thwarted. There is no record or other indication of his
departure from the territory of Kenya.

According to the task force, Kabuga is also
reported to have interests in property and businesses in
Kenya, either in his own name or jointly with family
members or with business associates. There is evidence
that he holds, or has held, accounts with banks in
Kenya. His involvement and activities in Kenya are
therefore very well documented.

Although in May 2008, following my request to
the Government of Kenya for the implementation of
the recommendations of the task force, the Government
obtained a High Court order freezing one such property
belonging to Kabuga, nothing else appears to have
been done for the implementation of the rest of the
recommendations of the task force and for the
discharge of Kenya's responsibility in this case.

Kenya must now proceed to maintain an active
search for the fugitive within its territory, with a view
to arresting him and transferring him to the ICTR or
establishing his departure from its territory. Kenya
should take steps, as other Member States have done,
to freeze the bank accounts of the fugitive that may
still be operational and to provide a report on all such
accounts and others that may have been closed. It
should also undertake serious and conclusive
investigations into the reported interests of Kabuga in
the businesses and companies specified in the report
and, if those are confirmed, take the necessary
measures to freeze those assets as well. In short, Kenya
has legal obligations of cooperation that the Security
Council should request it to fulfil urgently. As the
President indicated at the beginning of this meeting,
members of the Council have before them a letter
(8/2008/356) in which the Secretary-General draws
this matter to their attention. Much of the past three
years has been devoted to investigations of Kabuga's
activities and his involvement with the country. The
implementation of the recommendations of the joint
task force is now overdue.

A number of fugitives, including some of the
high-level indictees earmarked for trial at the ICTR,
have also been located in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo by the Tracking Team of the Office of the
Prosecutor. The ICTR generally and its Tracking Team
in particular have not had the benefit of much
cooperation from the authorities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in effecting the arrest of those
fugitives. Last week, however, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo indicated its
readiness to participate in a tripartite meeting with the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the ICTR to
discuss this matter. We welcome that development and
look forward to the meeting proposed for later this
month. Nonetheless, I consider it necessary for the
Security Council to reiterate to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo its call for cooperation with the
ICTR.

The Office of the Prosecutor continues to receive
and to respond to requests for mutual legal assistance
from Member States that are investigating, prosecuting
or handling extradition requests for fugitives wanted
for international crimes committed in Rwanda. Many
such States are now conducting those activities in their
respective countries, with a View to extraditing them to
Rwanda or prosecuting them nationally. The Office of
the Prosecutor has the largest electronic database of
evidence on the crimes committed in Rwanda. That
database should be an invaluable tool to national
investigating and prosecuting authorities of Member
States, now as well as after the closure of the Tribunal,
for as long as those fugitives remain at large.

Consistent with its mandate and its obligation to
fight the culture of impunity, the Office of the
Prosecutor will host a forum later this year for selected
national prosecuting authorities to discuss ways of
enhancing cooperation with them and ensuring their
continued access to our database, both now and after
the closure of the Tribunal. As part of our consultative
process, early next year, we shall also host the fifth
annual colloquium for international prosecutors, which
will focus on the challenges of completion and the
orderly and proper closure of the ad hoc Tribunals.

Over the past year, we have also been actively
involved in capacity-building initiatives at the request
of the National Prosecution Service in Rwanda. With
generous funding from the European Union and the
World Bank, the Office of the Prosecutor has held a
series of training seminars and workshops for Rwandan
prosecutors, investigators and information managers on
best practices in the investigation and prosecution of
international crimes, as well as on information and
evidence management.

In my last report to the Council, I indicated that
there had been some progress in the investigation of
allegations against the members of the Rwanda
Patriotic Front (RPF). Rwanda has cooperated with my
Office in that process, as requested by the Council.
Together, we have been able to establish a prima facie
case that, on 5 June 1994, RPF soldiers killed 13
clergymen, including five Roman Catholic bishops and
two other civilians, at the Kabgayi Parish in Gitarama.
Some of the perpetrators of that crime are reported to
have died, but others are now serving within the
Rwandan Army. Following inquiries, the Rwanda
Prosecutor General communicated to me his decision
to shortly indict and prosecute four serving senior
military officers in the Rwandan Army for murder and
complicity to murder as war crimes in connection with
that incident.

As the Council knows, Rwanda shares concurrent
jurisdiction with the ICTR over such offences. I have
therefore decided to hold in abeyance further action on
my part, on the clear understanding that any such
prosecutions in and by Rwanda should be effective,
expeditious, fair and open to the public. My Office will
also monitor those proceedings. The prosecutions in
Rwanda will of course be without prejudice to the
primacy of the ICTR's jurisdiction over those crimes. I
hope that the prosecutions will be conducted by
Rwanda in a manner that will effectively contribute to
reconciliation in that country.

The anticipated reduction in the workload of the
Tribunal by the end of 2008 is reflected in the process
of downsizing through the reduction of resources, both
human and material. That process started within the
Office of the Prosecutor towards the end of 2007 with
the abolition of a number of posts within the
Investigations Division in Kigali. It is expected to
continue and intensify in the course of the year. It is a
process that is likely to be a difficult one emotionally
and in many other respects, both for the staff
concerned and for the ICTR. We shall do our utmost to
manage the process fairly and compassionately. The
closure of the Tribunals will create a large pool of
well-tried staff, experienced in the investigation and
prosecution of crime, whom I believe the United
Nations can rely on and should do its utmost to retain
and utilize in other activities.

I would like to thank the members of the Council,
the Secretary-General and the Secretariat, as well as
Member States, for their support to, and cooperation
with, the ICTR.

