We thank Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for the opportunity, through this debate, to consider how some dimensions of peacebuilding and sustaining peace can be addressed as global threats from the perspective of the functions of the Security Council, as well as to highlight the importance of maintaining coherence among the efforts of other parts of the system, in particular development and humanitarian agencies, including health organizations, to identify how phenomena such as pandemics and others challenges may impact, or are impacting, societies in conflict or in peacebuilding processes. In our view, as expressed on previous occasions, it is crucially relevant that the Security Council address such issues within its own areas of responsibility, since, in times of crisis, we need strong multilateral organizations, with all their bodies responding adequately given their respective mandates and functions to any major challenge. That is why we believe that the inclusion of youth, women, civil society and all relevant actors is key for establishing resilient and cohesive societies, which is why we are grateful for the contributions of such high-level briefers today. The Secretary-General's appeal last March for a worldwide ceasefire, which Chile supported, remains relevant as the global health crisis continues to pose a risk due to its devastating impacts on societies, especially for the most vulnerable people and those disproportionately affected, such as women and girls. Moreover, the women and peace and security agenda provides important tools to ensure a gender perspective in all entities linked to peace processes. Furthermore, we believe that this approach must not be neglected when addressing the impacts of the pandemic or other crises on conflict or peacebuilding settings, including as related to sexual and gender-based violence. Preparedness and response capacity- building and evaluation processes should also be used to enhance the gender perspective, both in addressing impacts and in promoting women's participation in decision-making at all levels. Given the current multiplicity factors driving conflict and insecurity today, the Security Council cannot be detached from discussion thereof, particularly when the impact of these drivers can lead to global crises and devastating consequences on the ground. In this regard, we stress in particular the experience of the multidimensional crisis caused by the coronavirus disease, which has revealed the importance of institutional and multilateral preparedness in responding coherently to new global challenges and threats. In this regard, we welcome the reflective exercise involving the Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and the Secretariat, as well as the review of the peacebuilding architecture, geared towards sustaining peace, with a view to evaluating, for instance, the impact of the current pandemic on both the geographic and the thematic situations under its consideration and identifying areas of weakness requiring action in the responses thereto, as well as to identifying, through the sharing of experiences, successful field-level processes applicable in different contexts, such as quick-impact projects implemented in peace operations, which promote the involvement of local communities in peacebuilding and sustaining peace, strengthening the principle of national ownership. This is all done with a view to building the preparedness and response capacity within the multilateral system as a whole for cases of conflict and peacebuilding in the face of future pandemics and other challenges and threats. To that end, we believe that a key element is reliable, flexible and robust information channels, focused on early warning and evaluation of the impact on tensions and development processes. Combating misinformation and the dissemination of hate speech is essential in promoting and building peace. Finally, I wish to reiterate that a peaceful environment is an essential condition for combating pandemics and other global challenges, as well as for neutralizing today's drivers of conflict and insecurity. In an interconnected world of complex challenges, we believe it is important that the Security Council contribute, within its own sphere of action, to efforts to tackle the great challenges of our time, as well as to efforts to strengthen global capacities in prevention, preparedness and response.
