The President (interpretation from Russian): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of December, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Salim Bin Mohammed Al-Khussaiby, Permanent
Representative of Oman to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the month
of November 1995. I am sure I speak for all members of
the Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby for the great diplomatic skill
with which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina

The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses deep concern
over the looting and burning of houses by the HVO
forces in the area of Mrkonjic Grad and Sipovo,
which have continued for some time, and it also
notes with concern that similar acts have been
committed by Bosnian Serb forces in other areas of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Council is also deeply
concerned by reports that the HVO is moving mine
laying equipment into the Mrkonjic Grad and Sipovo
areas.

"The Security Council considers that such
actions are dangerous and detrimental to the spirit of
confidence essential for the implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/ 1995/999, annex).

"The Security Council demands that all such
actions be stopped immediately and stresses the need
for all parties to exercise maximum restraint and to
demonstrate the cooperation essential for the
successful implementation of the Peace Agreement."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l995/60.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 5.40 pm.

