Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling this important meeting. I
also thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing, in particular
for his unequivocal support for the two-State solution
and for his warnings against unilateral measures that
jeopardize the prospects of sustainable peace for
Israelis and Palestinians.

At the outset, I would like to note that the United
Kingdom's position on the status of Jerusalem is clear
and long-standing: it should be determined through
a negotiated settlement between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, and Jerusalem should ultimately be the
shared capital ofthe Israeli and Palestinian States. In line
with relevant Security Council resolutions - including
resolutions 242 (1967), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016) -we
regard East Jerusalem as part ofthe occupied Palestinian
territories. We therefore disagree with the United
States decision to move its Embassy to Jerusalem and to
unilaterally recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel
before a final status agreement. Those decisions are
unhelpful to the prospects of peace in the region - an
aim that I know all of us in the Security Council remain
committed to. The British Embassy to Israel is based in
Tel Aviv, and we have no plans to move it.

We share President Trump's desire to bring an
end to this conflict. We welcome his commitment to a
two-State solution negotiated between the parties. We
note his clear acknowledgement of the importance of
the final status of Jerusalem, including the sovereign
boundaries within the city, which must be subject to
negotiations between the parties.

We remain committed to an Israeli-Palestinian
peace agreement that is based on 1967 borders with
agreed and equal land swaps, reflecting both parties'
national and religious interests, and with Jerusalem as
the shared capital of an Israeli and Palestinian State.
This outcome must be determined through a final status
agreement and ajust, fair, agreed and realistic settlement
for refugees that is demographically compatible with
the principle of two States for two peoples.

We recognize that Jerusalem holds huge significance
and holiness for Jews, Muslims and Christians. We
reiterate the fundamental necessity of maintaining the
status quo at the holy sites, in particular the Temple
Mount/Haram al-Sharif, and we welcome President
Trump's call on the parties to maintain that status quo.
The access and religious rights of both peoples must
be respected. We value Jordan's important role as
custodian of the holy sites, and remain fully supportive
of their efforts to maintain calm.

We are deeply concerned by continued
developments on the ground that undermine the
prospects for a two-State solution. As the Quartet has
made clear, settlement construction and expansion,
particularly in East Jerusalem, are a significant barrier
to achieving that solution. Terrorism and incitement
to violence constitute another crucial barrier. We will
continue to press the parties to refrain from actions
that make a viable peace more difficult to achieve. A
just and lasting resolution to end the occupation and
deliver peace for Israelis and Palestinians alike is long
overdue. Recent developments demonstrate the urgent
need for progress towards peace.

Today, I reaffirm our strong support for renewed
peace negotiations between the Israelis and Palestinians
as soon as possible. These should be supported by the
international community and should result in a safe and
secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State. We welcome the Secretary-General's
intent to do everything in his power to support
the Israeli and Palestinian leaders in returning to
meaningful negotiations and in realizing this vision of
a lasting peace for both peoples. We strongly encourage
the United States Administration to bring forward
detailed proposals for an Israeli-Palestinian settlement.
The United Kingdom will also do everything we
can to support progress and achieve the vision of a
lasting peace.

To have the best chances of success, the peace
process must be conducted in an atmosphere free
from violence. We call on all parties to maintain calm
and work together in a spirit of commitment to that
common enterprise. On Jerusalem specifically, peace
efforts need to take account of the people, not just the
land and the holy sites. There are more than 320,000
Palestinians in East Jerusalem. The vast majority are
permanent residents whose permits can be revoked
at any point. If they move away from the city, Israel
often does not allow them back. If they marry, they
face obstacle in bringing their spouses. Ifthey apply for
Israeli citizenship, and most do not, a high proportion
of applications are rejected. Their status must not be
forgotten in any peace effort.

If all parties can truly take bold steps in the spirit
of compromise, I have no doubt that an agreement
can finally be reached. That is the only way to ensure
the long-term security that Israelis deserve, and the
statehood and end to the occupation that Palestinians
are calling out for. This is what both peoples ought to
have. It has been denied to them for too long.

