Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his report
on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2012/907). We also
welcome Mr. Jan Kubis and thank him for his valuable
briefing. We are also grateful for the statement by
Ambassador Zahir Tanin. We would like to highlight
four issues in the report of the Secretary-General.

The first issue pertains to the electoral process,
which will overlap with the end of the Afghan transition
period. We welcome the issuance ofa detailed calendar
for carrying out the presidential and provincial
council elections. Nevertheless, the report refers to
shortcomings in establishing a legal and technical
framework to prepare for the April 2014 electoral
process. We encourage the Afghan Government to
continue to attach priority to the preparatory process.
In our experience, democratic governance and the
holding of elections, in line with the Constitution, are
prerequisites for long-term stability.

The second point has to do with the issue of
Afghan-led national reconciliation under Afghan
ownership. A few weeks ago, we had an opportunity
to hold an informal interactive dialogue with
Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Chair of the High Peace
Council. In that dialogue, we heard first-hand of the
progress in the national process, including a successful
visit to Islamabad. Another pertinent point in that
connection has to do with resolution 2082 (2012),
which was adopted last Monday and by which the
Council renewed and strengthened the sanctions
regime under resolution 1988 (2011). We are convinced
that the improvemetns made to the sanctions regime
will effectively contribute to the national reconciliation
process.

The third point involves the security situation.
We are pleased that, when it comes to security, to
date the transition has made the expected and hoped
for progress. It is encouraging to note the ongoing
progress being made in the transfer of responsibility
for security. That has now reached 75 per cent, with the
remaining tranches to be announced at the beginning of
2013. There continue to be threats and challenges that
jeopardize the security situation. We note with concern
the attack that took place early this month against
against the chief of Afghanistan's intelligence service.

As to the fourth point, we agree with the Secretary-
General that the increase in civilian casualties during
the reporting period is a source of great concern.
However, what we find truly outrageous is the
information contained in paragraph 26 of the report,
where it is pointed out that more than 355 children
were killed or injured in the armed conflict from
1 August to 31 October. That is undoubtedly one of the
most regrettable facts from this reporting period. In
addition, we continue to find deplorable the situation
faced by women and girls in Afghanistan. We call on
the Afghan Government to take concrete measures to
protect women and girls and guarantee their rights. We
resolutely support the efforts of the United Nations in
this area.

Lastly, we view positively the follow-up to the
systems and mechanisms for carrying out the mutual
commitments established at the Tokyo Conference on
Afghanistan. That is being boosted by the regional
Istanbul Process. We believe that significant progress
has been made in establishing confidence-building
measuers. Both processes will be an important avenue
for generating social and economic opportunities, in
particular as the international military forces draw
down.

Before I conclude, I should like to join other
delegations in thanking the delegation of Germany and
Ambassador Peter Witting for their important role in
leading the Afghanistan Sanctions Committee, and
more generally in familiarizing the Security Council
with the various issues relevant to that country.

