Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I express my condolences to the people and the
Government of France and to the victims of the terrorist
attacks in Paris, which my Government has denounced.
We condemn any such attacks targeting civilians and
violating humanitarian and moral principles.

I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the present
month. We express our appreciation to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Chile for having participated in
this meeting. We also thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for his briefing this morning.

We align ourselves with the statements delivered
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the Non-Aligned Movement.

We regret that the Security Council was unable
to adopt the Arab draft resolution on the situation in
the Middle East (S/2014/916), including the question of
Palestine, not only because it was a missed opportunity
for making progress on implementing peace, but also
because the principal elements in the draft resolution
were in line with international consensus. There is no
disagreement on the right of the Palestinian people to
establish an independent State within the 1967 borders
and put an end to the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories.

The Arabs and the Palestinians have taken very
flexible steps towards international initiatives in
keeping with the basic rights of the Palestinian people,
their national unity and their right to establish an
independent State. But such steps need support and
encouragement from the international community in
a number of ways, including by putting an end to the
Israeli occupation of all occupied Arab territories,
supporting the building of the institutions of the
Palestinian State, putting an end to the unjust blockade
against the Gaza Strip, assisting in Gaza reconstruction
and providing opportunities for a dignified life for all.

The State of Qatar has played and continues to play
a positive and effective role with a view to achieving a
just, lasting and sustainable solution to the Palestinian
question. We were at the forefront of the States that
took important steps to support the opportunities for
achieving a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian
question. We are also part ofthe international consensus
in support of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, especially their right to self-determination. That
consensus is embodied in several relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and in the successive recognition
by most States of the State of Palestine.

In that context, we reiterate our call on the Security
Council to implement its previous resolutions and
respect international consensus by adopting a binding
resolution that obligates Israel to end its occupation
of Palestinian and Arab territories, end its settlement
activities and all other practices that violate international
law and take the necessary actions to implement a clear
and time-bound political plan to realize the two-State
solution based on well-established principles, including
the Arab Peace Initiative.

Peace, stability and security in the region, including
the security of Israel, will require genuine steps
towards that goal - that is to say, the establishment
of a Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living side-by-
side in peace with Israel; guarantees for the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people; and the withdrawal
from all occupied Arab territories, including the
occupied Syrian Golan, the Sheba'a farms and the
Lebanese village of Ghajar. Moreover, all violations of
the freedom of worship and of holy sites in Palestine
by the Israeli authorities must stop. The Israelis have
been implementing a dangerous policy against these
places, and we denounce such actions, which bring
more violence to the region.

Several months have passed since the Cairo
international donors conference on the reconstruction
of the Gaza Strip, yet the Strip still awaits the fulfilment
of reconstruction efforts, which are very important
in the light of the destruction of its infrastructure,
housing, public facilities and basic services caused by
the recent Israeli aggression against that territory. The
State of Qatar responded to the dire humanitarian needs
by announcing at the Cairo conference that it would
provide $1 billion. We are now working to implement
the mechanisms for delivering that grant.

This year, the region has witnessed waves of
extreme cold that have had a painful and indescribable
impact on millions of Syrian and Iraqi refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs). The situation
requires the international community to fulfil its moral
and humanitarian obligations towards these vulnerable
populations and to increase its support for them. This
very difficult situation must serve as an added incentive
to put an end to the crisis. The State of Qatar has
responded to the call of the United Nations to continue
providing humanitarian and emergency relief for the
refugees and the IDPs. We are now at the forefront
among donor States for the emergency response fund
created by the United Nations for the Syrian crisis, and
we call on Member States to respond to the call as well.

The crisis in Syria has entered its fifth year. It
is up to all of us to try to put an end to the horrible
crimes and terrorism carried out by the regime in Syria,
which have promoted instability in the region and the
growth of the problem of foreign terrorist fighters. We
all agree that the main element of a solution for the
Syrian crisis is a political transition, pursuant to the
Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex), in order to
fulfil the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. It
is alarming that various Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2118 (2013), remain unfulfilled.

The most recent report of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its fact-finding
mission concerning the use of chlorine gas in Syria
established the use of poisonous chemical elements,
such as chlorine, in a systematic manner in various
attacks. The report has proven that there have been
bottle bombs that include chlorine that were thrown
from various helicopters. That is a systematic war crime
for which the perpetrators must be held responsible.

In conclusion, we reiterate the position of the State
of Qatar in support of Syria and its independence and
unity based on the Geneva communique.

