Mr. Wittig (Germany): I had the honour to
assume the chairmanship of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee in January. In today's briefing, I
would like to give an overview of the Committee's
activities and achievements since the last briefing in
November (see S/PV.6424). In addition, I would like to
offer comments on the future work of the Committee
from the Chairman's point of view.

At the outset, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank my predecessor, Ambassador
Thomas Mayr-Harting of Austria, and his team for their
excellent work in steering the Committee in 2009 and
2010. Under Austria's able leadership, the Committee
concluded successfully the first comprehensive review
of the consolidated list. Today, I am pleased to report
that the Committee, building on those efforts, has
approved the most comprehensive set of updates to the
consolidated list and the largest group of narrative
summaries of reasons for listing in its history.

Specifically, the Committee has just agreed to 78
list amendments and to making publicly available
almost 200 additional summaries of reasons for listing.
The additional narrative summaries will further
facilitate the implementation of the sanctions. They
mark an important step towards closing an information
gap and further enhancing fair and clear procedures.
However, in resolution 1904 (2009), the Council
clearly flagged that further efforts to that end were
required. Let me now focus on three important aspects
of the Committee's work.

First, the Council directed the Committee to
continue to conduct reviews on a regular basis. The
Committee, supported by the relevant Member States,
the Monitoring Team and the Secretariat, is working

hard to deliver. The review of 48 individuals reported
to be deceased is currently under way. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank Member States for their
cooperation and their efforts in submitting to the
Committee any relevant information in the context of
that review. The Committee aims to conclude the
review by the end of May, before conducting other
reviews as requested by the Council in resolution 1904
(2009). In addition, the Committee decided to review
listed entries that are reported to have ceased to exist
and agreed on a paper outlining the modalities of that
specialized review.

Secondly, through resolution 1904 (2009), the
Council established the Office of the Ombudsperson.
As of today, the Ombudsperson, Judge Kimberly Prost,
has received 10 requests for de-listing. The
Ombudsperson submitted her first comprehensive
report on a specific de-listing request to the Committee
in February, as well as two further comprehensive
reports on two additional de-listing cases in April. The
Committee is currently considering these de-listing
requests and has been discussing with the
Ombudsperson her observations, including the
methodology and standards applied in her reviews of
the requests. The Committee will conclude its
considerations according to resolution 1904 (2009) and
the relevant guidelines. The Committee views the
assistance of the Ombudsperson as valuable and
helpful in the process of reaching well-founded
decisions. The Committee is currently considering
options in this regard.

Thirdly, resolution 1904 (2009) encourages
members of the Committee to provide reasons for
objecting to de-listing requests. As Chair, I am
insisting that all Committee members do so in a timely
manner. In that connection, I am pleased to note that
the Committee has been able to reach a consensus on
the way and the form in which reasons for the
Committee's decision could be communicated to
relevant stakeholders on a case-by-case basis.

Here I should like to draw the Council's attention
to changes and challenges as I see them and to share
the views of the Chair of the Committee.

The 1267 regime was established in 1999, more
than 11 years ago, in response to attacks planned by
Osama Bin Laden and perpetrated by Al-Qaida. As
times change, the threats posed by international
terrorism are evolving. I should like here to make some
brief comments, in my personal capacity but informed
by my experience as Chair of the Committee, on
current changes and future challenges.

First, the death of Osama Bin Laden constitutes
clearly an important landmark and a turning point.
However, it is neither the end of Al-Qaida nor the end
of terrorism. The Committee will duly assess the
implications which recent events may have on the
nature of the threat posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban,
and on the future work of the Committee. The
Monitoring Team will have to monitor closely current
and future developments in that regard. It is clear,
however, that rigorous implementation of the sanctions
measures remains essential, since various groups
associated with Al-Qaida remain active around the
world, constituting a continued threat to international
peace and security. At the same time, the Committee,
supported by the Monitoring Team, should consider
how best it can play its part in further marginalizing
Al-Qaida and how it can ensure that the 1267 list
continues to fully and adequately reflect the evolving
threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliated networks.

Secondly, regarding Afghanistan, the Committee
has discussed the possible implications that political
dialogue in Afghanistan may have on the work of the
Committee and the future design of the regime. The
Monitoring Team, in its recommendations paper, has
provided several options for developing the 1267
regime further according to the perceived needs related
to political dialogue in Afghanistan. It is the view of
the Chair that the Committee and the 1267 regime as a
Whole must be prepared to play a facilitating and
supporting role in a political dialogue and not become
a stumbling block in terms of peace and security in the
region. The Committee has been proactive in seeking
and taking into account the views of the Afghan
Government in the process of listing and de-listing
Afghan Taliban. The Committee will consider a draft
checklist of necessary supporting documentation for
de-listing requests. However, taking into account the
dynamics of political processes, it is the view of the
Chair that the design of the regime may have to be
further developed.

As Chair, I recommend that the Council carefully
review and calibrate the criteria for the listing and de-
listing of Afghan Taliban, reflecting in particular
internationally agreed criteria in the reconciliation
processes. The Council may wish to consider options
for granting an even more visible role to the Afghan
Government in this context, with a view to promoting
the transition process and the principle of Afghan
ownership.

Finally, as Chair I am pleased to note that the
need for continued reforms as regards fair and clear
procedures remains high on the agenda of the members
of the Committee. At the same time, I have to note that
although many of the substantial reforms set out in
resolution 1904 (2009) are currently being
implemented, they still represent a work in progress,
and the effects of this comprehensive reform agenda
cannot yet be evaluated. This applies first and foremost
to the most ambitious reform step set out in resolution
1904 (2009): the establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson. I have noted that all members of the
Committee are committed to making this a meaningful
and credible process. This, however, does not exclude
well-founded disagreements on particular cases. As
Chair, I am confident that the Ombudsperson process,
in its current form, can already deliver tangible
improvements as regards fair and clear procedures, in
particular the right to be heard.

In compliance with the provisions of resolution
1904 (2009), the Ombudsperson's findings are based
on a thorough and conclusive examination of each de-
listing request. At this stage, it is already clear that the
political will of all Council members to promote fair
and clear procedures has added weight and rigour to
the Ombudsperson process. The observations, even
though formally not binding in nature, are seriously
considered and taken into account before a decision is
taken on any de-listing request presented through the
Office of the Ombudsperson. At the same time, as
Chair of the Committee I am committed to continuing
to assist in trying to build consensus on further
enhancing fair and clear procedures as well as the role
of the Ombudsperson.

This concludes my statement on the Chair's
personal views.

