Mr. Goff (New Zealand): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting in an open
format. May I begin by expressing my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his opening remarks this
morning and to his Special Representative,
Mr. Brahimi, for the briefing that he also gave us this
morning. He has a tremendous responsibility placed on
his shoulders and deserves all the support that the
Council can give him.

The withdrawal of the Taliban forces from Kabul
in the last 24 hours has greatly increased the urgency of
the international effort to assist the Afghan people to
install a fully representative, accountable government
which will respect human rights. Mr. Brahimi has given
us a clear framework leading towards a new
constitution and government for Afghanistan. The key
challenge before this Council is how the security needs
within Afghanistan can be met while steps are taken to
establish a new Government. We must, of course, do
everything possible to bring to an end the absence of
legitimate government and law and order in
Afghanistan in which terrorism, extremism and drug
trafficking have thrived. We also have a responsibility
to help end the cycle of violence and retribution, which
has now plagued Afghanistan for over two decades. We
see again the graphic and tragic images of that
retribution that has occurred in the last 24 hours.

The United Nations has a leading role to play in
addressing the political future of Afghanistan. To
succeed in its efforts, it must have the firm support of
Afghanistan's neighbours. We were therefore greatly
encouraged to receive yesterday the declaration made
by the Foreign Ministers and other senior
representatives of the "six plus two" group. Their
endorsement of the United Nations central role and the
work of the Secretary-General's Special Representative
are critically important.

Well before the events of the eleventh of
September, this body had determined that the situation
in Afghanistan constituted a threat to international
peace and security. That included the Taliban's failure
to meet the Council's demands from as far back as
December 1998 to stop providing sanctuary and
training for international terrorists and their
organizations. When those resolutions over three years
were ignored, and the attack of 11 September
heightened the threat that the terrorists posed to the
world, new measures were clearly needed. An
international coalition, to which New Zealand is a
contributor, is out of necessity engaged in a campaign
to suppress the Al-Qaeda terrorist organization and
their Taliban protectors. The Taliban withdrawal from
Kabul signals important progress, but there is still a
long way to go.

Our fight is not against the civilian population.
The coalition must exercise the utmost care to avoid
civilian casualties. There has already been too much
loss of civilian life. The cumulative effects of long-
term conflict, the drought and the repressive policies of
the Taliban have created an appalling humanitarian
crisis in Afghanistan. As winter approaches, we must
deliver assistance to the millions at risk of starvation
and illness. Without that help and a determined effort
by this body, the humanitarian disasters of recent years,
when hundreds of thousands have died from famine,
preventable disease and the cold, will be repeated. The
political and humanitarian dimensions of the crisis are
intrinsically linked and must be addressed in a
coordinated way if we are to find a sustainable, long-
term solution in Afghanistan.

This week I have had the privilege of meeting
with the Special Representative and with Under-
Secretary-General Oshima. New Zealand has
contributed to the United Nations consolidated appeal
and has offered further assistance, including through
the provision of air transport to deliver humanitarian
supplies during the coming winter in Afghanistan.

Resolving the crisis in Afghanistan is, I believe,
the most important challenge before this body today.
The campaign against terrorism, and also against drug
trafficking, depends heavily on the restoration of a
legitimate government in Afghanistan that observes the
norms of international behaviour. Restoring law and
order and a government capable of meeting the social
and economic needs of its people will contribute
enormously to resolving the refugee crisis affecting
millions of people living a marginal existence in the
refugee camps. Restoring human rights under a fully
representative, accountable government will end the
repression under which the Afghans have suffered for
far too long.

New Zealand urges the Security Council to act
decisively so that these outcomes can be achieved, and
New Zealand offers whatever support it can to the
Council's endeavours.

