Mr. AlNafisee (Saudi Arabia)(sp0ke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank the Council and the
Secretary-General for their efforts to achieve
international peace and security in the face of changing
circumstances and threats throughout the world at this
critical stage. I would also like to thank Mr. B. Lynn
Pascoe for his detailed briefing on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine.

The suffering of the Palestinian people began at
the same time as the idea of giving land to a landless
people. In that context, the first issue was land and the
refugees became the second. Later issues involved
settlements, the revision of history and the demolition
of religious sites. The Palestinian people paid the price
for each of these scourges due to the international
community's complete failure to enforce resolutions of
international legitimacy against the occupier.
If the United Nations, represented by the Security
Council, had fulfilled its role, the Palestinian people
would not have had to endure this continued suffering.
For more than half a century, Israel has unleashed its
worst policies against the people of Palestine,
including murder, deportation, imprisonment,
blockades, the annexation of land, the confiscation of
property, and the looting and plundering of the
resources of Palestine. These actions of the Israeli
occupation forces seek to perpetuate the destruction of
the Palestinian people and its infrastructure, subject it
to greater oppression and suffering, and systematically
drive the Palestinians to despair and frustration.

The Arabs have chosen peace, not surrender.
Their demand was and continues to be for the
enforcement of international legitimacy, starting with
the implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land in exchange for a just
and comprehensive peace. This necessarily requires
full Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Arab
territories to the 1967 borders and the return of
Palestinian refugees to their homes with full restoration
of their rights. That will enable the Palestinian people
to exercise their right to self-determination and to
establish their independent State on their national soil
with East Jerusalem as its capital. It will also require
Israel's withdrawal from the Syrian Golan Heights and
the Lebanese Shaba'a farms.

To address Israeli violations of international
legitimacy is to address violations of international law
and the international community's lack of will to
shoulder its responsibilities for maintaining peace and
security. The Israeli occupation forces have exceeded
the limits of international legitimacy in their
application of any number of policies, including
building the apartheid wall, building and expanding
settlements in the occupied territories, and increasing
illegal colonization measures.

In addition, the Israeli Government's financing,
protecting and arming of settlers has enabled the
building of more settlements and resulted in rapid
growth over the past few months. Last year, the world
witnessed the Israeli project to build 900 housing units
in the Gilo settlement, south of occupied Jerusalem.
This action was criticized by the entire international
community, including the so-called friends of Israel.

Moreover, Israel recently decided through its so-
called Israeli Building Management Committee to
launch a larger project to build 1,400 housing units in
the same settlement under the name Gilo: Southern
Slopes. Reports indicate that an even larger project
includes a vast plan for 4,000 housing units to attract
families from other areas. Such continued expansion,
along with the indiscriminate demolition of houses in
the occupied Palestinian territories - most recently of
the historic Shepherd Hotel - would create obstacles
to any peace initiative, as the wall and settlements
surrounding most cities of the West Bank will make it
nearly impossible to establish a contiguous, viable
Palestinian State in the future.

Israel's illegal measures and practices against the
Palestinian people not only constitute violations of the
United Nations Charter, humanitarian law and
resolutions of international legitimacy; they also
undermine any slim chance for peace. Furthermore,
such unilateral practices prevent any international
initiative or effort to achieve peace and undermine any
international drive to hold Israel, the occupying Power,
accountable for its actions. From this rostrum my
Government calls on the international community, the
United Nations and the Quartet in particular to adopt a
comprehensive, strategic approach to achieving the
immediate and complete cessation of all settlement
activities in the occupied territories.

For the past six decades, the Arab-Israeli conflict
has dominated all issues in the Middle East. This has
led in turn to extremism and the expansion of terrorism
and created a critical deterrent to development and
reform efforts in the region, which should play a
civilized role instead of being torn by conflicts that sap
its energy and squander its resources.

In conclusion, all the Arab countries have
stressed their continued commitment to a just and
comprehensive peace based on international
legitimacy. In return, these countries continue to await
a matching, serious Israeli commitment. In this
context, the Israeli side must immediately accept the
Arab Peace Initiative, which is the only way to achieve
a lasting and comprehensive peace between the two
sides and a definitive solution that is equitable for all
parties.

