Mr. Pence (United States of America): It is a great
honour to be with the Security Council today in the midst
of the seventy-second session of the General Assembly.

As we gather at this historic Assembly, I know
all of our hearts are with the people of Puerto Rico as
they face Hurricane Maria and its aftermath, as well
as with the people of Mexico City. Even now, as first
responders and families seek to save the lost and find
those that are injured in the midst of the earthquake that
has now claimed more than 200 lives, our hearts and
our prayers are with the people of Puerto Rico and the
people of Mexico as we gather.

We are here today to discuss what I believe is the
most important mission of the United Nations: keeping
the peace. Let me begin by thanking Ethiopia for
introducing resolution 2378 (2017), on peacekeeping
reform. It was my honour, as Vice-President of the
United States, to cast a vote in favour of the resolution.

As President Trump said yesterday in his historic
address to the General Assembly (see A/72/PV.3), just
as each of us should always put our country first, we
will always put America first. But as his words and, I
hope, our presence here attest, America first does not
mean America alone. As the President said, we will
forever be a great friend to the world. It is because ofthat
commitment that he sent me here today to the Security
Council to reiterate our call for fundamental reforms
of United Nations peacekeeping and our determination
to see this institution do even more to keep the peace
across the wider world.

President Trump and I firmly believe that the United
Nations must act to make its peacekeeping operations
more efficient, more effective, more accountable and
more credible. Ambassador Haley previously laid out
the United States principles for peacekeeping reform,
and we are all familiar with them. Peacekeeping
missions must support a political solution and have
the consent of the host country. Its mandates must
be realistic and achievable. Every mission must have
an exit strategy. And United Nations peacekeeping
missions must adjust to progress and failure. In short,
when a mission succeeds we should not prolong it; when
a mission underperforms we should restructure it; and
when a mission consistently fails to fulfil the mandates
of the Council, we should end it.

We urge the United Nations to analyse all
peacekeeping operations in the light of those principles
so that missions most effectively advance peace across
the wider world - after all, keeping the peace is at
the heart of the United Nations mission. The very first
words of the Charter of the United Nations are "to
maintain international peace". Just yesterday President
Trump challenged this great body to rededicate itself
to that noble goal, and I do so today on behalf of our
nation before the Security Council.

History records that the United Nations was forged
in the fading embers of the Second World War, the
most destructive conflict in the history of the world.
The United States of America, with our allies, emerged
victorious, but in that victory we vowed to come
together to prevent dictators and demagogues from
ever threatening the peace that we had won through
our shared sacrifice. As President Harry Truman told
us then, it was not sufficient to merely check madmen
who would plan world domination, but rather to bring
together again "a mighty combination of nations
founded upon justice for peace". And so we founded
this great body, the United Nations.

That was the rallying cry of the United Nations in
the twentieth century, and so it must be again in the
twenty-first century.

But keeping the peace requires more than
peacekeeping; it requires action and the unwavering
resolve of every country represented here today. For as
President Trump observed yesterday, we are once again
confronted "by those who threaten us with chaos, with
turmoil and terror", who seek to undermine sovereignty,
prosperity and security - all of which the President
called the "pillars of peace".

In Eastern Europe, Russia continues to compromise
the sovereignty of its neighbours as it seeks to redraw
international borders by force. Radical Islamic terrorism
continues to beset nations, with barbarous attacks in
Barcelona, Paris and London. In the Middle East, the
world's leading State sponsor of terrorism continues to
flout the spirit of the Iran deal, destabilizing the region
and brazenly threatening the security of sovereign
nations. And as the world has seen in just the past few
days, a depraved regime in North Korea is relentlessly
pursuing nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles and
now, as the President said, "threatens the entire world
with unthinkable loss of human life".

The United States is grateful to see the Security
Council unanimously adopt resolutions 2371 (2017)
and 2375 (2017), which impose tough new sanctions
on the North Korean regime. But to be clear, the
United States of America will continue to bring the
full range of American power to bear on the regime in
Pyongyang. We will continue to marshal economic and
diplomatic pressure - ours and from countries across
the world - to demand that North Korea abandon
its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. As the
President said yesterday, the United States has great
strength and patience, but all options are on the table.
If we are forced to defend ourselves or our allies, we
will do so with military power that is effective and
overwhelming. We call on the United Nations and the
Security Council to do more to keep the peace - much
more - and confront the threat posed by North Korea.
Finally, to keep the peace most effectively, this
organ must have the credibility to pursue peace by
advancing the cause ofhuman rights. It is no coincidence
that some of the most dangerous regimes in the world
are also some of the worst abusers of human rights. In
Iran, North Korea and other despotic regimes, we see
a truth of history borne out once again - those who
subvert the freedom of their people at home undermine
sovereignty and security abroad.

The United Nations is bound by its Charter to
foster international cooperation in promoting and
encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all. That was the purpose under which the
United Nations Human Rights Council was formed,
but the truth is the Human Rights Council does not
deserve its name. As we look at the membership of the
Council today, we see nations that betray those timeless
principles upon which the Organization was founded.
Today the Human Rights Council actually attracts and
welcomes many of the worst human rights violators in
the world.

A clear majority of the Human Rights Council
members failed to meet even the most basic human
rights standards. Cuba - an oppressive regime that has
repressed its people and jailed political opponents for
more than half a century - sits on the Human Rights
Council. Venezuela - a dictatorship that undermines
democracy at every turn, imprisons political opponents
and, as we speak, is advancing policies that worsen
deprivation and poverty and are costing the lives
of innocent men, women and children - sits on the
Human Rights Council.

The Security Council must reform the Human
Rights Council's membership and its operation. As to
its operation, I think of what President John F. Kennedy
warned more than 50 years ago - that the United
Nations must not become "a forum for invective".
Unfortunately, today the Human Rights Council has
become exactly that, and particularly the Human
Rights Council has become a forum for anti-Semitism
and invective against Israel.

The Council's agenda item 7 actually singles out
Israelfordiscussionatevery singlemeeting-something
no other country must endure. As evidence, the Human
Rights Council has adopted more than 70 resolutions
condemning Israel, while largely ignoring the world's
worst human rights abusers. It is, as President Trump
said yesterday, "a massive source of embarrassment",
and we call on the Security Council and the entire
Organization to immediately embrace reforms of the
membership and practices of the Human Rights Council
and end the Council's blatant bias against our cherished
ally, Israel.

Under President Trump, the United States of
America is firmly committed to the cause of human
rights because we are committed to keeping the peace.
Keeping the peace requires more than peacekeeping;
it requires action and reform, and it also requires a
willingness to call out senseless attacks on innocent
people around the world. At this very moment, in
South-East Asia we see heartbreak and assaults on
human rights and innocent civilians that are ultimately
endangering the sovereignty and security of the entire
region. In recent weeks, the people of my country
and the wider world have witnessed a great tragedy
unfolding in Burma, with the Rohingya people.
Recently, Burmese security forces responded to
militant attacks on Government outposts with terrible
savagery, burning villages and driving the Rohingya
from their homes. The images of the violence and its
victims have shocked the American people and decent
people all over the world. And now we are witnessing
a historic exodus. Over 400,000 Rohingya, including
tens of thousands of children, have now been forced to
flee from Burma to Bangladesh, with more following
every day.

Yesterday, Secretary of State Tillerson discussed
Rohingya refugees with Aung San Suu Kyi, and urged
the Burmese Government and military to facilitate
humanitarian aid and confront the allegations of human
rights abuses. While we welcome Suu Kyi's comments
that returning refugees have nothing to fear, the United
States renews its call on Burma's security forces to
end their violence immediately and support diplomatic
efforts for a long-term solution. President Trump and I
also call on the Security Council and the United Nations
to take strong and swift action to bring that crisis to an
end and give hope and help to the Rohingya people in
their hour ofneed. Unless the violence is stopped, which
justice demands, it will only get worse, and it will sow
seeds of hatred and chaos that may well consume the
region for generations to come and threaten the peace
of us all.

As I said, keeping the peace requires more than
peacekeeping; it requires action, courage, conviction.
And so the United Nations must be prepared to do
more, for as President Trump said yesterday:
"If the righteous many do not confront the wicked
few, then evil will triumph. When decent people
and nations become bystanders to history, the forces
of destruction only gather power and strength."
(A/72/PV3, p. 11)

Let us therefore rededicate ourselves to the mission
upon which this organ was founded. The first words of
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations - "to
maintain international peace" - must again be our
lodestar, our ideal and our aspiration. Through reform
of our efforts and reform of this institution, through
renewed courage to speak and act whenever and
wherever the inalienable rights of innocent people or
the peace of the world are at risk, we will create, as
our President said, "a more safe and peaceful future for
all people".

As the world witnessed yesterday, our President is
a man of deep conviction and faith - faith in God and
faith in the boundless capacity of peoples and nations
founded on peace and justice to improve the world. My
prayer today is that this institution might mirror that
conviction in renewed ways, in the faith that, as we
make every effort to pursue peace, the God of peace
will guide us and bless us, today, tomorrow and always,
for this generation and our posterity.

