Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wouldlike to thank Ms. Sahle-WorkZewde,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and Mr. Sma'il Chergui, African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, for their substantive briefings.
We share the attitude of the Secretary-General to the
development and strengthening of the cooperation
between the United Nations, the African Union (AU)
and Africa's subregional organizations. The challenges
facing both the African continent and the international
community make it essential to unite our efforts and
make use of the organizations' comparative advantages.
We see the potential for more thorough interaction.

We welcome the efforts of our African partners
to resolve conflicts on the continent and have been
pleased to note a marked intensification in the activities
of the African Union and subregional organizations in
that regard, including in efforts to establish a continent-
wide peace-and-security architecture. There can be no
question that in order to deal effectively with Africa's
crises, the continent requires first of all an approach
in which Africans themselves take the leading role
in determining ways to settle their various problems,
combined with effective support to their efforts from
the international community. The approach we support
is that of "African solutions to African problems".

We would like to focus attention on the fact that
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
should be based on Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, including such key provisions
as ensuring that the peace and security activities of
regional arrangements are consistent with the purposes
and principles of the Charter, that peaceful means
are used for settling disputes, that Security Council
authorization is obtained for any enforcement action
and that the Council is kept informed. Besides that,
it is important to ensure that individual recipes for
dealing with crises are developed for each concrete
situation and geared to local specifics. We believe
that in the majority of cases, the regional stakeholders
have a better understanding of situations in their area
of responsibility. However, the Security Council has
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, so its participation in
resolving Africa's problems is also essential.

We understand the concerns of our African
partners about the provision of resources for African
peacekeeping operations. It will be important to improve
the predictability, reliability and flexibility of the
financing for African operations and joint missions. We
do not object in principle to considering the possibilities
for expanding United Nations participation in such
missions, and we are ready for further constructive
dialogue in that regard. However, we believe it is
extremely important to maintain the current United
Nations procedures for considering and approving the
relevant budgetary applications, to ensure transparency
and accountability in the allocation and use of funds,
and to provide for the participation of United Nations
personnel at every stage of the planning and practical
implementation of the tasks involved. Obviously,
strengthening cooperation between our organizations
will inevitably mean additional responsibilities for the
regional actors that they must be fully prepared for.

Russia participates actively in the logistics of
peacekeeping, primarily by providing air services.
We give a great deal of attention to training police
and military personnel from Africa through Russia's
specialized institutions. In particular, the All-Russian
Institute of Advanced Training of Employees of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation
runs a training programme for peacekeepers. African
law-enforcement officials are given the opportunity to
study in higher-education programmes as well as short-
term training courses for improving their qualifications
in Ministry of Internal Affairs educational institutions.
We are ready to share with our African partners our
experience in counter-terrorism and to implement
projects to increase the capacity of the continent's
countries to combat the threats of terrorism
and extremism.

