Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Jan Kubis, for
his substantive briefing and for his work as the Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We listened closely to the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Tanin. Indeed, Afghanistan is entering
a crucial phase in its development, one that calls for
new efforts, based on what has been achieved, from
the people and Government of Afghanistan and calls
as well for increased support on the part of the entire
international community. The April 2014 elections will
be an important milestone that will require meticulous
and comprehensive preparation, including with the
support of UNAMA.

At the same time, the security situation in
the country remains challenging. Heavy civilian
casualties continue to be incurred in armed hostilities.
Unfortunately, the international military presence is
responsible for some of these. Additional measures
must be taken to minimize civilian casualties.

Much remains to be done in enhancing the
preparedness of the Afghan National Army and Police.
Failing that, it will be extremely difficult to ensure
Government control throughout the country's territory.
We note the problem of the feasibility of an accelerated,
time-bound transfer of responsibilities from the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). Would
it not be more appropriate to first report to the Security
Council on the implementation of the mandate it has
issued? In that context, we cannot conceal our concern
about the possible spill-over of extremism into the
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States
that are neighbours of Afghanistan.

Furthermore, we have questions with respect to
the intention to maintain a foreign military presence
in Afghanistan after 2014. Will that not have a
destabilizing impact on the situation in the region?
Will it not become a factor for disturbance to the local
population, be exploited to consolidate the armed
opposition and give rise to further extremism? We need
the maximum possible transparency in that regard.

We have repeatedly emphasized that we see the
future of Afghanistan as a sovereign, self-sufficient and
prosperous State. We are convinced that the restoration
of its neutral status would serve to strengthen regional
stability and cooperation and help to establish an
atmosphere of trust and good-neighbourliness in
relations between Afghanistan and its neighbours.

The regional dimension is extremely important
with respect to the situation in Afghanistan. We stress
the useful efforts for stabilization and economic
development being taken by the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (C80) and the Dushanbe Four, comprised
of Russia, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Tajikistan. We
welcome the decision taken at the June summit of
C80 leaders in Beijing to accord Afghanistan observer
status in that organization. Particular support should be
provided to the position, first articulated at the Kabul
regional conference, concerning enhanced regional
cooperation, including by implementing the agreed
confidence-building measures, as well as efforts to
develop strategies for the sustainable development of
Afghanistan after 2014.

Urgent problems persist with respect to the illegal
drug traffic in Afghanistan. Effective measures
must be undertaken to physically destroy drug crops
and laboratories, curb the supply of precursors to
Afghanistan, and include drug lords on the Security
Council's sanctions list. We believe that drug
production in that country threatens international
peace and stability, and in that context the activities of
the CSTO - including the counter-narcotics Operation
Canal - are especially important in countering the
Afghan drug threat.
The proposals that have been put forward
repeatedly by the CSTO and the CSO to ISAF and
NATO with respect to counter-narcotics cooperation
and coordination in the Afghan context remain valid.
Putting an end to illegal drug trafficking would
above all be a major contribution to the fight against
international terrorism, which is reliably sustained and
financed by the drug traffic.

The process of national reconciliation could
have a considerable impact on easing the situation
in Afghanistan. We anticipate that the activities of
the High Peace Council will lend additional impetus
to that process and help to strengthen national unity
in Afghanistan. We are not opposed to contacts with
opposition groups that are prepared to adhere to the
three well-known principles of recognition of the
Afghan Constitution, ending violence and breaking ties
with Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations. We
have seen an increase of such contacts recently, and we
believe that it is unacceptable for the peace dialogue
to include those who feature on Security Council
sanctions lists.

Ongoing, effective support for the Council's
sanctions regime is of the utmost priority as an
important tool for countering terrorism. The idea of
dividing the sanctions list pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) between Al-Qaida and Taliban was reflected
in resolutions adopted two years ago, and guides the
international community towards adopting more
flexible and targeted approaches. It is important in
that respect that the practice of using sanctions against
individuals and entities involved in terrorist activities
continue to be based on a case-by-case approach and on
compliance with relevant procedures, which would not
allow for simplified or more collective exemptions of
persons on the list.

ISAF must play an ancillary role in national
reconciliation and its actions must be agreed by the
Government of Afghanistan. We advocate strengthening
the central coordinating role of the United Nations
in international civilian efforts in the context of the
Afghan settlement. UNAMA will need to remain the
coordinator of international efforts to assist in the
stabilization of Afghanistan.

