Ms. Seepanovie (Montenegro): At the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for organizing this open debate on the theme "Maintenance of international peace and security: Upholding the United Nations Charter". I would also like to thank both briefers for their valuable contributions. While we fully align ourselves with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union, I would like to make some additional remarks in my national capacity. Today's world is completely different from that of 75 years ago, when the United Nations was created. Significant progress has been achieved in eradicating extreme poverty and upholding human rights, as well as in fostering peace, security and international cooperation. However, we live in a rapidly changing world that faces complex global challenges, such as climate change, refugee and migration crises, terrorism, violent extremism and nuclear proliferation. In addressing these challenges, we must uphold the Charter of the United Nations as the cornerstone of a multilateral system that strives to maintain international peace and security, foster friendly ties among nations and ensure respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all. We all agree that no country on its own can handle these ever more demanding challenges of modern society. Cooperation is a prerequisite for success, while strong commitment to the vision enshrined in the Charter is imperative. For more than seven decades, the world has faced countless peace and security challenges, while recent developments in the Middle East once again confirm the importance of dialogue and cooperation. We must be aware that any form of long-term instability will make all of us vulnerable. Therefore, it is more crucial than ever to address the root causes of conflict and work to prevent them before they escalate. In so doing, everyone must assume their responsibilities to make the Organization stronger and more efficient. To effectively respond to non-traditional and transnational security challenges, we believe that the Security Council should undergo necessary reforms and demonstrate a stronger and renewed commitment to the tools provided in the Charter. In the year that marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations in an atmosphere of increasingly profound polarization, fragmentation and instability in international relations, and economic and geopolitical uncertainty, it is our common responsibility to reaffirm the true values of United Nations action and efficient multilateralism as the only global solution for the global challenges we face. We must ensure that this global Organization serves as a framework for dialogue and cooperation, guaranteeing that all people can enjoy safety, prosperity and dignity. Inconclusion, I wish to reaffirm my country's strong commitment to the approach defined by the founders of this global Organization, which we accepted in 2006 after restoring our independence and becoming a full- fledged State Member. That is the approach of good- neighbourliness, strongly and resolutely defending universal values and principles, and being a reliable partner in efforts to preserve international peace and security. We believe that every country, regardless of its size or statistics, can by its own example contribute to global solutions and take part in them.
