Ms. Johnson (Norway): Let me start by thanking
you, Ambassador Danforth, for inviting me to address
the Security Council here in Nairobi today. I am
grateful for this opportunity to speak about the
international donors' conference to be held in my
country, and am honoured to be part of this highly
important meeting. The fact that the Security Council
is meeting in Nairobi sends a strong message: a
message about the world's commitment to support a
Sudan without war; a message about the world's
expectations for a speedy conclusion of the Sudan
peace talks sponsored by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD); a message that we
must all do our part to bring about peace in a country
where so many have suffered for so long.

The main responsibility for the Sudan's future
development rests with the Sudanese leaders, but it is
crucial that the international community stand ready to
support the parties in rebuilding and developing the
country once the foundation for a Sudan at peace has
been laid.
Norway has offered to host an international
donors' conference to address the next step: the
reconstruction and development of a country
devastated by decades of conflict. Preparations for the
Oslo conference are well under way. We are only
waiting for the parties to take the very last steps to
peace.

The situation in Darfur reminds us again and
again that those last steps must be taken very soon -
now. Norway strongly condemns the continued killings
and attacks on civilians taking place in Darfur, and we
fully support the Security Council's call for rapid
implementation of the humanitarian and security
protocols. We welcome and support the efforts of the
African Union in the Abuja negotiations and on the
ground in Darfur, and we commend the parties for
signing the significant agreement in Abuja recently.

But we share the view that the road to a political
solution to the crisis in Darfur goes through the
completion of the IGAD peace negotiations. A
comprehensive peace agreement in the context of the
IGAD talks will become the platform for peaceful
solutions nationally, in Darfur and in other volatile
regions. But the urgent and undivided attention of the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLM) is now needed to
complete the process.

The Sudan is at a crossroads, where the country's
leaders have to choose between the path to peace and
stability and the path to fragmentation and fighting.
That is why the memorandum of understanding just
signed is promising. The successful outcome of the
peace talks will mark the end of one long process and
herald the start of another: the rebuilding and
development of Sudan.

When the parties have laid the foundation for a
peaceful environment throughout the country, when
internally displaced persons are able to return, when
people can go back to their daily lives without fear,
when international assistance can safely access all
areas of Sudan, that is the time when long-term
international development support will be made
available. That is the precondition for a successful
donors' conference: an environment that can convince
the international community that the best possible use
will be made of donor resources, for the benefit of
every Sudanese.

The international community will come well
prepared to the table at a donors' conference. Plans for
assistance to the Sudan after the war have been an
integral part of the efforts to bring about a political
solution. Throughout the IGAD effort, the international
donor community, through the IGAD Partners Forum
(IPF), has been engaged for the last four years in
preparations for assistance, in parallel with its support
for the peace process. The parties to the conflict have
been involved in these preparations every step of the
way and are fully aware of the rewards that are likely
to result from the signing of a comprehensive peace
deal.

The Oslo donors' conference will address the
construction and development of the whole of Sudan.
In fact, this could be our best prepared post-war donor
process so far. In September, at the IPF meeting in
Oslo, the Sudanese parties, including those from
Darfur, met with the donor community, including
China, the African Union and the Arab League, to
discuss preparations for assistance to a future Sudan.
The meeting confirmed that the IPF will be the forum
for donor coordination and widened the circle of
support for assistance to the new Sudan.

Successful planning does not always translate
into successful action. However, I believe that, if we
stick to our plans, the Sudan has an excellent chance of
success. The Sudan can be rebuilt, but only with
massive national and international efforts. The new
Government structure - the Sudanese - must deliver
on their promises, and we as donors must deliver on
ours: no empty promises, only delivery.

In the Sudan we are not starting from scratch. We
are not starting from zero. We are starting from minus
39: 39 years of war and destruction. In the south,
millions have been forced to flee their homes,
infrastructure is destroyed and the basic structure of
society is non-existent. In Darfur, the destruction is
overwhelming. In most of the Sudan, poverty is at a
level that will require years of international
engagement. The Sudanese parties and the
international community have an enormous task ahead.
We cannot afford to repeat past mistakes from other
post-conflict areas of the world.

We know from experience that peace is fragile. It
needs attention, protection and nurturing. We also
know that history overflows with examples of
promising peace efforts gone awry, opportunities
missed and mistakes made. In fact, more than half of
all peace agreements fail and the parties slide back into
war. Ironically enough, donors, in spite of the best
intentions, have sometimes contributed to this. We
have to learn from our mistakes.
These are some of the dangers: lack of
coordination between donors, when national or
organizational pride is allowed to take precedence over
results on the ground; lack of country ownership, when
the country's Government and population are relegated
to being spectators unable to take the steering wheel in
a process that should be theirs; and lack of long-term
commitment from donors, when donors compete to
assist for a short period after the peace is made -
another photo opportunity - only to disappear when
the next crisis demands attention.

In the Sudan, we will pay dearly if these mistakes
are repeated. Because of the unique features of this
conflict, such mistakes will have more serious
consequences here than in most other parts of the
world. It is imperative that we as donors take note of
lessons learned. If we fail, the consequences will be
devastating, not only for the Sudanese people, but for
the entire region. We may have only this one chance to
do it right. The Sudanese leaders and the international
community have an obligation to make it work. That is
why we need a united international partner group,
closely coordinated with the Sudanese parties and the
post-war Sudan Government. That is also why we need
close cooperation between the United Nations and the
World Bank, and United Nations agencies that work in
harmony. It is why we welcome the ongoing efforts of
the United Nations and the World Bank to create joint
multi-donor trust funds in close cooperation with the
parties and key donors. It is why we are making plans
for joint operations and joint donor offices, preparing
for a level of coordination and cooperation never seen
before.

In the Sudan, there is no room for solo players.
Lack of coordination between donors not only leads to
a waste of resources, but can also open the way for
manipulation that reverses, rather than advances, the
process.

We as donors cannot risk becoming pawns in a
game that we cannot control. This is why we want to
set a new and higher standard for our work in a future
Sudan - a standard of coordination that can serve as a
reference in other post-conflict areas.

The parties have agreed to a model of asymmetric
federalism. That will ensure far-reaching autonomy for
the southern region. However, the imbalance between
north and south in social, political and economic
development lies at the heart of the civil war, and must
be addressed by the United Nations and other donors.
The complexity of the peace agreement and the special
arrangements for the interim period must be reflected
in our joint efforts.

The United Nations work plan for next year must
be owned by the Sudanese parties. It must form an
integral part of our joint planning engagement.
Sudanese ownership means ownership by both the new
Government structure and the population. It means
cooperation with the different levels of authority.
Development assistance should play a strategic role,
strengthening peace in accordance with the letter and
the spirit of the agreement, rewarding progress and
ensuring stability. And we must have staying capacity.
Donors must be committed to a long-term process,
making sure that the Sudan remains a priority until not
only peace, but also prosperity, has come within reach
for the Sudanese people.

Even a peaceful Sudan cannot be rebuilt in a year
or two. Decades of destruction may demand decades of
construction - of buildings, institutions and people's
lives. In order to do our part, we must agree on some
ground rules for our assistance and cooperation. If we
know that aid will be spent wisely, the donor
community will provide the necessary funds. But to get
the most out of every development dollar, we must
cooperate and we must coordinate. Turf wars cost
money; they may even cost us the peace.

I ask the Security Council to send a clear signal
to the United Nations Sudan mission and all of the
agencies, as well as to all other donors, multilateral as
well as bilateral, to coordinate their efforts closely
within the United Nations system, within the donor
community and with the relevant Sudanese authorities,
and not to lower their flags. This principle should be
reflected in the Council's resolutions and in
preparations for the forthcoming donors conference.

We must start by mobilizing resources for the
enormous task of building a stable and secure Sudan -
the biggest country in Africa. Our pledges will be
based on solid documentation, such as that already
provided by the Joint Assessment Mission. Separately,
we must also reach a common understanding among
key actors about how to handle Sudan's heavy debt
burden. The solution must be broad in scope, and it
must include non-Paris Club members. The Oslo
conference must not be overshadowed by the debt
issue, and should concentrate on new aid flows to
underpin the peace. In parallel with the preparation for
Oslo, therefore, a process to deal with the debt issue
will be established.

We also need more donors. I am hopeful that
future donor partnership in the Sudan will include new,
non-traditional participants. We must urge all donors to
pledge generously and - not least - to stick to their
promises. Norway will be honoured to invite the
Sudanese parties and the wider donor community to the
first donor conference for the Sudan as soon as peace
agreements have been signed and the humanitarian
situation in Darfur is under control. At this meeting in
Nairobi, the Security Council has emphasized its
commitment to the Sudan. The United Nations and the
entire international community will be ready to assist
the Sudan as soon as the Sudanese leaders have
completed the negotiations. The Sudanese people and
the rest of the world are waiting for the parties to
demonstrate the leadership necessary to finish the job
and to prepare for peace.

In view of the urgency of the situation, I would
like to make a suggestion. In the sprit of goodwill
demonstrated by both leaders yesterday and today, and
in order to maintain the momentum, I wish to suggest
that Ali Othman Taha and John Garang advance their
schedules and meet five days before they had intended
to so that they can start the job quickly. They need
every minute. The people of the Sudan have suffered
too much for too long. The lives of millions are at
stake, and they can put an and to that situation now.

