Mr. Monchotte (spoke in French): The new
approach we have set up is of course aligned with view
towards an exit strategy, as the mandate of resolution
2350 (2107) gives us a time limit. By targeting high-level
leadership, there was an attempt to force ownership and
to announce a departure.

Additionally, the new approach should be
understood in the context of the European Gendarmerie
Force, which is perfectly integrated. Moreover,
coordination and integration is generally carried out
through the programme budget of the global focal
point for justice, human rights and correctional justice.
It is an extremely positive aspect that enables us to
contribute in a very pragmatic way to the development
of the Haitian National Police.

With respect to the challenges I see for the future,
I can anticipate two specific challenges for the Haitian
National Police. First ofall, there is the non-politicization
of the police, as that would be extremely damaging for
the general atmosphere in the country and its stability,
which would be called into question. The second
challenge is the budgetary interest of the Government
in the police by availing it of the means to act and
by honouring the commitments adopted on 5 July
by the Prime Minister in his capacity as President of
the Superior Council of the National Police, when he
validated the 2017-2021 strategic development plan that
we prepared jointly, in which Haiti must contribute at
least 45 per cent to the overall five-year budget.

Other challenges that I see for us are ensuring
the best experts so as to ensure that skills transfer
and capacity-building occur in the best possible
conditions. To that end, we must have the necessary
equipment - be they vehicles, infrastructure or
infrastructure adjustments - for the working conditions
of our international police, above all a helicopter unit
to carry out our joint operations with the police. Our
mandate requires that we provide operational support
to the Haitian National Police in the territorial planning
of the country. That element is crucial.

As for sustainable peace, beyond the purely
economic aspects of political stability in the technical
and police arena, it is absolutely clear that the police
must address the population equitably, respect human
rights and use force with care. These are fundamental
prerequisites. That is why we participate in and support
operations as part of the mandate. Human rights
training for law enforcement units is a critical part of
technical support.

I would also like to underscore the role of the
General Inspectorate, which we support with experts
alongside its senior management. That was implemented
under the mandate for the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) with approximately
15 United Nations police deployed in the Inspectorate.
The Inspectorate must carry out investigations of
allegations of improper conduct or the use of excessive
force, whether in police or peacekeeping operations.
The General Inspectorate considers approximately 600
cases annually.

With respect to the transition - a question was asked
in this respect by the representative of Sweden - what
enabled it to take place in a smooth and harmonious
manner was a vision that I would say was crafted in
late 2016. We began to plan well in advance, so that in
February 2017, when the strategic evaluation mission
arrived along with Mr. Ladsous, we were able to make
proposals relating to the post-MINUSTAH period and
to outline our support and advice programme. This
planning and preparation for the future took place in
close cooperation with the local police, without whom
none of this would have been possible. The work was
thus carried out in a harmonious manner with a partner
that is fully accepting of this new landscape.

What further contributed to the stabilization of
MINUSTAH, as I observed based on my own experience,
was above all the fact that there was support for the
electoral process to be fully carried through. The police
component played an important role by deploying more
than 85 per cent of its force during the two rounds of
the presidential elections. This was also done jointly
with the Haitian National Police, which was absolutely
critical. In the presence of the highest authorities of the
State, we signed a joint security plan that enabled the
Haitian National Police to make clear progress in terms
of operational planning and to generate a coherent and
realistic operational framework at the national level.
This was a first for the Haitian National Police.

Turning to the promotion of gender equality in the
police component, first we created a listing of posts in
the framework of our new approach so that contributing
countries could see what posts needed to be filled, with
priority given to female personnel. At my headquarters,
I have two gender equality adviser posts reserved for
women. We are currently a very small structure, with
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti. I have also maintained a women's network, and
I would stress here that advisers to this network have
a counterparts in the Haitian National Police, which
provided an excellent example of how to promote gender
equality within a police force. We are continuing these
efforts every day.

With respect to the police division and human
resources, arrangements were made that included the
authorization to reduce the duration of the mandate and
deployment for women, so as to facilitate their joining
the Mission.

Turning to communications, at the request of our
partner the Haitian National Police, we have stressed
linguistic issues, which are very important. Indeed,
the proper transfer of skills and capacity-building
is best carried out in a context of afieciio socieiaiis,
that is to say, a trust-based relationship between
mentor and mentee, which works best when a common
language is used, in this case French or Creole. This
is noted in the profiles that have been set up, so that
contributing countries, in addition to providing female
personnel, can ensure that such personnel are French-
or Creole-speaking. When candidates are put forward,
we conduct interviews and make our selection with a
view to securing French-speaking experts.

In conclusion, with respect tojoint law-enforcement
units, I can attest to the fact that I have benefited from
this undertaking and would be fully in favour if it were
to continue.

