Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I would like to join other
Council members in expressing our appreciation to
all of today's briefers for their insightful assessments
of the latest situation in Ukraine. I would also like to
acknowledge the presence of the Foreign Ministers of
Lithuania and Ukraine, who are with us here today.
Almost half a year has gone by since the Council last
met on this issue (see S/PV.7498), and we would like
to believe that the situation in Ukraine is stabilizing.
Listening to the briefers, however, we share the
concerns that other Council members have expressed
about the security, humanitarian and human rights
situations in Ukraine.

Malaysia takes note of the progress made so far in
implementing the 13 points in the Minsk agreements,
particularly on the maintenance of the ceasefire, the
withdrawal of weapons, the release of hostages and
work on constitutional reforms. However, that progress
is far from being irreversible. We therefore call on
all parties to comply fully with the provisions of the
Minsk agreements. In particular, we urge them to
cooperate fully with the Special Monitoring Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), in order to enable it to carry out its
mandate, including by providing the OSCE with full
and unhindered access to rebel-held areas in the Donbas
region and with the information it needs to verify the
withdrawal of heavy weapons.

Malaysia looks forward to further progress being
made by both sides on determining the modalities
of local elections in certain areas of Donetsk and
Luhansk, as laid down in the Minsk agreements and in
accordance with the laws of Ukraine. We take note of
the extension of the time frame for the implementation
of the agreements from the end of this year to the end of
2016. Rather than pointing fingers about who might be
causing the delays in implementing the agreements, the
parties should engage in good-faith negotiations and
use the breathing space created to redouble their efforts
to deal with the issues of constitutional reform and
decentralization of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

Malaysia is deeply concerned about the allegations
of violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law in Ukraine. We urge all the parties
to comply with international law and international
humanitarian law, particularly where it concerns
the protection of civilians. Reports of the summary
execution and arbitrary detention of civilians and of
torture and forced disappearance must be thoroughly
investigated in order to ensure accountability. We
also call on the parties to respect the people's rights
to freedom of opinion and expression and to peaceful
assembly. In that regard, Malaysia welcomes the
progress made by the Ukrainian Government in
introducing a national human rights strategy in
August and looks forward to its implementation via an
action plan. We also urge all parties to allow safe and
unrestricted humanitarian access to those in need. We
would like to emphasize that humanitarian assistance
must be carried out in accordance with international
law, international humanitarian law and respect for
Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

We remain concerned about the insidious increase
in violations of human rights in Crimea, especially of
the right to life, liberty, security and physical integrity,
to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly, and
to an education in one's native language. We urge
the de facto authorities in Crimea to provide access
to the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in order to enable it to carry out its mandate
effectively. Malaysia would like to recall General
Assembly resolution 68/262, adopted last year by an
overwhelming majority of Member States, on the status
of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. We share the
assessment of the Office of the High Commissioner of
Human Rights that compliance with the resolution is
crucial if we are to see an environment conducive to the
promotion and protection of human rights in Ukraine.

In conclusion, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in Ukraine
based on the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. We also reiterate that
full compliance with the February Minsk agreements,
as endorsed by the Council in resolution 2202 (2015),
is crucial to rebuilding trust and confidence in order to
achieve a political solution to the conflict. Any military
solution is unsustainable in the long run and will only
result in further humanitarian disaster. I would also
like to take this opportunity to commend the tireless
efforts and dedication of the various humanitarian
organizations, including the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, in providing assistance and
basic services to those affected by the Ukrainian crisis.
We also greatly appreciate the work of the OSCE and
the Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. And
we affirm the important role of the Normandy format
and Trilateral Contact Group, and urge the relevant
parties to intensify their cooperation in good faith via
those frameworks.

