Ms. Pajevie (Montenegro): Mr. President,
Montenegro congratulates you on your accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February, and warmly thanks you for taking this
initiative and providing a platform for our deliberations.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union;
however, I would like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations. When representatives
of 50 nations met in San Francisco to establish a
new world organization, their primary motivation,
as stipulated in the Preamble to the Charter of the
United Nations, was to "save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war". Although adjusted to a post-
war geopolitical distribution of power that needs to
be reformed in many aspects, the United Nations has
proven to be an irreplaceable universal Organization
for fostering international cooperation and preserving
peace and security.

Over the past decades, the Organization has
strengthened its role by rapidly responding to prevent
outbreaks of violence and political crises, and by
providing mediation expertise, logistical support and
resources to countries in need. With a view to pursuing
more durable political solutions, United Nations
peacekeepers have overseen the cessation of hostilities
and played a critical role in the protection of civilians.
They have also provided support to national authorities
in the reform of security institutions, disarmament,
and the promotion and protection of human rights.
The United Nations has also played a crucial role in
supporting transitions, including by providing technical
assistance and expertise in the organization of free and
fair elections in post-conflict States.

Nowadays, due to the internationalized character
of social processes and the global impact of regional
and local conflicts, the role of the universal
Organization is more important than ever. Numerous
threats to international peace and security demonstrate
that the world needs a stronger, more effective and
relevant United Nations system, and imply the need
for a responsible approach to United Nations reform.
In our view, the security challenges we face can be
successfully tackled only through the active engagement
of the international community within the reformed
multilateral framework.

Montenegro attaches great importance to the
improvement of the international legal order, in
particular to the United Nations Charter as one of its
key parts. There is no doubt that all States must adhere
to the basic principles of international law, cooperate
with one another with a view to combating all forms
of terrorist activities, aggression, crimes and human
rights abuses, and bring those responsible to justice.
The responsibility for tackling the root causes of
conflict and creating a culture of peace, justice, equity,
democracy and the rule of law lies with us.

Recommitment to multilateralism and the principles
enshrined in the United Nations Charter is central to
our efforts to accomplish those goals. In that context,
I would like to underline, as on previous occasions of
a similar nature, the significance of United Nations
early detection and early warning mechanisms, as well
as the establishment of mediation as a core function
of the United Nations. Montenegro highly values the
Rights Up Front action plan, as well as all pillars of
the responsibility to protect initiative. Bearing in
mind that conflicts over the past decades have almost
always started as human rights violations, the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, should
heighten its sensitivity to early warnings of potential
conflicts. Also, the United Nations system itself needs
to be improved through inclusive negotiations on the
main points of United Nations reform in order to make
it possible to better address crucial issues of peace and
security.

Seventy years after the adoption of the Charter of
the United Nations, we must realize that the problems
and challenges facing the world today require a
collective global response. No other international
organization enjoys the legitimacy and capacity to
unite the international community in common cause
to realize enduring solutions to conflicts and to ensure
sustainable peace. Therefore, let us work together
towards a world that will bring about peace, justice
and security. That is our task, our challenge and our
opportunity. Montenegro is committed to playing its
role in a constructive and responsible manner in pursuit
ofpeace and stability in all regions of the world. We are
convinced that multilateralism is the conditio sine qua
non for the challenges facing humanity today.
