The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Colombia.

I should like to begin by expressing my gratitude
to all of my colleagues for these two years during
which we have tried to contribute, with enthusiasm and
dedication, to the work of the Security Council. I
should like also to thank in particular the members of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States for
having placed their trust in Colombia throughout the
period 2001-2002.

This is an opportunity for the members of the
Council to reflect on the work that we have done in the
past year. Having come to know well the colleagues
who have already spoken and to appreciate their
abilities, those of their teams and, of course, their
dedication, and having shared with them their vision of
the Council - which I would like to endorse after
having heard their presentations - we would prefer on
this occasion to reflect on one single theme: to suggest
that the functions of the Council be adapted to the new
challenges that are facing it in the fulfilment of its
responsibilities.

We believe that in recent years the concept of
international peace and security has undergone a
fundamental transformation. Historically, the Council
has dealt with threats stemming from inter-State or
intra-State conflicts, as was the case during the cold
war and the post-cold-war period, respectively. It is
clear that the Security Council still defines many
threats to international peace and security on the basis
of these traditional international concepts.

Nevertheless, since the beginning of the new
millennium, an additional and very important step has
been taken in defining these threats, whose
implications we still have not fully grasped. Indeed, we
have included within this group of threats those of
global scope which, because of their nature, are not
limited to a specific territory or to the inhabitants
thereof. This has been the most notable consequence
that international terrorism has had for the concept of
security that is now being increasingly shaped by
Council decisions.

We can easily identify the cases in which this new
approach has been applied, even though our actions
sometimes give rise to doubts and involve a lack of
definition; this is something that the Council must
remedy if it wishes to be the ideal instrument for
addressing these threats.

Within these new global threats, we have
included the cases of 11 September and, more recently,
the terrorist attacks in Bali, Indonesia; the hostage-
taking in Moscow; and the attacks in Mombasa, Kenya,
against Kenyan and Israeli citizens. In other words, the
Council has gradually fallen into a case-by-case
management of the global threats posed by terrorist
acts, which could indicate its own inability to act.
Which cases of terrorism should be characterized as
threats to international peace and security, and which
should not? Is this categorization useful? Are we not
running the risk of become involved in very intensive
political discussions in specific cases on which there is
no consensus within the Security Council? Should such
a divisive issue be brought before the Council?

Everything seems to indicate that the Security
Council's ability to act in accordance with its
definitions of threats to international peace and security
is uneven. In inter-State conflicts, it has played, and
continues to play, a constructive, effective and
important role, as we saw recently with respect to the
conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia. In intra-State
conflicts, it has also played, and can play, a
constructive, effective and important role, as we saw
recently in the case of Sierra Leone. Both cases involve
a series of problems, many of them identified by the
Secretariat and also by the members of the Council.
But, in any case, a certain know-how exists that makes
it possible to accumulate experience and produce
results.

However, the Security Council has no experience
in managing global threats, and, what is more
worrisome, the little experience that it has acquired
seems to highlight its worst shortcomings as an
institution.

We feel that the Security Council should
thoroughly and systematically discuss its own ability to
perform its functions in the face of these global threats,
with at least the same intensity with which it discusses
its reaction to threats to international peace and
security that stem from inter-State or intra-State
conflicts.

However, discussions are not enough. The
Council must take strong and robust measures in order
to enhance and fine-tune its ability to react. The cost of
not doing would be to sacrifice the validity of
multilateralism as an instrument for responding to
international terrorism and to weaken the image of the
Council in the eyes of the peoples of the world, who
would see their own personal security jeopardized.

With respect to this item, we would like to stress
the urgency of revising the mandate set out in
resolution 1373 (2001), strengthening the universality
of resolution 1390 (2002), and exploring options to
create new instruments that would improve the
Council's capacity to respond.

In the light of global threats that are not confined
to a specific territory - as have been the ones that the
Council is accustomed to considering - the United
Nations must be more innovative, more sophisticated
and more professional.

The Secretariat, which largely coordinates the
implementation of Council decisions, must overcome
its shortcomings and help to work effective to combat
these new global threats to international peace and
security. This Organization must not be afraid to call
terrorism by its name. Leadership and ability must
come from New York, because the point of reference
must be here.

I should like to conclude with what is, perhaps, a
basic thought on the future of the Security Council. We
are ending our tenure as non-permanent members with
the absolute conviction that this body is crucial for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
precisely this characteristic that require that we
produce results.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

