Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful for the convening of today's
meeting and thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for sharing his assessment of the situation with respect
to United Nations peacekeeping with us.

Peacekeeping is a key instrument in the arsenal
of United Nations measures designed to support
international peace and security, resolve conflicts
and provide support for State-building at the initial
post-crisis stage. The increasingly complex character
of problems that are spawned by modern crises, the
growth in the number and the geographical scope
of conflict situations, the rapid political changes,
the presence of specific factors that lead to conflict,
including terrorism, crime, drug trafficking and other
transboundary challenges and threats - all of these
point to the need for a transformation of United Nations
peacekeeping and raise the issue of the need to enhance
its effectiveness.

However, in these difficult conditions, what has
not changed is the essence of peacekeeping, namely,
that there is no alternative to conflict resolution. It
is precisely this priority that the Secretary-General
established, and the High-Level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations reached the same conclusion
previously. It is not by chance that during today's
meeting the organizers of the debate suggested that
we focus on the need to enhance the effectiveness of
peacekeeping with an emphasis on the political aspects
of the peacekeeping missions' actions in the field.

We have to agree that the mandates of some
missions have been slow to adapt to new realities on
the ground. There is no doubt that there are questions
about the effectiveness of the work of the Secretariat on
planning the life cycle of missions or the cooperation
of missions with the authorities of the host country. It
is important to streamline the process of developing
an exit strategy and ensuring a smooth transition to
the post-conflict rebuilding stage, which would make
it possible not only to optimize expenditures but also
enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
and their impact.

Furthermore, we believe that it is unacceptable
to use the practice of having the Secretariat provide
requests with estimates for separate components of
peacekeeping operations without sufficient justification
for them. Recently, we have also seen the broad
artificial expansion of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations through the addition of non-core tasks. We
have often spoken about the harm of this practice, which
significantly reduces the effectiveness of missions.

Let us look at the example of the broadly interpreted
tasks of protecting civilians, monitoring human
rights, including gender issues, and preventing sexual
violence. Those functions are often entrusted to the
civilian staff of missions. Deploying and maintaining
such personnel is rather expensive. For example, with
regard to the Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, almost nearly every one of its components
has an expert on outreach to society. There are
approximately 30 such experts. Is that really necessary
or economically justified?

We are convinced that we should not burden
peacekeeping operations with difficultly achieved
tasks of a socially humanitarian character. Such factors
are not a threat to international peace and security, and
come under the purview of other specialized United
Nations bodies. It is important to have a carefully
balanced approach to dealing with human rights issues
in peacekeeping. We do not question the importance
of promoting and protecting human rights, but we
believe that delegating to United Nations peacekeeping
operations human rights functions that fall outside of
their field of expertise reduces the effectiveness of
achieving their primary goal, which is separating and
reconciling the conflicting sides and ultimately saving
lives.

It is the successful resolution of a conflict that
is the key precondition to improving human rights
situations and developing democratic institutions in a
specific country, rather than the converse. Excessive
attention given to human rights issues often leads to a
distorted understanding of the causes of crises and of
new challenges and threats, as well as the erroneous
interpretation of peacekeeping mission mandates, the
lack oftheir effectiveness and, on occasion, the resultant
hostility from host and troop-contributing countries.

There has been an increasing number ofproposals to

give peacekeeping missions multi-component mandates,
including peacebuilding tasks, above all promoting
security sector reform, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and support for the restoration of law-
enforcement bodies and the rule of law in general. We
believe that such tasks should be specifically targeted
to the specific causes of conflicts, thereby ensuring
that conflicts do not reignite. Peacekeeping personnel
cannot be used as a substitute for national authorities or
embedded into domestic political situations.

We believe that reducing financing for certain
peacekeeping operations should go hand-in-hand
with modifying their mandates, in particular with
regard to reducing their parallel non-core tasks that
only dilute peacekeeping efforts to address the root
causes of conflict. Unquestionably, no matter how the
transformation of peacekeeping unfolds, the critical
guidelines will be the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the basic principles of United
Nations peacekeeping - the consent of the host
country, impartiality and the non-use of force except
for self-defence or in order to implement the mandate
of the Security Council. Lately, those lements are
unfortunately increasingly being considered by some
countries almost as an obstacle to implementing
missions' mandates. We have heard ideas expressed
about the need for their flexible interpretation
depending on conditions on the ground. We reiterate,
once again, that that is unacceptable. We believe
that it is precisely those elements that guarantee the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. Every new or
emerging area of peacekeeping should strictly adhere
to those principles.

We also believe that it is important to warn
about attempts to artificially politicize the activity of
peacekeepers. We are seriously concerned about the
attempts to flexibly interpret the norms of international
humanitarian law, in particular as pertaining to the
protection of civilians in conditions of armed conflict.
Under no circumstances should Blue Helmets become
party to a conflict orjoin those parties. That is precisely
what would happen if the Security Council adopted
certain proposals made by Member States entertaining
the possible use of force by peacekeepers against
host States.

Any action allegedly guided by the need to protect
the civilian population is unacceptable if it is actually
intended to achieve narrow express geopolitical aims,
especially if such an action is against the legitimate
authorities of sovereign States. As has been illustrated
by past experience, that leads to more civilian victims.
We do not support the view that has often been
expressed that the protection of civilians is the goal in
itself of peacekeeping operations in general. I would
like to recall once again that the need to protect civilians

is a consequence of conflict and not the cause of a
conflict. Effectively ensuring the security of civilians
can be achieved only by dealing with the root causes
of conflict. Supporting and protecting civilians can be
only a temporary measure so as to provide time to find
a political and diplomatic solution.

Moreover, we are concerned about certain questions
in the concept paper (S/2017/287, annex) with regard
to the possibility of missions carrying out their work
without the strategic consent of the host country. We
believe that that is inappropriate as it runs contrary to
one of the basic inviolable principles of peacekeeping,
which cannot be revised. At the same time, the success
of United Nations peacekeeping operations depends
directly on building constructive and mutually
respectful relations with the host country and other
national actors. That kind of cooperation must not be
imposed or artificial. It must be based on the natural
wish of the host country to cooperate, and that is a
direct consequence of strengthening trust in the work
of the mission and its components.
We should not forget that Governments bear the
main responsibility for ensuring the security of their
people, including security against terrorist attacks.
They also bear the main responsibility for establishing
the political process, ensuring development and dealing
with the root causes of conflict. The international
community should provide support to local and regional
efforts, but it should provide substitutes for them.

It is difficult not to agree that the current
challenges and threats that have changed the character
of conflicts require a corresponding adaptability from
the Organization. Competent and thorough political and
mediation efforts should be a priority in peacekeeping
activities. The history of conflicts in various regions
of the world has shown that such efforts help address
the root causes of conflicts rather than merely treat
their symptoms. Otherwise, crises will resurface after
a brief pause. United Nations peacekeeping missions
and the Blue Helmets should be deployed in places in
which they can effectively help while remaining neutral
actors and, at the same time, not undertaking functions
that fall outside their field of expertise. In order to
enhance the effectiveness of peacekeepers in fulfilling
their mandates, we should not consider various generic
initiatives but, rather, set realistic and clear goals for
Blue Helmets and focus on the specific causes and the
core problems that are related to every conflict.

