Mr. Hunningstad (Norway): My delegation would
like to congratulate the presidency and the Council on
adopting resolution 1260 (1999) last Friday. This is proof
of Namibia's wise guidance of the Council and the ability
of the Council to respond to a conflict of grave
consequences - not only for a member country, Sierra
Leone, but for the thousands of innocents caught in the
conflict, particularly children. We consider the resolution,
in particular paragraphs 6 and 16, an important example of
how the rights of children in armed conflict, their protection
and rehabilitation, can be addressed in dealing with specific
conflicts. This manifestation of the Council's will and
ability to take the interests and rights of children explicitly
into account in a peace settlement process bodes well for
our future endeavours in this field.

I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, for his informative briefing. His
description of the current situation is the best example of
the need for increased awareness and urgent action to
alleviate the unacceptable situation in which a large number
of children are forced to live. We therefore welcome the
Security Council's again putting this important issue on its
agenda. We take this as an indication that the protection
and welfare of children affected by conflict is becoming a
continuing concern of the Council. We also hope that the
Council's deliberations can lead to agreement on concrete
recommendations to improve the current situation.

Let me briefly outline some of the elements my
Government believes are of key importance in this regard.

States have the primary responsibility to protect the
rights and well-being of children. In those cases where the
national legal framework and measures are inadequate,
States have the responsibility to ensure that these
inadequacies are addressed, and that the protection and
welfare of children are given priority in economic and
social policies.

International law has been developed, and if it is
adhered to it can go a long way towards protecting the
basic rights of children in armed conflict. This includes
the human rights instruments, the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols. It is also
important that the Statute establishing the International
Criminal Court leaves no doubt that those who conscript
or enlist children under the age of 15 into national armed
forces or have them participate actively in hostilities may
be punished as war criminals. Norway supported the 1998
adoption of that important new legal instrument. An
important first step in alleviating the plight of children in
armed conflict is for all States to comply with and respect
the obligations entered into under these instruments.

The practice of hiring children as soldiers - with its
related killing and maiming, sexual abuse and abductions
of children, not to mention the secondary effects for the
victims - is an indefensible activity which must be
stopped. All parties to conflicts must also respect
international humanitarian law, allowing unrestricted
access for humanitarian personnel to affected populations.
They must refrain from deliberately targeting civilians as
part of their strategies and observe internationally
accepted norms and standards. Special measures should
be taken to protect the girl child from sexual and other
abuse and gender-based violence.

While civilians - children being the most
vulnerable among them - are increasingly victims of
armed conflicts, peace negotiations and settlements often
do not specifically address the situation of children.
Treating the needs of children affected by armed conflicts
as an afterthought may not only constitute a breach of
their rights, but may also contribute to prolonging the
difficult return to a normal post-conflict situation. The
needs of children should therefore be explicitly and
adequately addressed in peace negotiations and treaties.

The rights and needs of children should also be
squarely addressed in the mandates and activities of
peacekeeping operations led by the United Nations.

Anti-personnel mines and small arms constitute
major difficulties in transitional post-conflict situations,
contributing to destabilization and further suffering for

 

civilians - children not least among them. The anti-
personnel landmine treaty constitutes a milestone in
combating the use and stockpiling of such mines, and is a
key basis for further action regarding mines. States should
be encouraged to ratify the treaty and adhere to its
provisions. There are also a number of international and
regional efforts under way to address the problems of small
arms. Norway takes an active part in these efforts. We
welcome the declaration of the Foreign Ministers of the
Economic Community of West African States, made at their
meeting in March, in Bamako, on child soldiers, as well as
the plan of action for the West African moratorium on
small arms. We believe these and other initiatives and
measures will lead to concrete results to curb the excessive
accumulation of these weapons.

Norway strongly supports the role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict as advocate for the rights of children
affected by armed conflict. We welcome the elaboration of
programmes of action for the Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sierra
Leone, Colombia and Burundi that build on the
commitments from the parties elicited by the Special
Representative. The success of these and other programmes
will to a large extent, however, depend upon support from
and close collaboration among United Nations
organizations, Governments and non-governmental
organizations. In particular, it bears stressing that the
various relevant United Nations institutions - the Special
Representative, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Development Programme, to
name a few - need to cooperate and coordinate in carrying
out their respective roles and activities in order to be as
effective in responding to the needs of children as the
situation requires.

We welcome the initiative to discuss the situation of
children in armed conflict in the Council. The protection
and welfare of children affected by conflict deserves to be
a permanent item on the Council's agenda. We hope that
further developments with regard to effective measures to
address the current situation, including those highlighted in
this statement, can be reviewed by the Council at an
appropriate future meeting.

