The President: I thank the representative of Brazil for
the kind words he addressed to me.

There are a number of speakers remaining. In view of
the lateness of the hour, and with the concurrence of the
members of the Security Council, I intend to suspend the
meeting now. The Council will resume its consideration of
the item on its agenda at 3.30 this afternoon.

The meeting was suspended at 1.25 pm. and resumed
at 3.45 pm.

The President: With the permission of Council
members, I should like to make the following information
known.

This morning, speaking in my national capacity, I
announced that I would be speaking with Mr. Savimbi by
telephone today. I spoke to him at around 2 pm. this
afternoon, and I wanted to brief members of the Council
and other representatives here on that conversation.

I expressed to Mr. Savimbi my nation's concern that
the quartering process was seriously behind schedule and
that UNITA would not be able to honour its commitment
to quarter 16,500 troops by 8 February. I told him that we
were in the middle of a public meeting on the subject of
Angola and that the speakers that had already spoken had
mentioned the importance of the process's going forward
and had used the 16,500 number.

Mr. Savimbi acknowledged that the quartering was
behind schedule, but stated that he was working around
the clock to fulfil his commitment. He provided the
following figures on soldiers quartered as of today. These
are Mr. Savimbi's figures and we will probably have to
verify them through United Nations sources. In the south,
at Vila Nova, 3,902 have been quartered; at Lunduimbale,
2,139; in the north, at Negage, 843; and at Quibaxe, 250.
He claimed that there would be 5,000 each in Vila Nova
and Lunduimbale by Thursday. He also said that there
would be 4,000 troops quartered in Negage and 1,500 in
Quibaxe by Thursday, 8 February. If completed, this
would mean that 14,500 troops would be quartered by
Thursday. The remaining balance of 2,000 troops would
be quartered by Saturday, 10 February, he said.

He claimed that the northern quartering sites
presented certain difficulties due to great distances.

I also reminded Mr. Savimbi that the troops were
required to bring their weapons. We had reports that
troops were arriving without weapons. Mr. Savimbi
replied that the UNITA troops were bringing their
weapons.

He also confirmed that there has been at least one
instance in which UNAVEM. had sent transport for
UNITA troops, but when the transport arrived the UNITA
troops were not at the appointed location. This, by the
way, was a point raised yesterday at the troop
contributors' meeting; I asked him about it, and he agreed
that there had been a lack of communication from the
UNITA troops on this point.

I told him that it was my sense that this public
meeting of the Security Council was a sign that the
international community was following developments very
closely.

He closed by saying to me that he was aware of his
commitment and felt personally responsible for ensuring
that it was fulfilled.

We have another telephone call scheduled for
Thursday.

 

I think that it is important for him to know that we
care deeply about the numbers and that we are following
them very closely.

I now resume my role as President of the Security
Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Lesotho. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement now.


