Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - as well as the associated
countries of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey and the
European Free Trade Association countries of Iceland
and Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.

First, the European Union would like once again
to thank Mr. Bernard Kouchner for the remarkable
work he has carried out over the past years in difficult
circumstances, and to pledge our full support to Mr.
Hans Haekkerup, the new Special Representative. I
would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for
his rich bilingual report here today.

The European Union welcomes the progress made
in Kosovo in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) and fully supports the continued efforts of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
establish democratic, self-governing institutions in
Kosovo in order to provide substantial autonomy for
the people of Kosovo in accordance with that
resolution.

The European Union also supports the efforts
being made to increase dialogue and cooperation
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the relevant
institutions of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and
welcomes the democratic progress achieved in that
country and in Serbia, most recently through the
victory of the democratic forces in elections held in
December. The European Union expects that this
progress will enable essential political, economic and
social reforms to be carried out within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, which could also contribute to
reducing tensions in Kosovo and the Presevo area of
southern Serbia.

In this respect, the European Union reiterates its
call on the Yugoslav and Serb authorities to find the
appropriate legal channels for the speedy release of all
Kosovo Albanian prisoners held on political grounds.
Such a release could also constitute an important step
towards the beginning of a dialogue between the
representatives of Kosovo and Belgrade.

Action to combat violence and enhance the
security situation for everyone in Kosovo should
remain a top priority for UNMIK and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR). It is deplorable that men, women and children
in Kosovo continue to be killed because of their ethnic
background and that moderate opinions expressed by
politically engaged Kosovars can be dangerous to their
safety.

The European Union vigorously condemns the
use of violence, extremism and any act that makes
coexistence among communities more difficult and that
adversely affects regional stability. In this context, the
EU encourages further confidence-building measures
between the different ethnic communities in Kosovo
and fully supports the right of all displaced people
from Kosovo to return to their homes in peace, security
and dignity.

An important aspect of enhancing the security
situation in Kosovo is reducing the overall level of
criminality and enforcing respect for the rule of law. To
this end, more than 800 civilian police, as well as
judges and prosecutors, from European Union member
States are serving in Kosovo. The EU also supports the
work of the Kosovo Police Service School to train local
police and police trainers. Furthermore, EU member
States remain the largest troop contributors to KFOR,
which continues to play a crucial role in maintaining
stability and security in Kosovo.

Another priority for the European Union is to
contribute to the reconstruction and economic
development of Kosovo. The EU is by far the single
largest donor providing assistance to Kosovo and is at
the forefront of the reconstruction effort. In this regard,
the European Union believes that it is important to
continue to create favourable conditions for the
economic development of Kosovo through the
establishment of viable and efficient economic
structures, including in the fiscal area.

The European Union strongly condemns the
violent action by ethnic Albanian armed groups in the
Presevo area of southern Serbia and reiterates the call
expressed in the statement of the President of the
Security Council of 19 December 2000 for an
immediate and complete cessation of violence in this
area. The EU calls upon all involved to exercise
maximum restraint and to resolve any differences
exclusively through peaceful dialogue. The European
Union welcomes specific measures taken by KFOR and
UNMIK to address the problem, including increased
surveillance of the administrative boundary.

The European Union also welcomes the
commitment of the Yugoslav authorities to respect the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
and the military-technical Agreement and encourages
the efforts to initiate confidence-building measures in
order to stabilize the situation in the area.

In order to further contribute to stabilizing the
situation, the European Union is currently undertaking
efforts to increase its monitoring presence in the
affected area.

