Mr. Briens (France): I thank Mr. Vuk Jeremie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, for
joining us today. I also welcome the Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, and thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/514).

I should like to make three points. Northern
Kosovo experienced tensions and violence a few
weeks, which was addressed in an emergency meeting
of the Security Council. Tensions have abated, but such
incidents remind us that the international community
must remain very alert and of the importance of
dialogue between the parties. In that respect, I
welcome the activities of the Kosovo Force and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) that helped to restore calm and the free
movement of people through sensitive border crossings
between Serbia and Kosovo. Hasty or unilateral actions
should be avoided while a common solution is sought
through dialogue. There is no place for violence, which
should be firmly condemned by the political authorities
on both sides, who must take all measures necessary to
maintain the calm.

Dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo in the
context of the European Union has already borne fruit,
which must now be implemented. The next meeting
will take place in several days. We support this process
and call on Serbia and Kosovo to return to the
negotiating table in a constructive spirit. We hope that
these discussions, in addition to improving the daily
lives of the population, will strengthen trust between
the parties and contribute to the European prospects of
both countries, which must demonstrate a spirit of
compromise and creativity.

Such dialogue requires a gradual increase of
mutual trust. In this respect, we commend the
deployment by the European Union of a task force of
magistrates and investigators to look into allegations of
trafficking in human organs set out in the report of the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe that
was made public in 2010. The task force's activities
will be based on the important work already
undertaken by EULEX in the framework of a
preliminary investigation that began on 27 January.
The willingness of the Serbian and Albanian authorities
of Kosovo to cooperate fully with EULEX should be
stressed. We call on all States concerned to continue
their cooperation with the Mission. The investigation
should be undertaken in an atmosphere of calm and a
spirit of dialogue, and not should not be exploited for
ulterior motives.

The international presence remains a motor of
stabilization. The European Union, the United Nations
and NATO are implementing their respective mandates
to move Kosovo towards sustainable stability and rule
of law. France hails the work of Mr. Lamberto Zannier
as Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo for some three years.

EULEX plays a crucial in helping the Kosovo
authorities to fight corruption and organized crime,
although it is the primary responsibility of
Governments to adopt relevant policies. The European
Union is also preparing to strengthen its presence with
the appointment of a single representative who will act
both as special representative of the European Union
and as head of its Kosovo office, and will shortly
assume his functions.

France stands with Kosovo and all States of the
region in helping to move them towards European
standards and European Union membership.

