Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): At the outset, I
have the pleasant duty, on behalf of the Commission of
the African Union and its Chairperson, Mr. Alpha
Oumar Konare, to extend our warm gratitude to the
President of the Security Council for his country's
initiative to bring us together at an open debate of the
Council to discuss the issue of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations in the
stabilization process. I would like to thank him in
particular for kindly having involved the Commission
of the African Union in this debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and all others who have
contributed to promoting our consideration of this
extremely important subject at the heart of the
partnership for peace, which we must continue to make
a reality.

This debate began several years ago as a result of
the ongoing scourge of conflict, in order to take into
account the emergence of new regional players and of
their growing role in advancing and supporting the
maintenance of peace and security. For the African
Union, this debate is all the more relevant because it is
taking place after the establishment of its Peace and
Security Council, which is a continental system for
collective security.

The Protocol relating to the establishment of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
defines the relation of the Council with the Security
Council of the United Nations. It also reaffirms the
Security Council's primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Under
the Protocol, the Peace and Security Council and the
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union
must maintain ongoing and close relations with the
Security Council and its African members, as well as
with the Secretary-General, inter alia through periodic
meetings and regular consultations. Now that the Peace
and Security Council is functioning, it must establish
the practical modalities for those relations, including
the format and periodicity of the meetings to be held. I
would like to emphasize the crucial role that the
African members of the Security Council - in
particular those holding seats in the Peace and Security
Council - can play in strengthening that relationship.

But the debate regarding the relationship between
the United Nations and the Security Council on the one
hand, and the African Union as a continental
organization and its Peace and Security Council on the
other, cannot be separate from other debates of equal
concern to us as regards the relationship between the
continental organization and regional African
mechanisms. In that regard, it should be emphasized
that article 16 of the Protocol of the Peace and Security
Council stipulates that regional African mechanisms
are an integral part of the basic security architecture of
the Union, which has the primary responsibility for
promoting, security and stability in Africa. The spirit
of article 16 also recalls Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. We therefore have as many lessons
to learn from cooperation between the Security Council
and the African Union as we do from cooperation
between the African Union and regional African
mechanisms. Under article 16 of the Protocol, there are
also plans for drawing up a memorandum of
understanding between the African Union Commission
and regional African mechanisms.

Allow me to make a few comments and
suggestions on the subject before the Council.

It seems to me that there is a need at the outset to
reaffirm our dedication to the collective security
system of the United Nations and to the Security
Council, which must continue to bear primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. However, in order to continue to
shoulder that global responsibility, the Security
Council must better adapt to meet the aspirations and
concerns of today's world. It should also be noted that
the United Nations is not always in a position to
address every crisis situation. In some situations in the
past, the United Nations - and the international
community as a whole, including Africa - have not
been able to meet the challenge of peace in Africa. In
other, more recent cases, such as in Burundi, the United
Nations did not seem ready to intervene, given the lack
of a peace to keep. An African peacekeeping mission
had to be deployed, with great difficulty, under the
aegis of the African Union until the Security Council
decided to authorize the deployment of a United
Nations operation, which it ultimately did. That
scenario could be repeated in the future. The question
therefore arises as to the extent to which the Security
Council can authorize logistical and financial support
for such operations as are deployed under its mandate
or with its agreement, endorsement or backing.

No doubt, the spread of conflicts and crises, with
all their complexities, do not permit the Security
Council alone to cope with all challenges to
international peace and security. Continental and
regional arrangements must assume their share of
responsibility within the framework of subsidiarity.
The principle of subsidiarity must also be accompanied
by the principles of solidarity and complementarity.
Thus, when a regional organization undertakes efforts
to establish or maintain peace, it must be able to
benefit from the political, financial and logistical
support of the continent and of the international
community as a whole. However, such solidarity
requires a high level of information exchange.

There is also a need to take into account the
comparative advantages of the various organizations
involved in the promotion of peace and security. Action
begun by a regional organization may thus offer
definite comparative advantages. I am thinking in
particular of the efforts undertaken to date by the
African Union in Darfur, as well as those of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in the
Naivasha peace process, which has the very strong
support of the international community.

In addition, in the interaction between the United
Nations and regional organizations, preference should
be given to the regional approach to peace and security
problems, whether conflicts or issues linked to the
spread of small arms and light weapons or terrorism.
The joint United Nations-African Union initiative to
hold a conference devoted to the Great Lakes region, as
well as the United Nations approach shared by the
Economic Community of West African States with
regard to the West African region, both merit strong
support. Finally, it seems to me important to emphasize
the need to better address the challenge of post-conflict
reconstruction through cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the readiness
of the Commission of the African Union to build,
together with the United Nations and regional African
organizations, cooperative relations that better support
the determination of the peoples and the leaders of
Africa to overcome the challenges of peace and
security.

