Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like, first of all, to express my Government's
condolences in connection with the loss of life and the
other consequences of today's earthquake, which struck
the Baghlan region of Afghanistan, in particular the
city of Nahrin.

I would like to express my Government's
satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, presiding over this
meeting of the Security Council. Not only does your
presence bear witness to your interest in the situation in
Afghanistan, but it is a clear demonstration of the
serious approach and sense of responsibility of your
Government in participating in the work of the Security
Council.

My Government would also like to associate
itself with the satisfaction expressed by other members
of the Council about the progress that has been made in
recent months in the reconstruction effort in
Afghanistan, and we commend all of those who have
participated actively in that endeavour.

My Government believes, however, that the
message delivered by Ms. Louise Frechette contained a
warning that we must heed. This is no time for
complacency, because the task ahead of the
international community and, in particular, the task that
lies ahead for the Afghan people, is extremely difficult
and complex. In this regard, two basic criteria must be
taken into account. The first is that the efforts of the
international community must be sustained. Past
experience in the case of Afghanistan shows that any
loss of sustained effort can give rise to a new cycle of
problems, which the international community
afterwards bemoans. The Security Council must thus
ensure that the reconstruction effort under way in
Afghanistan represents a commitment that must be
fulfilled - an effort that will involve tasks being
accomplished over time in a sustained fashion.

Secondly, my country believes that the task of
reconstructing Afghanistan is fundamentally one of
coordination among all international efforts by all the
nations and organizations that have expressed their
readiness to become involved. In this connection, we
fully agree with the comments made earlier by Ms.
Frechette in identifying four major challenges that
must immediately be met in a coordinated and
concerted way. The first is, undoubtedly, the political
integration of Afghanistan through the Loya Jirga
process. We believe this to be the most vital task, on
which the success of all the other tasks depends.
Nothing can replace the will of the Afghan people
themselves in the reconstruction of their country, and
nothing can help them to express their will better than a
Government in which everyone can participate - a
representative Government with the capacity to ensure
that the rule of law prevails throughout Afghan
territory.

Undoubtedly, the second topic, which other
members of the Council have already referred to, is
security in the country. The immediate task is to
combine activities to demobilize combatants, form a
new Afghan military force that represents the national
interests, and form a national police whose peace-
building efforts, my country wishes to emphasize,
should have as one goal the eradication of the
production and trafficking of narcotics. The production
of drugs greatly underlies much of the violence and the
sources of power in the interior of Afghanistan, and we
must make an effort not to lose sight of the issue of
combating the production and trafficking of narcotics
in Afghanistan.

Thirdly, we believe that it is essential to pay due
attention to humanitarian issues and not sidestep them.
Giving appropriate attention to refugees and displaced
persons will be a prerequisite for the stabilization of
the country and the advancement of the Loya Jirga
political process. It is fundamental that the Afghans
recover control over their own communities and that
they rebuild those communities in peace and achieve
reconstruction on that basis. This must be done with
full respect for human rights, promoting civil rights
and freedoms in Afghanistan, including the equality of
women, which is a very important element. We believe
that many difficulties lie ahead in the achievement of
these goals, and unfortunately there will be many
causes of frustration in the future.

Finally, we believe that all these measures must
also be part of great sustained efforts at economic and
social development through the appropriate use of
resources and the creation of national capacities in
order to make proper use of these resources.

All of these are fundamental tasks that are, above
all, in the hands of the Afghans themselves. I
emphasize that the international community cannot in
any way replace the will and the commitment of the
Afghan people regarding their own political process
and the reconstruction of their country. It is up to the
international community to motivate, support and lend
coherence and content to the efforts of the Afghan
people.

In this regard, the United Nations Mission - for
which a concrete proposal has already been made to us
by the Secretariat, to be reflected in a resolution that,
as the Ambassador of France has pointed out, is now
being prepared - must be designed with a very clear
idea of combining efforts and producing a real model
partnership among all the many agencies of the United
Nations system that are participating in the task of
reconstructing Afghanistan, so that in the short term
their work can be made more effective. That Mission
must also be inspired by the capacity and the skill of
the international community to transfer, as soon as
possible, all the development responsibilities to the
Afghan institutions that emerge as part of the economic
and social consolidation process. We hope that the
resolution being drafted will adequately reflect the
mandate for achieving these objectives.

May I conclude by emphasizing once again that
the reconstruction of Afghanistan will not be at all
easy. The present momentum augurs well. The Security
Council, therefore, must see to it that that momentum
is maintained.

