Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to thank
Ambassadors Cesar Mayoral, Ellen Loj and Peter
Burian for their briefings and for their able work
regarding, respectively, the activities of the 1267
Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
1540 Committee. The delegation of Brazil sees this
open meeting as an enriching experience that will
ensure synergy in the functioning of the various
Security Council Committees.

My delegation commends the genuine effort
made by the 1267 Committee in gathering a
considerable amount of information, mostly from
sources other than the direct processing of Member
States' reports. These inputs should allow for a more
thorough understanding of the ongoing combat against
Al-Qaida-related terrorism as well as the identification
of key mechanisms to proceed in this fight, including
the fine-tuning of sanctions when applicable.

In addition, we believe that further steps must be
taken to increase cooperation between the Committee
and Interpol in order to enhance the effectiveness of
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime. Given the
similarities between the travel controls applied by
Interpol and those sought by the Committee as regards
the travel ban, there seem to be ample opportunities to
make use of Interpol's very efficient information-
sharing mechanisms.

Brazil recognizes that the efforts made by the
Chairman to improve dialogue with Member States,
including through visits to selected countries, are of
great relevance to the work of the Committee. It is also
worth pointing out that the conclusion of the revision
of the draft guidelines of the 1267 Committee ensured
the long-overdue update of the Committee's task and
working methods. Special attention should continue to
be paid to the issues of listing and delisting, including
of legal entities.

The importance of the contribution of the
Committee in combating the threat of terrorism
represented by Al-Qaida is directly related to the
international community's perception of its work. A
renewed effort to incorporate the recommendations put
forward by States is, in our View, the best way to
ensure the maximum effectiveness of sanctions.

As to the CTC, my delegation believes that, as
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED)
has been formally declared operational and the Council
has concluded a comprehensive review of its work, the
CTED will be in a better position to carry out its
ambitious work programme under the policy guidance
of the plenary of the CTC.

It is our view that the CTED should continue to
focus its attention on identifying States' technical
assistance needs and facilitating the provision of such
assistance, with a view to enhancing Member States'
capacity to deal with the threats posed by terrorism.

Brokering assistance to States in areas related to
institution-building is one of the most efficient ways to
counter the scourge of terrorism. Member States should
have access to that type of cooperation on a voluntary
basis and in accordance with their real needs. Potential
areas for technical assistance should be identified by
mutual agreement through increased dialogue with
Member States.

After the dreadful terrorist acts of 11 September
2001, the United Nations has been enhancing its
activities in the field of counter-terrorism. This has
resulted in a legislative activity that concerns us all. In
accordance with the United Nations Charter, the
General Assembly is the only organ with universal
representation that has the competence to make
recommendations with regard to general principles of
cooperation in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The Committee's work should be in line
with that provision, including through the
identification of best practices in various areas related
to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Best
practices are not, however, treaties. They are neither
binding nor mandatory. The Committee should be
extremely careful not to stray into areas that belong to
the exclusive domain of Member States.

Another important issue on the CTC agenda is the
incorporation of the human rights perspective while
countering terrorism. Despite the fact that the CTED
mandate does not include a monitoring role in this
field, it is important that its work actually contribute to
strengthening the observance of human rights
standards. In our view, General Assembly resolution
59/191, entitled "Protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism",
which was adopted by consensus, should be a primary
reference for the Directorate's work in this area.

As regards the 1540 Committee, our delegation is
pleased to note that, with the valuable support of the
group of experts, the Committee, under the leadership
of Ambassador Burian, concluded the examination of
the first round of national reports submitted by
Member States. This is a most welcome achievement.
We continue, on the other hand, to encourage those
States that have not yet done so to present their first
report as soon as possible. The Committee should seek
ways to assist countries that are willing to report but
are, for technical reasons, unable to do so.

I would like to reiterate that Brazil is ready to
provide technical assistance, as appropriate, to States
in the Latin American and Caribbean region and to
other developing countries lacking the legal or
regulatory infrastructure and implementation
experience required to apply the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004).

The Committee has already begun considering
the responses to its requests for additional information.
This exercise will certainly allow the Committee to
achieve a full, comprehensive picture of the state of
worldwide implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
It will also serve as the basis for its final report, to be
submitted to the Council by April 2006. Once the
present mandate of the 1540 Committee is concluded,
there will be important lessons for the wide
membership to consider, and the General Assembly
will certainly benefit from the work accomplished. In
this context, we recognize that there is a clear
difference between the obligations encompassed in
resolution 1540 (2004) and the mandate of the
Committee. We continue to believe that extension of
the 1540 Committee's mandate should be avoided, as it
deals with areas within the competence of the General
Assembly.

Terrorism continues to be a major threat to
international peace and security. The international
community is indeed aware of that challenge, as
reflected through the work of the General Assembly
and of the Security Council over the last years. In
parallel with the important activities of the Council on
the issue, States should continue to focus on the need
to better explore other mechanisms of international
cooperation for the promotion of the fight against
terrorism. The full use of existing mechanisms could
further contribute to our common effort.

