I thank the Dominican Republic presidency of the Security Council for organizing this open video-teleconference. I also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. I echo the sentiments of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth and the other young briefers. Their concerns and aspirations must be taken into due consideration by us. Today's meeting comes at a time when the whole world is fighting against the dreadful coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Many young medical professionals, emergency personnel, peacekeepers and peacebuilders are at the forefront of this battle. Yet many others are stranded in their homes, passing through an uncertain time. The pandemic has far-reaching impacts on our young generation. We must therefore pay heed to their voices with regard to overcoming the crisis and reversing its potential adverse impacts on our peace and development gains. We need to invest more to help them to adapt to new situations and to be part of the solution. Bangladesh welcomes the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015). We consider the subsequent progress study, entitled "The missing peace: independent progress study on youth and peace and security" (see S/2018/86), and its follow-up resolution 2419 (2018) to be important contributions to the youth, peace and security discourse. They helped to put the youth, peace and security agenda on a truly multidimensional and forward-looking trajectory. We also welcome the first-ever report of the Secretary- General on the agenda (S/2020/167). Its recommendations provide a comprehensive framework for promoting the potential role of young people as active agents of building and sustaining peace. It is crucial that young people all over the world have the opportunity to unleash their positive energy and realize their potential to create a sustainable and peaceful world. To that end, peace and development actors must work hand in hand, building on the momentum of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. As a fairly young country, Bangladesh will enjoy a demographic dividend from its large youth population until 2035. They carry forward the proud legacy of earlier generations of young people who played a leading role in our nation's independence and democratic struggles and now play in our strides towards peace and development through their participation in nation-building efforts. We are working to harness those historical and demographic dividends into development dividends. We are making policy interventions to tap into the immense source of transformative energy of our young women and men and to turn them into true agents of change. Our Honourable Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina, has launched the vision of an inclusive, knowledge-driven economy, under the slogan "Digital Bangladesh", where young people are the foot soldiers. Our Youth Development Policy 2017 exemplifies our efforts not to leave any young person behind. The policy upholds our constitutional provisions to ensure rights, justice and equity for all young people. We actively encourage a whole-of-society approach to inculcate in young people the moral and ethical values of human dignity, pluralism, diversity and non- violence. We have been actively working towards greater inclusion of the voices of young people in major policy debates, as well as involving them in the planning and implementation of our national development plans, including the Sustainable Development Goals. The new generation of leadership occupies a greater space both in Government and the private sector. We have already started receiving rich dividends from such multilayered initiatives. Our entrepreneurial young generation is leading in e-commerce and e-business alleviating unemployment issues and social frustration. In crises and calamities, they have always been at the forefront through spontaneous engagements and left their mark. During the COVID-19 pandemic, for example, they have been contributing in many ways, starting from innovative digital tools and ideas for tracing infections to raising awareness at the community level. Going forward, we wish to work more closely with the international community and the United Nations in implementing Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy on Youth in alignment with our national priorities. We also hope to spearhead further dialogue involving young people around implementing the youth, peace and security agenda. We look forward to drawing up a comprehensive national action plan on youth, peace and security. Investment in the youth, peace and security agenda makes eminent sense from all considerations. The key challenges faced by our youth today are not necessarily unique to any particular context, but they have global ramifications. Keeping that in mind, we would like to underscore the following specific points. First, the youth, peace and security agenda should be used to develop stronger narratives to change the general mindset about the youth's potential to contribute to peacebuilding, to support and recognize their role in preventing conflict and sustaining peace, and to restore their trust in Governments and multilateral systems. For that, we underscore the importance of adequate financing for national and local- level initiatives aimed at amplifying the participation of the youth in peace processes. Second, we must institutionalize the involvement of young people in the promotion of a culture of peace, and thereby promote tolerance and intercultural and interreligious dialogue within and across societies. We also need to use them as agents to tackle stereotypes and to counter hate speech and xenophobia sweeping the globe. Third, we must utilize the technical savviness of young people and provide them with some alternative spaces for engagement through youth associations and networks. That would allow them to guide decision-making and ensure their overall inclusion. For that, we need to empower young people through the promotion of media and information literacy, as well as through constructive social media engagement. Fourth, young men and women remain vulnerable to violent extremist narratives that can lead them to the path of radicalization and terrorism. They are also easy prey to organized crime networks. That is particularly worrying in conflict situations and humanitarian crises, as we are experiencing around the world. We need to engage young role models to dissuade them. We also need to develop practical ways at the global, national and community levels to include the youth in the development of relevant programmes and initiatives aimed at preventing terrorism and violent extremism. Fifth, quality, inclusive and transformative education can turn our youth into truly global citizens, help shape global discourses, foster their critical thinking and provide them with skill sets for building social cohesion as well as civic and economic engagement. We must ensure them affordable access to such type of education. Sixth, with the right environment and tools, young people can indeed prove to be a force for conflict prevention and sustaining peace to reckon with, even in the most difficult situations. As a major troop- and police-contributing country, we have experienced how the young people among our troops and police continue to make a difference in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Seventh, the youth, peace and security and women, peace and security agendas have many essential common threads. They need to reinforce each other in their efforts to overcome the traditional gender norms and practices, which have a disproportionate impact on the potential of young women in many contexts across the world. In that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission and Peacebuilding Fund have demonstrated some useful precedents and results, such as the Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative. We need more structured engagements for sharing good practices among United Nations agencies and national Governments in that respect. Eighth, we need to collect and analyse age-disaggregated data to yield stronger evidence-based policy interventions, build institutional capacity for the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda and reduce structural barriers to youth participation. Finally, the COVID-19 crisis has truly demonstrated the digital transformation that we have gone through during the past couple of decades. In developed parts of the world, the digital connectivity is helping immensely to maintain business continuity during this difficult time. Yet, in many other parts of the world, Internet connectivity and digital platforms still remain a faraway thing. We need to work together to eliminate this digital divide, particularly among the youth. We must ensure equal opportunities for the youth from every corner of the world so that they can thrive together.
