Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to commend Your
Excellency for convening this briefing in order to
discuss the very important topic of intercultural
dialogue for peace and security.

In an increasingly globalized world, different
nations and civilizations live together and interact with
each other. Therefore, intercultural dialogue is a
permanent process with worldwide participation at all
levels and should be placed at the top of the political
agenda. At the same time, cultural diversity has
become one of the major political challenges to modern
democracies, citizenship, pluralism, social cohesion
and, above all, peace and stability among nations.
Hence, Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the view that
intercultural dialogue is one of the key issues of our
time.

History has shaped Europe as a multicultural,
multi-ethnic and multireligious continent. At the same
time, new realities such as migration and globalization
are expected to enrich its physiognomy, making it more
open, deeply democratic and more multicultural. This
pertains also to my country. The Balkans, as an area
characterized by countries that share many historic
events, with a richness of cultural and religious
diversity, are facing challenges and difficulties that
require a comprehensive response.
Alienation, misconceptions, exclusion,
marginalization and lack of knowledge about the
culture, traditions, beliefs and history of others
represent a serious threat and challenge to peaceful and
good relations among peoples and nations. Stereotypes
regarding religions and civilizations may have serious
political implications and create an atmosphere of
tension which can erupt into acts of violence, as we
have witnessed in many situations.

We are of the belief that intercultural and
interreligious dialogue can play an increasingly
important role in post-conflict societies, advancing
regional cooperation and solving some difficulties. It
can also be a useful tool of preventive diplomacy
aiming to defuse tensions, support mediation and
promote and encourage understanding.

Yet multiculturalism should not be defined
simply as a multitude of cultures with equal status, but
as a system based on common values and the
development of peace. Interculturality refers to a
constant interaction between cultures in the spirit of
building bridges among peoples. In that regard,
reinforcing intercultural dialogue, underlining shared
values and promoting the settlement of disputes by
peaceful means should be given the utmost priority.
Furthermore, the promotion of dialogue among various
cultures, on the basis of tolerance and respect for
diversity, can result in the reduction of tensions and
contribute to international peace and security.

Bosnia and Herzegovina considers that
international initiatives in the field of international and
intercultural dialogue, encompassing those carried out
by the United Nations, including the Alliance of
Civilizations, have beneficial effects and should be
widely promoted. In December 2009, Bosnia and
Herzegovina hosted a conference under the banner of
the Alliance of Civilizations. On that occasion, a
Declaration was adopted endorsing the principles,
objectives and recommendations of the Regional
Strategy on Intercultural Dialogue, which aims to
contribute to the further building of bridges and
strengthening of trust through enhanced intercultural
dialogue and cooperation in the region. The
Declaration considers education, youth and media as
key instruments to build pluralistic, inclusive and
cohesive societies, and the Regional Strategy for
South-Eastern Europe was the first ever adopted in the
framework of the Alliance of Civilizations.
Intercultural dialogue as a tool of peacebuilding
is an indispensable instrument for fostering tolerance
and consolidating the values of justice, equality and
respect. It should be an integral part of nationally
owned peacebuilding strategies aiming at promoting
the culture of peace and turning pluralism into a source
of strength, with equality in diversity.

In a globalized world, where migration is an
inevitable phenomenon, the need for interaction among
individuals and groups and for understanding of
different cultures, traditions and beliefs will be even
greater. In that context, efforts should be made to
reduce the room for ignorance and stereotyping of
those who are different. We believe that tolerance is
essential for ensuring social cohesion. At the same
time, social cohesion is an important element for peace
and security, not only within a country but also
between countries.

In that respect, we are of the View that the
Security Council, with its primary responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, can and
should do more in terms of preventive diplomacy and
promotion of intercultural dialogue as a mechanism for
maintaining peace and security. Efforts should be made
through a dialogue-based approach to problems,
including activities such as fact-finding missions, early
warning about potential conflicts and, in particular,
mediation and confidence-building measures.

We welcome the appointment of special
representatives and the use of good offices as
alternatives that can yield useful recommendations for
the peaceful settlement of disputes prior to preventive
deployment or enforcement measures.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina is convinced
that today's briefing will strengthen our commitment to
dialogue as a tool that can contribute to achieving
peace and security in the world.

