Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to Piracy off
the Cost of Somalia, Mr. Jack Lang, for his briefing. I
would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Stephen Mathias for his briefing and the representative
of Somalia for his statement.

At the present time, the Somali peace process is
facing multiple challenges. The security situation
leaves no room for optimism. Piracy remains rampant.
To address the issue of Somalia, we must treat both the
root causes and the symptoms.

The Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and
the international community must adopt a holistic
strategy to promote, in parallel, work in the political,
security, economic, development and humanitarian
areas. China has consistently supported the TFG and
the implementation of the Djibouti Peace Agreement.
We welcome the new Cabinet established not long ago
by the TFG. We hope that the TFG will continue to
work for national reconciliation, a stronger security
sector and a speedy completion of the tasks that remain
in the transitional period.

China supports the African Union Mission in
Somalia and is in favour of the United Nations playing
a greater role in addressing the Somali issue. The
international community must respond actively to the
appeals by Somalia and the African Union by
providing more assistance to Somalia.

China is of the view that the effective prosecution
and imprisonment of perpetrators of acts of piracy
form an important link in combating piracy in Somalia.
The Special Adviser has put forward in his report (see S/2011/30) 25 proposals on combating Somali piracy
more vigorously. The proposals are wide-ranging in
content. As a follow-up to the Secretary-General's
report issued last July (S/2010/394), the report will
serve as an important reference for all parties to
identify gaps that hinder the effective prosecution and
imprisonment of Somali pirates, as well as to explore
feasible solutions. The report warrants further study.

The United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea and other relevant international instruments
provide a basic legal framework for States to exercise
jurisdiction and engage in judicial cooperation against
piracy. China supports the international community on
the basis of the existing international legal framework
and the relevant Security Council resolutions in
strengthening international cooperation on the
prosecution and imprisonment of Somali pirates.

China appreciates the work of various countries
in that regard, especially by coastal States.
Strengthening the judicial capacity of coastal States
will be critical in prosecuting and imprisoning Somali
pirates. China supports efforts towards strengthening
the judicial capacity of coastal States and calls upon
the international community to continue to provide
necessary assistance to coastal States. Moreover, China
also welcomes various feasible programmes conducive
to the prosecution and imprisonment of Somali pirates.

