Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the holding of the
quarterly open debate of the Council on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his enlightening
briefing on this issue.

The situation in the Middle East is a persistent
source of concern for my country owing to the ongoing
grave tensions and the lack ofa genuine political process
in negotiations and the peace process in the region.

With respect to the question of Palestine, my
delegation deplores the entrenchment of present
positions that has been seen since the announcement of
the recognition by the United States of Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel and the announcement of the transfer
of the United States Embassy to that city. The years-
long stagnation in the peace process and the current
entrenchment of the parties' positions as a result of
recent initiatives in the region are liable to permanently
undermine the international community's efforts in
seeking a two-State solution with two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security, with
mutual recognition of the legitimate rights of each.

Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its support for the two-
State solution as the sole viable solution to enable the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples to coexist in peace
and security.

The final status of the city of Jerusalem must be
negotiated within the framework of a concerted solution
between the two parties, as set out in the relevant United
Nations resolutions. My country urges the international

community to persevere in its efforts with the two
parties with the aim of arriving at a lasting peace in
the Middle East. Furthermore, we call upon Israeli and
Palestinian actors to engage in constructive dialogue so
as remove any obstacles by abandoning any unilateral
action or initiative that could further dim the prospects
for a political settlement of the Palestine question based
on peace in the Middle East.

In this regard, Cote d'Ivoire my delegation deplores
the recent decision of the United States to reduce
Washington's contribution to the funding of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East. My delegation encourages Hamas and
the Palestinian Authority to continue dialogue aimed at
bringing about Palestinian unity, which would enable
an effective restoration of Palestinian central authority
in Gaza and help to mitigate the consequences of the
crisis for the people.

To that end, Cote d'Ivoire calls for openness on
the part of the Palestinian authorities to dialogue with
neighbouring countries, with a view to pacifying
the situation, specifically concerning the hosting of
Palestine refugees for an inclusive management of the
humanitarian crisis in line with the relevant provisions
of international humanitarian law.

As the war in Syria enters its seventh consecutive
year, my country remains gravely alarmed by the
potential spillover of the conflict, which has been
characterized by numerous violations of human rights
and humanitarian law and the repeated use of the
parties of chemical weapons, with full impunity. My
delegation condemns any use of chemical weapons,
which jeopardizes the security of us all. We call for
unity among members of the Security Council, so
that the perpetrators of such acts can be identified,
prosecuted and punished.

To that end, Cote d'Ivoire, as other Member States
have done, calls upon the relevant United Nations
structures, specifically the Fact-Finding Mission, to
shed light on the circumstances surrounding the use
of these weapons in order to enable the relevant legal
bodies to take action. In that vein, my country supports
the establishment of a consensus-based mechanism
to address the issue of the responsibility of and
accountability for the parties to the conflict.

In this regard, Cote d'Ivoire commends France
for having launched on 23 January last in Paris an
initiative entitled "International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons", which
reflects the shared will of the international community
to deliver an adequate response to the issue of the use
of chemical weapons in conflict and the need to hold
perpetrators accountable.
We reiterate our full willingness to cooperate
with every initiative aimed at contributing to the
international community's efforts in the area of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
combating the use of chemical weapons in conflicts.

With regard to the humanitarian situation in Syria,
we welcome the extension for an additional year of the
United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the delivery
of cross-border humanitarian assistance to the besieged
areas. We urge all the parties to cease all hostilities
in the so-called de-escalation areas in order to enable
unfettered access for humanitarian convoys so that they
can alleviate the suffering of the people. Regarding the
political process, we welcome all initiatives designed to
encourage the parties to engage in dialogue with a view
to reaching a peaceful and definitive settlement of the
Syrian crisis within the Geneva process.

