Mr. Gambari: The report before the Council
details the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) from September to
November 2005. Having accompanied the Secretary-
General during his visit to Baghdad on 12 November, I
am pleased to be able to brief the Council today on the
work of our mission and to share some firsthand
impressions of the challenges that the United Nations
faces in Iraq as we move into 2006.

The Secretary-General's report comes as
tomorrow's election is about to bring to a conclusion
the political transition process outlined in resolution
1546 (2004). To have kept that process on track under
very difficult conditions is testimony to the
commitment of most Iraqis to participate in shaping
their country's future through peaceful, democratic
means. The growing strength of popular participation
in the three polls held this year, which we very much
encouraged, is a sign of the new political dynamic
developing in Iraq, and it is a positive one.

Tomorrow's vote will provide a measure of the
confidence that the Iraqi people are ready to place in
their own future at a time when they continue to face
formidable security, political and economic challenges.
The United Nations once again encourages all Iraqis to
exercise their democratic right to vote and appeals to
all parties to refrain from violence or any action which
could undermine the democratic process.

Of course, the process of political transition is far
from complete. As the Secretary-General's report
makes clear, the framework laid out in resolution 1546
(2004) was intended to promote national dialogue and
reconciliation. In turn, that was intended to have a
positive impact on the security situation. In fact, this
has not occurred, and much remains to be done to
develop a momentum within the political process that
places emphasis on what the Iraqis have in common
rather than on what divides them.

Iraq's political leaders know that the
overwhelming majority of Iraq's citizens wish to live
in a stable, peaceful and democratic Iraq. Under the
auspices of the League of Arab States, a group of Iraq's
political, social and religious leaders came together in
Cairo from 19 to 21 November to discuss the need for
national reconciliation and the development of
confidence-building measures that will lessen tensions,
reassert the aspirations which all Iraqi communities
share, and, no less important, agree that violence and
negative external forces should have no place in Iraq's
political life and future.
Although this was only a preliminary meeting,
the conference showed that, given the right
encouragement and space, Iraq's representatives could
contribute substantively to a political process that
draws back from civil strife and puts what Iraqis have
in common ahead of ethnic and sectarian identities or
differences.

We encouraged the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ashraf Jehangir Qazi, and his
team to support the efforts of the League of Arab States
and of its Secretary-General, Amre Moussa, in creating
a forum in which real differences could be discussed in
a meaningful way and a constructive manner. The
Secretary-General has expressed the commitment of
the United Nations to continue to work with the Arab
League, the Government of Iraq and all the participants
at the Cairo meeting to ensure that this initiative leads
to a sustained process of dialogue and of
reconciliation, in accordance with resolution 1546
(2004) and in full respect for Iraq's national
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity.

After the election, a new political landscape will
undoubtedly emerge in Iraq. All political initiatives
will have to take account of that fact. We hope that the
Council of Representatives will assemble at the earliest
opportunity after the results have become clear and that
the new Government will be formed as soon as
possible thereafter. The United Nations encourages all
of Iraq's elected representatives and its political leaders
to do their utmost to speed up the formation of the
administration, so that the positive momentum created
by the election carries through to Iraq's new sovereign
Government.

One of the most important tasks facing the new
Council of Representatives will be to establish a
Constitutional Review Commission and enable it to
undertake its work in a credible and effective manner.
The result of the constitutional referendum showed that
a significant proportion of Iraqis could not support the
draft constitution in its current format. The Cairo
meeting showed that the basis for national consensus
on difficult issues still remains. The United Nations
remains confident, however, that consensus can be
achieved on those points in the constitution on which
agreement has not yet been reached. UNAMI therefore
stands ready to continue to provide its assistance to the
Council of Representatives and to the Constitutional
Review Commission in the discharging of their duties.

Irrespective of the outcome of the election, the
need for national dialogue and reconciliation is real,
and so is the opportunity for Iraq's political
constituencies to reach out to one another with a View
to building their future together, through dialogue,
mutual understanding and compromise. The United
Nations stands ready to contribute to supporting that
goal in a direct and practical way. Iraq's greatest asset
is the diversity of its people, their skills and their
shared history. We will continue to make every effort
to help facilitate genuine political progress and
promote greater understanding between Iraq's diverse
communities. Dialogue and reconciliation will
therefore be at the heart of United Nations activities in
all areas of our mandate.

An important aspect of our work in that regard
relates to the human rights situation, particularly in the
light of increasingly disturbing reports in recent weeks.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly drawn attention
to the plight of human rights in Iraq, condemning
terrorist, insurgent and paramilitary attacks against
innocent civilians. He has repeatedly called on all sides
to strictly observe their obligations under international
humanitarian law. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has also been seized
of the matter. The situation requires not only our
continued attention but, more important, urgent action,
particularly by the Iraqi authorities and by the
multinational force.

In that regard, we welcome the commitment of
the multinational force to take initial corrective steps,
particularly with regard to the issue of detainees. We
also urge the Iraqi Government to follow up on its
announced actions to address that serious situation. For
its part, UNAMI will continue to encourage all
concerned to make every effort to ensure that the basic
human rights of all Iraqis are respected and that both
past and present abuses are addressed based on the rule
of law and international obligations. The United
Nations expects the full backing of the Security
Council in implementing that important aspect of our
mandate.

Equally important will be the ability of the new
Government to deliver quickly on the real needs and
genuine expectations of the Iraqi people. After three
years of dramatic change and decades of deprivation,
Iraqis are still looking to their leaders for the tangible
improvements necessary to better their everyday lives
and to further stabilize their country. It is therefore in
the interest of the region - particularly of Iraq's
neighbours - and of the international community as a
whole to continue to provide long-term support to Iraq.
The Council has a special responsibility in that regard
to help normalize Iraq's status as a full and respected
member of the international community.

Upon his return from Baghdad, the Secretary-
General had the opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the exceptionally difficult conditions under
which UNAMI operates in Iraq. While in resolution
1637 (2005) the Council reaffirmed the leading role of
the United Nations in assisting Iraq with further
political and economic development, it must be
recognized that the capacity of the United Nations in
Iraq depends on the commitment and support of States
Members of the Organization.

In that regard, I am pleased to report that last
week, on 8 December, I signed with Ambassador John
Bolton the agreement between the United Nations and
the United States, as the overall commander of the
multinational force, concerning the establishment of
security for UNAMI. That historic and important
agreement formalizes the security arrangements that are
already in place for the United Nations in Iraq. However,
in order for UNAMI to remain effective and to expand
its activities beyond Baghdad, it needs the Council's
continued support and adequate resources. In that respect,
the air assets necessary for moving into and around the
country are critical for UNAMI's future deployment.

The United Nations has accompanied Iraq at
every step of its transition thus far. The men and
women of UNAMI, under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Qazi,
deserve our full admiration and support for their
dedication and for the efforts they are making in the
cause of peace. In accordance with its mandate, as
circumstances permit and as requested, UNAMI is
determined to continue to work for all the people of
Iraq, in partnership with the Iraqi Government and with
the full backing and support of the international
community through the Security Council.

