Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, Sir, to congratulate you and your delegation
on having convened today's meeting on an issue of
great relevance and international interest: cooperation
between the Security Council and international
organizations in the implementation of resolutions
1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006).

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) was a
milestone in the area of non-proliferation. The national
reports submitted to the Committee established
pursuant to that resolution demonstrate the
commitment of States to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials and reflect their efforts to ensure
that those weapons are kept out of the hands of non-
State actors.

In extending the mandate of the 1540 Committee,
resolution 1673 (2006) showed that some States that
submitted their reports still have gaps in their
legislation and deficiencies in implementation.
Renewed efforts are therefore required to achieve the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Here, I
would like to commend Ambassador Peter Burian for
his work as Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).

My delegation is fully aware of the difficulties
that many States face in the submitting of their reports
or in the establishment of appropriate legislative and
operational measures. The Committee should therefore
maintain its full support towards the achievement of
those objectives. Countries with more experience and
capacity to provide assistance should also support that
task.

That situation gave rise to intensified promotion
of the implementation of the resolution through the
organization of a number of regional seminars. In
November 2006, as an example of its commitment to
the issue of weapons of mass destruction, Peru hosted
one of the events for Latin American and Caribbean
countries. The seminar was co-sponsored by the
European Union and the Government of Spain and was
supported by the United Nations Department for
Disarmament Affairs through the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean,
headquartered in Lima. Because of the results obtained
in terms of shared experiences and assistance, we
recommend such activities. The participation of
subregional and regional organizations is highly
appreciated.

Allow me to note the progress made in
cooperation between the 1540 Committee and
international organizations such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). My
delegation welcomes the assistance that those and other
organizations can provide in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) within their respective
mandates. Such support should, however, be provided
on a case-by-case basis. We are confident that the work
of the 1540 Committee and the cooperation of
international, regional and subregional organizations
will contribute to guide and motivate States in
strengthening their non-proliferation processes.

Finally, I would like to reiterate our conviction
that non-proliferation initiatives, which are fully
supported by my Government, should be associated
with effective action on disarmament issues. Progress
in both areas is required if we truly intend to build a
safer world and to reduce the proliferation of
conventional threats.

