Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I commend you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Japan for
convening this important meeting of the Security
Council. I would also commend the statement just
delivered by our colleague, the Ambassador of
Bangladesh.

This statement is in large part a reflection of our
recent tragic experiences in the Bougainville conflict.
But more importantly, in the context of this debate, the
resolution of the Bougainville conflict under the
auspices of the United Nations, this Council and our
regional partners stands as a testament to a number of
the core issues that this debate is centred upon.

We fully agree that we have to consider - as
you, Sir, have rightly noted in your concept paper - "a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy to prevent the
recurrence of conflict" (S/2010/167, annex) and that
the Security Council should "conduct a comprehensive
policy review on an effective peacebuilding strategy"
(ibid., para. 1).

On 16 June 2005, this Council wound up its
seven-year mandate to oversee the resolution of the
10-year bloody civil conflict that had raged on the
island of Bougainville in Papua New Guinea. Sadly
and, indeed horribly, it is estimated that between
10,000 and 15,000 people - and maybe more -
including women and children and touching all Papua
New Guineans, lost their lives in what could have been
an avoidable national tragedy.

A few months prior to the end of the mandate,
between 20 May and 9 June 2005, the first general
elections for President and members of the House of
Representatives were successfully completed, resulting
in the establishment of the Autonomous Bougainville
Government. That historic election was made possible
under the agreed constitutional arrangements between
the Government of Papua New Guinea and the leaders
of Bougainville - a process that was critical to
securing the lasting peace that continues to prevail
today.

Contextually, the amending of our national
Constitution was a testament to the notion that,
ultimately, any peace process has to be nationally
owned and driven. That a nation saw fit to amend its
supreme law to facilitate a peace process remains a key
factor in how the Bougainville peace process has been
sustained. I am also pleased to report that the second
general elections are currently under way, with the
results to be finalized in June.

The United Nations, through the Security Council
and its agencies, especially the Department of Political
Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme
and UNICEF, played pivotal roles in ensuring the
continuing success of the peacebuilding process. Our
neighbouring countries in the Pacific region - namely,
Australia, New Zealand, Fiji, Tonga and your own
country, Mr. President, Japan - along with our
regional agencies also participated in that process, at
different levels and in different ways, thereby
contributing to the continuing success of the
peacebuilding process. This strongly underlines the
view - and it is also our view - that any successful
peace process must always have a strong element of
partnership.
In our view, along with the idea of partnerships,
there is a need for stronger application of the
provisions of Article 52 of the Charter, whose
paragraph 1 provides for

"regional arrangements for dealing with such
matters relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security as are
appropriate for regional action provided that such
arrangements or agencies and their activities are
consistent with the Purposes and Principles of the
United Nations".

Paragraph 3 of the same Article also states that
the Security Council should "encourage the
development of pacific settlement of disputes
through such regional arrangements". We would make
the observation that, of course, article 52 does not
impair the provisions of Articles 34 and 35 of the
Charter.

Your delegation's reference in its concept paper,
Mr. President, to the need to ensure social stability
along with political stability is critical, important and
timely. There can be no peace unless there is peace
among the population. The need to reinforce civilian
capacities is therefore critical. Added to that is the need
to empower women and, especially, youth. In the case
of the latter, reintegration issues are critical if long-
term peace is to be sustained. A peace dividend can
only be realized if there is a concerted effort on the
part of all parties concerned.

In conclusion, the Bougainville conflict, its
resolution and the current peacebuilding process do not
loom large in the global context. However, we believe
that the United Nations and the Security Council
should, in their attempt to review their comprehensive
policy on an effective peacebuilding strategy, look to
the Bougainville peace process in order to understand
some of the dynamics that continue to contribute to the
continuing success of that process.

