Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: It gives me pleasure, Sir,
to see you presiding over the Council for the month
of May. Congratulations to you and your country, the
Republic of Korea.

I am here today with His Excellency Mr. Edouard
Nduwimana, Minister of the Interior of the Republic
of Burundi, and other senior Government officials,
including the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of
External Relations, Ambassador Albert Shingiro.

Allow me to greet Ambassador Niyonzima,
Permanent Representative of Burundi to the United
Nations, and Ambassador Paul Seger, Chair of
the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).

Given that the Council has been closely monitoring
the situation in Burundi over the past few weeks, I will
limit my briefing to only a few significant developments.
During the reporting period, the United Nations
Office in Burundi (BNUB) made progress on its
mandated tasks, including promoting and facilitating
dialogue; strengthening judicial and parliamentary
institutions; supporting the establishment of transitional
justice mechanisms; and promoting the protection of
human rights.

In addition, pursuant to resolution 2137 (2014),
BNUB began the process of transitioning to a United
Nations country team. I was asked to prepare and
submit to the Security Council a joint transition plan
by 15 May. I am pleased to report that, thanks to the
outstanding cooperation and support of the Government
of Burundi and the keen participation of all members of
the transition steering group, we have been able to meet
that important goal.

The plan, which contains details on the transition,
including the transfer of tasks to the relevant
stakeholders and on possible gaps following BNUB's
Withdrawal, is before the Council today. In many ways,
this is a historic moment, as it marks the beginning ofthe
end of a stand-alone United Nations political presence
in Burundi in order to focus on development activities
through a strengthened United Nations country team.

(spoke in French)

Burundi has made considerable progress since the
signing of the Arusha accords. That has enabled the
country to leave behind its murderous conflict, which
has killed its people for many decades. In general,
security prevails throughout the national territory,
even if there is a relatively growing number of grenade
attacks and incursions by armed elements. Burundi has
become an important troop contributor to peacekeeping
operations. That has won it the admiration and
appreciation of all as a result ofthe successful reform of
its national forces. Burundi can also be congratulated
on its strong representation of women in political life.

On the socioeconomic front, the Government's
actions are guided by the ambitious strategic
framework - the second poverty reduction strategy
paper, which the international community supports, in
particular through the Geneva conferences and with the
valuable support of Ambassador Seger. Furthermore, a

significant reform process is under way to clean up the
private sector and to promote private investment, which
is key to development. That remains one of Burundi's
major challenges, in particular in the area of youth
unemployment.

However, a certain number of concerns remain. On
the political front, the situation is still tense. Mistrust
and a lack of constructive and inclusive dialogue
between the Government and opposition parties do
not help matters. The political space remains limited.
The Government insists on the need to respect the
laws in place, while the opposition, civil society
associations and the media condemn the represssive
laws. Unfortunately, it must be recognized that such
a context is not conducive to respect for and the best
protection of human rights.

Moreover, with the approaching electoral period,
there is a trend towards political violence and clashes
among youths affiliated with political parties, which
reflects the prevailing hostile political climate. That
phenomenon is ofparticular concern since it also affects
young supporters of the ruling party. I encourage the
Government to persevere in its efforts to counter such
agitation.

In order to prevent deterioration, we have in
particular to recommended that the authorities
strengthen initiatives to promote better political
governance through dialogue and tolerance, while
putting an end to impunity. However, it is also urgent to
continue efforts to significantly reduce the security risk
posed by illicit weapon flows.

Mistrust, which is dividing the Burundi political
class, has been evident since the negotiations and the
adoption in April of the law establishing a truth and
reconciliation commission. It is regrettable that the
adoption of that important law to set up transitional
justice mechanisms has not made it possible to
overcome sectarian divisions. We must now do our
utmost to prevent such differences from compromising
the credibility and the functioning of the commission
and from casting doubt over the long-term prospect for
reconciliation towards a stronger national cohesion.

Despite such worrisome factors, mentioned here to
demonstrate the extent of the path to cover, I remain
confident about the capacity of Burundian political
actors to overcome their differences and together deal
with their common challenges. They must overcome
the political intolerance within and among the political

parties and accept diverging views without creating
enemies. That is still possible.

The adoption on 25 April of the new electoral code,
which reflects the recommendations of the March 2013
consensus road map and the conclusions of the Kayanza
workshop on the May 2013 electoral code, is a step in
the right direction in that regard. All actors should
commit to preserving the prevailing spirit of consensus
at the time of adopting the electoral code in order to
restore mutual confidence, improve the political climate
and establish suitable conditions for free, transparent,
inclusive and peaceful elections in 2015.

It is crucial that Burundians and Burundi maintain
the calm. Despite the difficult outlook and their
immense challenges, they possess all the advantages
to build a rich and promosing future that is free of
violence.

(spoke in English)

As the Council can see, there are reasons to believe
that, with the right amount of political will from all
political actors and the implementation of courageous
and just measures, Burundi can stay the course and avoid
a reversal of its commendable gains. I am optimistic
that the upcoming workshop being jointly organized
by the Government of Burundi and BNUB, due to take
place on 20 May in implementation of the March 2013
road map, will help to further advance dialogue and
improve the political environment ahead of the 2015
elections, including averting political violence.

BNUB is determined to do its utmost up to the
end of its mandate in December. We are committed
to helping advance the cause of peace and respect for
human rights and democratic values, consistent with the
aspirations of the Government and people of Burundi.

That is the strong foundation upon which lays the
partnership that binds together the United Nations and
the Government of Burundi. It entails working together
to proactively address any potentially damaging threat
to peace and security in Burundi. We are grateful to the
Government of Burundi for its continued collaboration.

I would like to sincerely thank the Chair of the
Burundi configuration of the PBC, my dear friend
Ambassador Paul Seger, for his excellent cooperation
and support to the Government and people of Burundi.

Allow me also to express our gratitude to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, who has tirelessly led us in
shouldering our responsibilities. We could not have
been better guided than by Under-Secretary-General
Feltman and his team from the Department of Political
Affairs.

