Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to take this opportunity to extend a warm
welcome this morning to Mr. Mbeki and to thank him
for the important work that he is doing in the Sudan. I
would also like to thank him, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Menkerios, Joint Special
Representative Gambari and Joint Chief Mediator
Bassole for their briefings to the Council this morning.

This is a defining moment for the Sudan and for
this Council, with over 30,000 peacekeepers on the
ground in Darfur, Abyei, Blue Nile, Southern Kordofan
and Southern Sudan. The Council has more invested in
the Sudan than in any other agenda item. There is no
greater challenge facing the Security Council over the
next 12 months than supporting the parties in securing
peace and prosperity for the people of the Sudan.

I would like to focus on three specific themes: the
lead-up to the referendum on self-determination for
Southern Sudan under the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), efforts to support longer-term
constructive relations between Northern and Southern
Sudan, and the continuing imperative of working to
end the conflict in Darfur.

With now less than seven months before the
referendum, we should focus on how we can best
support the Sudanese parties to ensure a full and
peaceful implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. We should not prejudge the results of the
referendum, but we should be clear that it must take
place on time. There must be a credible result beyond
dispute. Either outcome - unity or secession - can
lead to peaceful and friendly relations between the
North and the South. It is our collective responsibility
to do whatever we can to ensure such a peaceful
outcome.

Much remains to be done. We must continue to
urge both parties to engage in serious and sustained
dialogue to reach agreement on the outstanding CPA
milestones. These include the urgent establishment of
the referendum commissions for Southern Sudan and
Abyei, as we have heard from Mr. Menkerios this
morning, and a clear focus on the popular consultations
in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan. We need to see a
much greater sense of urgency in preparing for the
referendum.

But we must also look beyond the referendum.
Northern and Southern Sudan will remain neighbours
and essential partners regardless of the outcome of the
referendum. We must encourage the parties to approach
the issues with a view to their longer-term shared
interests. This is not a zero-sum game. They will need
to cooperate if they are to have a peaceful, prosperous
future, whatever is decided next January.

Our immediate focus should be to encourage
dialogue between the parties on the issues and
arrangements relating to the post-referendum period and
to support this process. In particular, we must encourage
the parties as a matter of urgency to agreed demarcation
of the North-South border, citizenship rights and
arrangements for wealth-sharing, particularly regarding
oil. We must also consider what capacity-building support
we can provide to Southern Sudan to help it meet its
longer-term development and security challenges and to
address the severe humanitarian situation. And we should
support the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) in its planning for what assistance the United
Nations might provide after the end of the interim
period.

We must not forget that the challenges the Sudan
faces are closely linked. It is only by addressing them
together that we can ensure a truly stable future for the
Sudan's people. So we must continue to focus on
Darfur, where more than 2.5 million people remain
displaced from their homes by ongoing conflict. And
we must also not forget Eastern Sudan, where the
humanitarian indicators are some of the worst in the
world.

In Darfur, as Mr. Bassole has said, an inclusive,
comprehensive, negotiated agreement that focuses on
the causes and consequences of the conflict is the only
route to lasting peace. As we have heard again today
from Mr. Gambari about the increase in hostilities
across Darfur, we must urge all sides to show their
commitment to peace and security by ceasing
hostilities and engaging in the Doha process.

We must all - first and foremost the Sudanese
parties themselves - step up our engagement to meet
the challenges ahead. It is ultimately only the parties
themselves who can ensure a peaceful outcome. They
must show the political leadership and the vision
necessary for this task. This means engaging in serious
and sustained dialogue to reach agreement on the
issues I have mentioned.

The Security Council has a central role to play.
The Council's leadership on the challenges ahead will
be critical as we approach the referendum. The Council
needs to take a truly strategic approach, looking
forward and anticipating the difficult decisions ahead
without anticipating any particular referendum
outcome. The work of the United Nations missions in
the Sudan, both UNMIS and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, will remain vital
in supporting the implementation of the CPA,
particularly the referendum, and in providing security
and protection for civilians in Southern Sudan and
Darfur.

As we have heard this morning, the strong
engagement of the African Union, and particularly the
Sudan's neighbours, will also be critical in securing
long-term peace in the Sudan. We commend in
particular the leadership of Mr. Mbeki and the work of
his Panel, and we look forward to close collaboration
between the United Nations and the African Union on
the challenges ahead.

Finally, I hope that the presidency will be able to
reflect our discussions in some agreed remarks to the
press, a draft of which has been circulated to Council
members.

