Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. David
Shearer, as well as the Chair of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, President Festus Mogae,
for their thorough briefings. Faced with such a
bitter and, at times, discouraging assessment of this
persistant conflict, I would like to focus on two points
in particular.

First of all, upon having the magnitude of the daily
tragedy recalled to us, I commend the efforts of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and of the humanitarian staff who provide critical
assistance to people in South Sudan. The figures are
staggering and point to the sheer scale of the crisis,
which is worsened by the particularly dire conditions
in South Sudan, particularly for those who deliver aid
to the population.

South Sudan is indeed among the most dangerous
countries for humanitarian workers, 18 of whom have
been killed since the beginning of this year. We cannot
tolerate this situation. We firmly condemn the attacks
and access restrictions targeting UNMISS personnel as
well as humanitarian actors.
We call upon all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and provide access to the most
vulnerable people. Enabling humanitarian staff to do
their work in conflict zones is a core requirement that
must be upheld. Such attacks against humanitarian
workers, facilitated by the proliferation of weapons in
South Sudan, serve as a reminder of the importance
of considering the imposition of an arms embargo
to deprive parties to the conflict of opportunities to
perpetrate such violence.

In this difficult context, the protection of
civilians remains imperative. France welcomes the
efforts of UNMISS in carrying out its mandate under
Mr. Shearer's stewardship. The robust posture that he
has adopted to provide better protection for civilians
is critical while the violence persists. The deployment
of the first Regional Protection Force units is an
encouraging development, although unfortunately this
occurred more than a year after the Council's decided
to establish it. It is crucial that the deadlock be broken
as soon as possible.

Secondly, I would like to underscore the
importance of moving the political process forward.
We are aware that a lasting settlement to the crisis
in South Sudan can only be political and can only be
achieved with regional support. The launch of the high-
level revitalization forum for the 2015 peace agreement
should help advance this process. France commends
the commitment of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and calls upon the African Union
Peace and Security Council to ensure that the forum be
made a reality as soon as possible, as is explicitly called
for in the 20 September Communique. The parties must
address these initiatives and fully commit themselves
to the success of the forum.

The progress reports proposed by the Peace and
Security Council, as well as the threat and imposition of
sanctions against those seeking to hamper these efforts,
should contribute to rapid progress being made. France
welcomes the efforts of various stakeholders to make
the forum a reality, in particularly the IGAD Special
Envoy, the African Union High Representative and the
Special Envoy to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, as well as Special Representative Shearer and
President Mogae.

Smooth coordination by all in this undertaking is
the key to success. France considers it equally critical
to continue working to ensure an inclusive national
dialogue so as to contribute to building lasting peace.
We are further encouraged by the call of the Peace and
Security Council for the establishment of the Hybrid
Court stipulated by the peace agreement. The struggle
against impunity is indispensable for achieving lasting
peace in South Sudan.

The commitment of both our Council and the region
are critical in order to bring about peace in South Sudan.
Together we must take advantage of the next few weeks

to build upon these efforts for the benefit of the people
of the South Sudan.

