Mr. Cordeiro (Brazil): We join you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Council in the expressions of
deep sorrow over the passing of His Highness the head of
State of Bahrain.

Brazil supports the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL), as suggested by the Secretary-General. We
also consider that it is necessary to restore the United
Nations presence in Sierra Leone and that it may well be
necessary to extend it even beyond June 1999.

UNOMSIL is the expression of the political
commitment of the Council to the process of pacification
and nation-building in Sierra Leone. The establishment of
UNOMSIL was linked to the presence of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) in Sierra Leone, as member States of
ECOWAS asked the United Nations to support and endorse
their peacekeeping role.

The grim events of January suggest that the United
Nations and ECOMOG should keep a strong and effective
presence in Sierra Leone in order to support the efforts
conducted by the Government of President Kabbah, the
Special Representative of the Secretary- General and the
ECOWAS Committee of Six on Sierra Leone. The aim of
this is to promote a political agreement that will include
the rebels and respect the constitutional order. The
Abidjan Peace Agreement of 1996 is the basis for that.

However, the rebels have a history of repeated
disrespect for agreements and an appalling record of
human rights violations. Brazil joins in the condemnation
of the heinous acts committed against the civilian
population, children, women and those very persons
entrusted with the defence of human rights in Sierra
Leone. We believe that political compromise cannot offer
an excuse for those who have committed such crimes.

The international community needs to increase its
support to ECOWAS. This is a key element for the
maintenance of order and for the protection of the
Government and the people of Sierra Leone.

We pay tribute to the troop-contributing countries.

Foreign military assistance to the rebels, in violation
of the Council's resolutions, is a matter of grave concern
that must be pursued by the sanctions committees. The
providers of weapons and ammunition share in the
responsibility for the brutal events that have taken place
in Sierra Leone.
It is necessary to launch the basis for the future of
Sierra Leoneans. The international community, through
the coordinated efforts of the United Nations system,
must develop a long-term strategy for Sierra Leone that
includes security, political, economic, social and
humanitarian aspects, as well as support for regional
actors and organizations.

