Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): Let me from the outset
express the appreciation of the Jamaican delegation to
the Secretary-General for his report contained in
document S/2000/538, and to the Special
Representative, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, for his
comprehensive review of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) over the
past year.

Mr. Kouchner's review has emphasized the
magnitude of the unique undertaking entrusted by the
international community to UNMIK and to the
Mission's critical role in promoting peace,
reconciliation and stability, in creating viable and
democratic structures and establishing a framework for
sustainable development in Kosovo. My delegation
wishes to pay tribute to Mr. Kouchner, to the men and
women of UNMIK and of the intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations in Kosovo for the
commitment and dedication they have brought to their
difficult and complex task of implementing resolution
1244 (1999).

There is no doubt that there has been tremendous
progress over the past year as UNMIK moved from the
emergency phase of its operations to rehabilitation and
reconstruction and to bringing normalcy to the lives of
the people of the Kosovo. We have witnessed the large
number of refugee returns, the development of Joint
Administrative Structures, the efforts to give the local
community greater responsibility in the administration
of Kosovo and the revitalization of the economy.

As the report points out, however, understanding
and tolerance in Kosovo remain scarce, and
reconciliation is far from reality. We, therefore, support
the view expressed in the report that leaders and
ordinary people alike must make a personal and
concerted effort to bring violence, intimidation and
harassment to an end.
The observations in the Secretary-General's
report are particularly pertinent. I wish to highlight
some issues of particular concern to my delegation.
First of all, it is disturbing to note from paragraph 133
of the report that not only has the security situation
deteriorated over the past few weeks but also that the
upsurge of vicious attacks on Kosovo Serbs in several
areas appears to be part of an orchestrated campaign.
This has resulted in the suspension of the Serb National
Council (SNC) in the Joint Interim Administrative
Structure. We would encourage them to resume their
participation in the Interim Administrative Council
(IAC). The condemnation of violence by the Albanian
community and the general apology issued in April by
the Serb community of Orahovac are positive
developments, on which both communities could build.

Secondly, the steps taken by UNMIK to entrench
the rule of law in Kosovo must be emphasized. While
the security situation remains fragile, there has been a
dramatic reduction in crime. The need for an effective
judicial and penal management system is being
addressed. We support the appointment of international
judges and prosecutors to instil public confidence in
the judicial system, but, in the long run, this has to be
based on a well-trained professional cadre of local
officials.

Thirdly, tackling the issue of missing persons is
one of the most fundamental factors in the
reconciliation process and for the creation of stability.
As the Secretary-General's report indicates, this is an
issue that cuts across all ethnic groups and must be
addressed urgently and comprehensively. We therefore
support the timely appointment of a special envoy for
missing persons and detainees.

The civil and voter registration activities are of
importance in light of the upcoming municipal
elections. We believe it necessary to create the
conditions for the participation of all groups in order to
encourage a sense of ownership and participation in the
democratic process.

The report indicates that human rights violations
continue. These include, specifically, violence against
women and trafficking. We call on UNMIK and their
partners to address this issue urgently.

While the overall economic picture in Kosovo has
improved, economic recovery as a means of providing
confidence and reconciliation among the people of
Kosovo is another major challenge. Attracting broad-
based donor support and investment is necessary to
decrease the high level of unemployment. As one who
participated in the Security Council mission at the end
of April, we wish to thank Mr. Kouchner and the staff
of UNMIK for all that they did to make our visit a
success. We were provided with an opportunity not
only to meet with officials of the four pillars of
UNMIK but also to engage with representatives of all
ethnic communities, to listen to their concerns and to
obtain a better understanding of the expectations for
the future of the people of Kosovo. We know that this
has contributed to a better understanding within the
Security Council of the work of UNMIK. We therefore
wish to agree with Mr. Kouchner, as he stated in the
report:

"Democracy in Kosovo must begin to take root,
but given Kosovo's troubled history,
institutionalizing the sharing of administrative
and political responsibility between the ethnic
communities concerned will not be quick or
easy." (8/2000/538, para. 132)

We have noted his call for the development of a
contract with the people of Kosovo and look forward to
learning more about this in future briefings.

In conclusion, we wish again to pay tribute to the
men and women of UNMIK and KFOR and the other
organizations in Kosovo and express our support for
their activities.

