Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this essential debate.
We also join previous speakers in thanking the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses this issue signifies the urgency of the matter.
Illicit cross-border flows are taking place on a massive
scale and have an enormously harmful impact on
security, human rights and social and economic
development, in particular on developing countries. As
such, securing borders against illicit flows must be a
distinct aspect of the overall international peace and
security agenda. Secure borders means
non-proliferation; it means the compartmentalization of
threats; and it means that threats are localized and their
spread is prevented, making them much easier to
overcome.

The enormity of the threat and its implications
necessitate a multilayered approach. Moreover, the
successful implementation of the strategic decisions
that have been adopted to address the problem cannot
be ensured without the coordinated action and support
of the United Nations agencies and other international
and regional organizations dealing with transnational
crime and, most important, extensive bilateral
cooperation among all countries along the main
trafficking routes.

On the national level, for the past decade
Armenia has developed effective multilateral
cooperation in the fight against transnational organized
crime and international terrorism. A network of
bilateral agreements has been established with many
countries. We also work closely with various regional
international partners, such as the Council of Europe,
the European Union, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), NATO and various United
Nations agencies, in such areas as legal reform,
improving national law enforcement capacities, border
control and intelligence systems.

As a member of the CSTO, Armenia actively
participates in its anti-drug operations. That
multinational effort brings together not only member
States, but also representatives from approximately two
dozen States and international organizations. As a
result of those efforts, operations carried out since
2003 have resulted in the confiscation of several tons
of drugs in the CSTO region. Since 2008, those efforts
have had the status of a standing regional anti-drug
operation.

In full compliance with its international
obligations, Armenia has firm control over its borders
and prevents and thwarts any encroachment. In
addition, last February, the working agreement between
the European Agency for the Management of
Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the
Member States of the European Union (Frontex) and
the National Security Council of the Republic of
Armenia established deeper cooperation between the
relevant bodies of Armenia and Frontex to fight border
crimes and enhance border security.

Secure borders are particularly important in
volatile regions such as the South Caucasus, where
still-unresolved conflicts have become a convenient
excuse for the accumulation of enormous amounts of
weaponry, very often in violation of existing treaties
and agreements. Illicit flows of armaments, drugs and
terrorist groups and terrorist activities remain a matter
of concern in the most global sense. Despite the two-
decades-long blockade of Armenia and the difficulties
and challenges that has created, fighting illicit cross-
border flows, and more specifically drug trafficking,
Armenia, in cooperation with its partners, has spared
no effort in applying preventive measures.
Armenia believes that prevention is the best
defence against the spread of illicit cross-border
trafficking, which could also undercut the foundations
for recruiting under any pretext. Through education,
awareness-raising and improved legislation and
implementation mechanisms, we can multiply the
effectiveness of our efforts. In that respect, we pay
great attention to the training and retraining of the
officials working in the Government agencies dealing
with counter-terrorism. We would like to express our
gratitude to the United States and other partner
countries for assisting us in that regard.

In conclusion, I cannot but agree with the
statements made by previous speakers to say that no
country can counter these problems alone. Their scope
and magnitude require even greater levels of
innovation and effective regional and international
cooperation. We would therefore support the proposal
for a diagnostic assessment by the Secretariat aimed at
the evaluation and enhanced coordination of our joint
efforts in this critical area.

