The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Mauritius.

Allow me at the outset to express, on behalf of
my country, our deepest grief and sympathy over the
tragedies that the people and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have endured in the
aftermath of the volcanic eruption in Goma. Our
sympathy and condolences also go to the Government
and the people of Nigeria over the huge loss of lives
caused by the bomb explosions of a military arms
depot in Lagos.

We highly appreciate the presence of those
attending this special meeting on Africa and for the
quality and content of their contributions. I would like
to extend a special and very warm welcome to the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), Mr. Amara Essy, whose presence here will
hopefully develop into a permanent feature for
consultation between the Security Council and the
African Union in the days to come.

Individually African countries have occupied and
will continue to occupy the time and attention of the
Security Council. This meeting, however, is a unique
opportunity for the Council to address the issues of the
continent as a package. What is of interest to us in
these consultations is not the past, but what the future
holds for Africa, a continent abundant in natural and
mineral resources and yet desperately awaiting the
attention and firm commitment and support of the
international community in the field of political,
economic and technological development.

Africa as a whole has unanimously condemned
the terrorist attacks of 11 September, and we are
committed to taking all measures to eradicate not only
the terrorists, but also the sources of terrorism. With
the war against terror being won and with Afghanistan
on the road to reconstruction, we consider, however,
that the time has come to reactivate the spotlight on
Africa.

It is important to know that Africa is ready to
undo the errors of the past and to shed the image of
doom and gloom, which unfortunately keeps being
projected throughout the world. The new breed of
African leaders has the determination and the political
courage to confront the truth and reality, however
painful and harsh they may be.

We are encouraged by the efforts of the
international community to address the root causes of
conflicts in Africa, as identified in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. We also note, however, that the
provisions of Security Council resolutions 1170 (1998)
and 1197 (1998) are yet to be implemented. We
therefore propose that an ad hoc working group
composed of Council members be set up to look into
the implementation aspects, as well as the enhancement
of cooperation and coordination between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council.

We are concerned by the linkages of conflicts
with the illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, with the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and with the lack of success of sanctions
regimes. We believe that the time has come for
finalizing the review process on the sanctions regimes.
In spite of the sanctions against it, UNITA still has the
capability of carrying out terrorist acts, causing the
deaths of hundreds of civilians. But at the same time, it
is important that the collateral effects of sanctions on
civilian populations be seriously studied.

Before I go further, allow me to say that we are
comforted by the interest that the G-8 has shown in
addressing the immense problems that afflict Africa.
While we welcome the attention, we wish to make it
absolutely clear that Africa has undertaken major
reassessments of an infinite variety of issues, with the
result that a political transformation of the highest
order is now in place. We are confident that the
mistakes of the past will not be repeated and that the
blueprint, as set out in the Constitutive Act of the
African Union, as well as in the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD), will not be departed
from.

Unfortunately, the boundless optimism that
accompanied the independence of African countries is
matched only by the scale of the frustration of that
optimism. Many African heroes who fought for
liberation rapidly succumbed to the temptations of
lifelong presidencies, destroying in the process all that
remained of a multiparty political system. From 1960
to date, more than 80 coups, 24 political assassinations
and about 100 attempted coups are the legacy of our
continent. Coups d'e'tat or assassinations became the
only mode of changing Governments in many
countries. That, unfortunately, became the recipe for
instability, the death of democracy and the absence of
any semblance of good governance. Africa has paid
and is still paying an intolerable price for these man-
made disasters. The unlimited power of the heads of
State who became Presidents for life undermined the
structure of the State, and the institutions crumbled.

Whether the causes of conflicts are internal or
external, the truth remains that more than 7 million
Africans have perished in 32 wars, and we have nearly
10 million refugees and internally displaced persons in
post-colonial Africa. This situation cannot endure, as
this was not the dream of the founding fathers of the
OAU. Hopefully, quite a number of conflicts are being
resolved. The inter-Congolese dialogue is now
scheduled to take place on 25 February 2002 at Sun
City in South Africa, and the implementation of the
Framework Agreement in the Comoros with elections
in April also illustrates that patience is critical in the
search for the resolution of conflicts. In West Africa, as
many other speakers have pointed out, the
improvement is visible, and peer pressure seems to be
effective.

The OAU has utilized its Central Organ of the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution with a fair degree of efficacy. The
management of conflicts has taken various forms, and
the OAU has adopted innovative mechanisms that have
been more or less successful.

The Southern African Development Community
(SADC) has a Protocol on Peace, Security and
Defence, which has an organ to deal with conflicts in
the subregion. SADC is determined to avoid conflicts
in the region and to use the organ as an instrument for
this purpose. We believe that whatever bad or negative
happens in one Member State impacts adversely on all
the other Members. In this respect, it is the duty of
every Member to protect the region from tension and
conflicts.

With regard to the conflict in the Great Lakes
region, SADC invited Uganda and Rwanda to a recent
Summit meeting in Blantyre, although these two States
are not members of SADC. Getting all the parties
directly involved in the conflict around a table greatly
helps, in our view, in confidence-building and instilling
an element of trust among the concerned parties.

The urgent establishment of an effective and
workable early warning system is of paramount
importance with regard to conflict prevention. Dealing
with a full-blown conflict consumes too many
resources, which we in Africa can ill afford. We have
in Africa a reservoir of eminent leaders and former
heads of State who can be entrusted with the task of
surveying the continent and detecting signs of potential
tension. No conflict or war gets started overnight. It
should be possible to intervene before it is too late.

The diagnosis is clear and unchallenged. Other
speakers have catalogued the appalling statistics, and I
do not propose to travel over the same ground. Africa
is trapped: poverty, disease, conflicts, HIV/AIDS and a
multiplicity of other problems demonstrate the
magnitude of the task that we face in Africa. The
population picture will be significantly altered as a
result of HIV/AIDS, with additional dangers to
regional peace and security.

The most significant development in recent
African history was the decision taken by the OAU at
the 1998 Algiers Summit to deny recognition to any
Government which came to power through
unconstitutional means. That concept is now an
integral part of the Constitutive Act of the African
Union. The message is unambiguous and
unchallengeable. That is not to say that the provision is
by itself sufficient to guarantee transparency in the
peaceful transfer of power through free and fair
elections, but it does deal a terminator blow to coups
d'etat, whose impact on the present state of affairs in
Africa has yet to be studied.

The setting up of a special war crimes court in
Sierra Leone is significant for two reasons. First, it
provides the victims of atrocities with the prospect of
justice and the certainty of punishment for the
offenders, irrespective of status or any other
consideration; and secondly, it sends a message that
crimes will not be forgotten and that the era of
impunity has come to an end.

Our experience in Africa has shown that heads of
State cling to power because of the fear of what an
incoming Government could exact from them by way
of retribution or vengeance. In such circumstances they
are prepared to go to any length to remain in power.
This problem must be addressed in a dispassionate and
objective manner; we consider that Africa is mature
enough to guarantee any outgoing head of State a
minimum of personal security as well as adequate
resources to lead his life in a dignified manner.

We have embarked on a new paradigm for Africa.
Elections which are free and fair are regularly held;
Governments that lost elections have transferred power
peacefully; institutions are being revitalized; an
independent and corruption-free judiciary and anti-
corruption tribunals and bodies are being set up all
over the continent; the rule of law is gaining at the
expense of presidential fiat; the economy is being
liberalized; the challenges of globalization are being
appraised realistically; the emergence of civil society
and human rights groups, free media, global
communications and gender programmes; an enhanced
role for the private sector; and the involvement of all
State and non-State actors in the development process:
that is news coming out of Africa every day.

We do not accept that the destiny of Africa is
poverty and despair. We are determined to escape that
cycle. We have a vision of an Africa which is rid of
conflicts and which is engaged in reconstruction - not
only of bridges and infrastructure but also of a new
mindset by which we will not continue to view the rest
of the world as the source of our difficulties. We must
claim ownership of our difficulties so that we can also
claim ownership of our successes. We cannot do it on
our own. We need assistance and support. There is a
new brand of leadership in Africa which means what it
says. The New Partnership for Africa's Development
and the Constitutive Act of the African Union contain
commitments and targets.

We urge the Security Council to be seized of the
concerns of Africa and to ensure that follow-up action
pursuant to its resolutions is taken in time. Here, we
welcome the statement made this morning by Baroness
Amos of the United Kingdom, that Africa would be
made the focus of the United Kingdom presidency next
July.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

