Mr. Amorim (Brazil): The most recent reports on
the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia contain both reassuring and disturbing
assessments of the situation. On the one hand, it is
stressed that UNPREDEP has had a stabilizing role that
has successfully contributed to preventing the spillover of
the conflict. On the other hand, tensions in neighbouring
countries continue to give rise to serious concern.

The instability across the northern border of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia argues in favour
of the continued deployment of UNPREDEP, in line with
the wishes expressed by Minister for Foreign Affairs
Blagoj Handziski in his letters to the Secretary-General
and as proposed by the Secretary-General in his latest
report.

The tasks entrusted to UNPREDEP in the draft
resolution on which we are about to take action include
monitoring the border areas and reporting on any
developments which could pose a threat to the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, including reporting on
illicit arms flows and other activities that are prohibited
under resolution 1160 (1998).

We note with satisfaction that the authorities in
Skopje have informed the Committee established by

 

resolution 1160 (1998) that they have undertaken the
necessary steps for implementing that resolution. We would
also like to recall that resolution 1160 (1998) places
particular emphasis on cooperation by neighbouring
countries concerning the establishment of a monitoring
regime. It seems natural to envisage a role for UNPREDEP
in this regard.

It is also worth pointing out that the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Greece and of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia met in Athens on 23 June - an
event which deserves to be highlighted for its intrinsic
importance - and that they called for a peaceful solution
to the Kosovo crisis. We welcome these statements as a
sign of moderation that might hopefully be followed in the
region so that all peoples in the Balkans are given the
chance they await to reconstruct their lives in an
atmosphere of increasing mutual tolerance.

UNPREDEP is being strengthened and its duration
extended for another semester beyond the date that had
been initially foreseen for its termination on the basis of the
need to avoid the so-called spillover of conflict from
neighbouring areas and of the apprehension that the
situation to the north might further deteriorate. This being
the case, it is only fair to expect that the Security Council's
consideration of the future of UNPREDEP and of the
situation in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
will benefit in time from as clear and precise information
as can be made available on the impact that various
diplomatic initiatives are having on the stabilization of the
areas beyond its borders.

