Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx and_ civil society representative Mona Frei for their briefings. We are pleased to observe the fruitful collaboration between the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and encourage them to continue on that path. On that note, we note the important work that they have conducted to date and look forward to sharing Indonesia's experience and lessons learned in preventing and countering terrorism when we host both entities, as well as the Coordinator of the Monitoring Team, later this month in Jakarta. I would also like to express my gratitude to the Monitoring Team, CTED, the Office of Counter- Terrorism and other United Nations entities for the comprehensive report before us (S/2020/95). My delegation takes note of various salient points in the report, including the point that, despite the decrease in the overall level of violence related to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the group continues to pose a serious threat through its affiliates and the attacks it has inspired. Of equal concern is the remaining large number of foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs). With that in mind, let me make three brief points. The first relates to the threat of terrorism by ISIL affiliates. Far from Iraq and Syria, ISIL affiliates continue to threaten other parts of the globe. The report clearly demonstrates that ISIL affiliates have become even more active in West and Central Africa, the Greater Sahara area, Central Asia and South-East Asia. We know that it is a threat that evolves quickly and takes on different forms. Therefore, we must ensure that our preventive measures and responses evolve equally quickly and with greater dynamism. Secondly, we note the continuing humanitarian and security challenges posed by FTFs. Issues such as how to deal with the relocation, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of returning FTFs and _ their accompanying family members present significant challenges for Member States. In that regard, with a view to discussing existing practices and challenges in South-East Asia, Indonesia, together with CTED, co-organized a regional meeting in Jakarta last week on the theme "Comprehensive and tailored strategies for the prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of persons allegedly associated with terrorist groups". We believe that further efforts need to be made to strengthen the coherence, coordination and effectiveness of prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies among Member States, with the support of the relevant United Nations agencies. That leads to my last point - preventing recidivism. As mentioned in the report, the threat posed by returnees, terrorist perpetrators, frustrated travellers and radicalized prisoners is also of continued concern. Despite the fact that some of them are still believed to be dangerous according to records, they are expected to be released soon. We cannot afford to take risks. We cannot undertake deradicalization efforts that only lead back to prison. In that connection, Indonesia advocates a comprehensive approach. To that end, with the support of the Group of Friends of Preventing Violent Extremism, Indonesia,together with Belgium and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, co-hosted an Arria Formula meeting in November 2019 on the challenges of radicalization in prisons in order to discuss strategies, best practices and persistent challenges in managing incarcerated terrorists and other violent extremist prisoners. In conclusion, while continuing with law enforcement, Indonesia believes that we should also invest in soft measures to counter terrorist narratives and steer people away from extremism. We need to promote and facilitate the spread of messages of peace, moderation and tolerance, as the best approach to confronting hatred and prevent incitement. We must provide messages that at the same time turn back negativity and amplify credible positivity.
