The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Portugal.
First of all, I would like to express Portugal's full
support for the draft resolution before the Council. Of
course, my delegation associates itself fully with the
statement that was made by the United Kingdom on
behalf of the European Union. Let me also welcome the
presence among us of Vice-Minister Higino Carneiro.

The Security Council is about to take a decision
imposing a third package of mandatory measures on the
 

Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola
(UNITA). This is a regrettable but necessary decision in
view of the persistent pattern of non-compliance by UNIT A
with the provisions of the Angolan peace process, namely
the "Acordos de Paz", the Lusaka Protocol, the relevant
Security Council resolutions and, most recently, the plan
approved by the Joint Commission on 19 May 1998.

Since the beginning of this year, 1998, UNITA has
missed five deadlines for compliance with remaining tasks
of the peace process. These deadlines were freely accepted
by UNITA and, in some cases, were actually proposed by
its leadership. As a result of this persistent non-compliance,
the great gains already achieved in this long peace process
are now in jeopardy. The international community, which
has invested heavily in helping the Angolans towards peace,
is therefore in a position now to demand that these
substantial efforts not be thrown away through irresponsible
treatment of the very important tasks that form the road
map to peace in Angola.

We appeal to UNITA to heed the message from the
Council. Its leadership should live up to its special status,
which is recognized by Angolan law and by the Lusaka
Protocol. UNIT A should seize this opportunity to cooperate
fully as a political party in the consolidation of democracy
in Angola.

These additional measures are not being imposed for
their own sake. They have a clear goal: the successful
completion of the peace process, which is in the interest,
above all, of the Angolan people themselves, including
UNITA.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/1998/504.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1173 (1998).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 7.45 pm.

