Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the situation concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My statement will focus on
three points. First, I will address the political situation,
specifically with regard to the implementation of the
agreement of 31 December 2016, which is designed to
govern the transition under way and lay the groundwork
for elections. As indicated in the report ofthe Secretary-
General dated 30 June (S/2017/565), the implementation
of that agreement by and large remains insufficient.
Secondly, I will refer to the security situation in
certain areas of the eastern and western parts of the
country, which is characterized by an increase in
clashes between armed groups and national security
forces. In part, that situation is responsible for the
disturbing increase in violations of human rights. It is
also the reason for the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation. Between May and June, the number of
people displaced in Democratic Republic of the Congo
increased by 26 per cent, totalling 1.3 million persons.
In that context - and this will be my third point - the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is
working to respond to the challenges facing the country
and continuing its adjustment efforts, as I was able to
observe during my visit to the country few weeks ago.

Six months ago, when President Kabila's second
term was ending, the signing of the 31 December 2016
agreement by all the political stakeholders involved
helped to avert a serious crisis. The agreement marked
the culmination of many months of tension and
negotiations and outlined the transition to elections at
the end of 2017, which is currently under way. With less
than six months to go before the elections, however,
not all the transitional institutions are in place, and the
consensus that characterized the progress being made a
few months ago has gradually eroded.

The Rassemblement des forces politiques et
sociales acquises au changement, the platform uniting
various opposition parties, has dissociated itself from
recent developments. On 27 April it was not among the
signatories to the special arrangement for implementing
the agreement. On 16 May, its members were absent
when Parliament inducted the transitional Government,
and we fear that this erosion of the political consensus
has also been detrimental to the establishment of the
Conseil national de suivi de l'accord. The situation
could make it even harder to maintain the spirit of
collaboration and consensus approach that the political
landscape in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
needs. That is why Mr. Maman Sidikou, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the
Great Lakes Region, have been making every effort to
exercise their good offices with a View to convincing
all the relevant political actors of the importance of
implementing the agreement as fully and quickly as
possible. It was with the aim of supporting their efforts
that I visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
mid-June. During my discussions I stressed the crucial
importance of implementing the commitments made
six months ago, and I had an opportunity to reiterate
my appeal to President Kabila.

I would like to note, however, that despite the sense
we have at times of an impasse, the progress being
made on voter registration in 24 of the 26 provinces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a source of
encouragement. By 10 July, under the leadership of the
Independent National Electoral Commission and with
MONUSCO's active support, at least 33 million voters,
of an estimated total of nearly 41 million, had been
registered. However, the security issues in the provinces
of Kasai and Kasai Central have made registration there
problematic. We should also be concerned about the
Commission's delay in publishing the election calendar,
as well as the continuing uncertainty surrounding the
financing of the elections, despite the Government's
efforts to disburse the agreed budget in the past few
months. Finally, the Chair of the Commission's recent
announcement about the impossibility of holding the
elections by the end of the year is another reason for
concern. At a time when the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is midway through its transition, it is more
essential than ever to ensure that the national political
actors and international partners, including the
members of the Security Council, mobilize once again
to get the political agreement of 31 December 2016
back on track.

(spoke in English)

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, the
security situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo continues to be a major worry. Instability persists
in a number of areas in the east and west. In the east,
a recent spate of attacks by armed groups against the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC) has added a layer of complexity to an already
volatile security landscape. In North Kivu province
in particular, Mayi-Mayi groups, among others,
recently conducted raids against FARDC positions, a
new phenomenon that MONUSCO is assessing. In the
meantime, clashes between ethnically based militias
in North Kivu have continued. In South Kivu, armed
groups have been increasingly involved in disputes
related to customary succession and in intercommunal
and transhumance-related disputes. In Ituri, the Force
de resistance patriotique de l'Ituri (F RPI) continues to
pose the single greatest threat to civilians. Conflicts
in neighbouring Burundi and South Sudan have been
spilling over into the eastern provinces of Ituri and
South Kivu in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In response, MONUSCO has continued to support
the FARDC in operations against the FRPI in Ituri and
the Lord's Resistance Army in Haut-Uele. The Mission
is also supporting local and community dialogue efforts
in North Kivu, South Kivu, Maniema and Tanganyika,
in an approach based on the belief that, while military
means may sometimes be necessary, only a political
solution can effectively address the root causes of the
various conflicts that threaten civilians.

The violence in the Kasai provinces, in the western
region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, has
reached disturbing levels. The Kamuina Nsapu militia
has targeted and killed dozens of civilians, customary
chiefs, public servants and security officers. It has also
attacked voter registration centres, schools and religious
institutions. For example, in a series of clashes with the
FARDC in Kazumba territory between 25 and 28 April,
41 militia members and 12 soldiers were killed. The
recent increase of inter-ethnic violence in the Kasai
region is just as worrying. In April, for example,
violence between Pende and Tshokwe communities
reportedly aligned with the Government, and Luba
and Lulua communities reportedly associated with the
Kamuina Nsapu militia, led to the deaths of 38 people
in Kamonia territory in Kasai province. MONUSCO
has also received reports of summary executions and
rapes, including of civilians by the security forces.

In response to the developments in the Kasai
provinces, MONUSCO has established a small and
mobile presence in various locations in order to help
protect civilians. It has deployed personnel in Bulungu,
Luiza and Tshimbulu, in Kasai Central province,
and reinforced its existing presence in Kananga and
Mbuji-Mayi. Through a combination of human rights
monitoring and political outreach, supported by a light
but increasing military presence, the Mission is helping
to bring back some measure of stability wherever it
can. In Tshimbulu, for example, the deployment in May
of a standing combat deployment has helped to enable
internally displaced people to return. Schools and
churches have reopened and the Mission is supporting
the local authorities in their mediation work. Despite
those efforts, there continue to be disturbing reports of
human rights violations and abuses on an almost daily
basis. Dozens of mass graves have been reported. So
far, national investigation efforts have been slow. The
Mbuji-Mayi military court's recent conviction of seven
FARDC officers involved in the killing of civilians
in Mwanza Lomba is a small but encouraging step
in the right direction. I welcome the Human Rights
Council's recent resolution requesting that international
investigators be appointed to assist the authorities in
that regard.

Throughout my recent visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I stressed the importance of
prioritizing political means in addressing the situation
in the Kasai provinces and emphasized the urgency
of ensuring accountability for the crimes committed,
including crimes by members of the security forces.
I also underscored the determination of the United
Nations to ensure that those responsible for the killing
of our colleagues Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan
are brought to justice. I was encouraged by the
assurances that President Kabila gave me regarding
his determination to ensure that the crimes committed
in the Kasais do not go unpunished. Such statements
of intention must, however, be followed by concrete
action. The level of cooperation and support that the
Government provides to the team of international
investigators appointed by the Human Rights Council
will be a test of its commitment to accountability.

MONUSCO continues to adjust its posture in
response to a rapidly changing environment and
to focus on supporting the implementation of the
31 December agreement in order to pave the way for
holding elections and to protect civilians. I count on
the Council's continued support to our ongoing efforts
to transform the Mission into a more agile, flexible
and responsive tool. I am committed to ensuring that
MONUSCO delivers on its core mandated objectives
as efficiently and effectively as possible and that it
continues to evolve in response to the changing situation
on the ground. In the current financial context, it will
be critical to ensure that the Mission makes the best
possible use of the resources at its disposal by focusing
on a limited set ofkey priorities. The strategic review of
the Mission is under way and, as requested, we will be
presenting the Council with options by 30 September.

The current political impasse, the rising insecurity,
and the worsening human rights and humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
require a concerted response from regional and
international partners. That response must aim to help
to create the conditions for a successful transition and
the holding of free, fair and inclusive elections, in
accordance with the Constitution. The Secretariat and
MONUSCO are determined to work with the Congolese
Government and people to achieve that goal. Together,
we must preserve the hard-won gains of the past 17
years and pave the way for the Mission's exit.

