Mr. Bessho (Japan): This will be the last time
Japan will make a statement in an open debate on the
Middle East during its two-year term as a member of
the Security Council.

Unfortunately, the Security Council has made little
progress in the Middle East peace process or pressing
regional issues in the Middle East region, including
Syria and Yemen. Japan has consistently stressed the
importance of the peaceful resolution of conflicts, the
need to fully implement Security Council resolutions
and other international commitments, and the need to
generate confidence in a region where mutual distrust
is prevalent. Japan has continued its sustained efforts,
focusing on the importance of humanitarian assistance
and social resilience.

On the Middle East peace process, Japan continues
to support a two-State solution based on the 1967
lines with mutually agreed swaps, which will achieve
peaceful coexistence between a viable Palestinian
State and Israel, with secure and recognized borders.
Japan emphasizes that this should be reached through
negotiations based on relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Quartet road map, the agreements
previously reached by the parties and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

An important step has been taken to mend the
division between the West Bank and Gaza. Japan
appreciates Egypt's efforts, in particular, and welcomes
the move towards the Palestinian Authority assuming
its responsibilities in Gaza. We hope that the agreement
between Fatah and Hamas will be implemented in a
timely manner. Japan believes that achieving effective
governance by the Palestinian Authority in Gaza is
essential for preventing conflict and making progress
in the peace process.

At the same time, the reunification of Gaza and
the West Bank should first and foremost alleviate the
humanitarian crisis that affects every facet of life in
Gaza. Last month, during the high-level week at the
General Assembly, Foreign Minister Kono announced
$20 million in additional aid to Gaza and the West
Bank, including food aid and the development of a
sewage network. To assist Palestine's development
efforts, Japan is seeking to upgrade the Corridor
for Peace and Prosperity initiative, contributing to
capacity-building at border facilities and facilitating
the distribution of goods. The economic development
of Palestine provides an important basis upon which a
viable Palestinian State and Israel can coexist in peace
and prosperity.

Japan's assistance will not only promote the
resilience of Palestine's communities and improve
economic conditions, but it will also promote
confidence-building among the relevant parties. We
are convinced that these measures will contribute
to creating an environment conducive to a two-
State solution.

Unfortunately, the two-State solution continues
to be undermined by the issues of settlements and
violence, often leading to a chain of negative reactions.
Settlement activities are in violation of international
law and physically erode the possibility of a two-
State solution. They must be fully frozen. Violence
is fundamentally incompatible with the peaceful
resolution of conflicts and leads to bitter exchanges
of rhetoric and response. It is heartbreaking to think
of people on the ground directly facing this situation.
Mindful of resolution 2334 (2016), Japan would like to
reiterate that issues of violence and settlements must be
addressed to reverse the negative trend undermining a
two-State solution.

The implementation of multilateral agreements
and Security Council resolutions is equally important
to issues pertaining to Iran. Japan supports the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which
contributes to the international non-proliferation
regime and regional stability. The International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which verifies and
monitors the implementation of commitment under this
agreement, issued a statement last week that nuclear-
related commitments undertaken by Iran under the
JCPOA were being implemented. The statement also
noted that the IAEA had had access to all locations it
needed to visit thus far. Such words are encouraging.

At the same time, the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), which endorses the JCPOA, is an important
responsibility of all Member States. Japan believes
that ballistic missile launches by Iran are inconsistent
with the resolution. The June report (S/2017/515) of
the Secretary-General on resolution 2231 (2015) calls
upon Iran to refrain from launching ballistic missiles,
which escalates regional tensions. In addition, the same
report informs us that some individuals subject to
travel ban are reportedly present in countries outside of
Iran. Japan emphasizes the need for the comprehensive
implementation of both nuclear-related and non-nuclear
aspects of the resolution.

I began today's statement by noting that the
Security Council has made little progress on Middle
East issues during Japan's current term. This is not to
discredit the important achievements of the Council
over the years or the role it can play in the days ahead.
Japan, together with other members of the Council
and the international community, will remain actively
engaged on the challenges facing the Middle East.

