Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): We would like to add
our voice to those of other colleagues in thanking
Minister Nqakula for his very timely and informative
briefing. We would like to commend his efforts in
facilitating the Burundi peace process, as well as the
efforts of other important international actors, in
particular the Regional Initiative and the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi.

We are very concerned about the situation in
Burundi, and we are following it closely. Two years
after the holding of elections and one year after the
signing of the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement,
we not only face a protracted stalemate in the peace
process, but we also have already witnessed instances
of open fighting. This is a very serious, even
dangerous, development. The international community
should do all it can to prevent a relapse into hostilities.

We believe that a sustainable solution can be
achieved only through political dialogue. In this
context, we fully concur with the briefing and with the
information that Minister Nqakula has shared with us,
and we commend his efforts aimed at reaching this
particular goal.

There is an urgent need for the resumption and
early implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement within an overall political framework that
would address the concerns of the Government and of
the Forces nationales de liberation (FNL). We hope that
all Burundian parties will be able to show political
maturity and to engage in dialogue in good faith.

Therefore, we call on the Government and on the
FNL to urgently resume the peace process and to create
conditions for Burundi to recover from the conflict.

In concluding, we would like to encourage
Minister Nqakula in his capacity as Facilitator to
continue with his efforts, working closely with the
parties in Burundi and with the regional parties, to
achieve the final objective, which is peace, stability
and sustainable development in Burundi.

Lastly, we support the draft press statement that
has been prepared by the delegation of France, and we
thank France for preparing it.

