Mr. Gaye (spoke in French): I express my deep
respect to the Security Council and thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to present
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
the Central African Republic (S/2014/562).

Significant progress has been made at the political
level in recent weeks, in particular since the summit
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) in Malabo and the meeting ofthe International
Contact Group ofthe Central African Republic in Addis
Ababa. The convening of the Brazzaville meeting
and the signing on that occasion of the cessation of
hostilities agreement on 23 July marked the beginning
ofa political process that is essential to lasting stability
in the Central African Republic. It is an important step
forward, since only political dialogue can lead to a
consensus on key issues such as the establishment of a
professional national army that is representative of the
nation, as the Council has called for, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of combatants and the
holding of elections, as well as economic reform and
governance.

The discussions before, during and after the
Brazzaville meeting reflect the long way still to go
and the essential role of international mediation in that
regard. The mediator, the President of the Republic of
the Congo, Mr. Denis Sassou Nguesso, supported by
the mediators of the United Nations and of the African
Union, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily and Mr. Soumeylou
Boubeye Maiga, respectively, played a central role in
the signing of the cessation of hostilities agreement.
The mediators continue to work in close coordination
with the group of eight and with all stakeholders in
supporting the implementation of the agreement and
the preparation of the next phases of the process,
including organizing consultations with grassroots
communities and a forum on reconciliation and national
reconstruction in Bangui.

The road will be long and difficult. Following
the Brazzaville meeting, the Head of State of the
transition appointed a Prime Minister on 10 August.
That appointment triggered negative reactions among
the main actors, in particular the ex-Seleka and the
opposition parties who were invited to join the new
Government. That situation is of concern. In that
regard, we must encourage the transitional authorities
to do everything in their power to ensure that the new
Government is inclusive and respects the interests of
all key stakeholders. Only an inclusive Government can
move forward and complete the transition.

Disseminating the provisions of the agreement
in the country, establishing a follow-up mechanism
and investigating violations are now our priority.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), in cooperation with the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA), ECCAS and other members of
the group of eight, proposed a monitoring mechanism
in consultation with the Government, which has in
principle been approved by the Head of State of the
transition. It provides for a three-level mechanism,
consisting of a monitoring committee, a technical
implementation committee and local committees in
the prefectures and the hotspots. The committees are
to be led jointly by the transitional authorities and
international actors. MINUSCA will start talks with
the new Government once it has assumed its duties in
order to ensure that the mechanism is established and
begins its work as quickly as possible.

In that context, it is critical to implement the
provisions of the cessation of hostilities agreement
on the cantonment of combatants and of all signatory
groups. In that regard, I count on the Council's support
to mobilize the necessary financial assistance for that
cantonment.

In the light of the current situation in the Central
African Republic, implementing the follow-up and
investigating violations of the cessation of hostilities
agreement will not be easy. Those who have signed the
agreement do not necessarily have control over all their
elements in the field, and some of their fighters do not
know that a cessation of hostilities agreement has been
signed. Besides the lack of coherence and consistency
in the command and control of the armed groups,
the lack of a means of communication is a factor to
be taken into consideration. The radio broadcasting
capacity does not currently cover the entire country,
and approximately 70 per cent of the nation and more
than half of the population have no access to any media.
MINUSCA supports the strengthening of Government
communications and, in that regard, is also committed
to developing a plan so as to establish its own radio
broadcasting capacity at the national level.

(spoke in English)

There has been a relative improvement in the
security situation, particularly in Bangui, thanks to the
international forces, including the European Union-led
peacekeeping force, as well as in other locations, such
as Bambari and Boda, where MISCA and Operation
Sangaris are present. As a result, the number of
internally displaced persons has significantly decreased
in Bangui and some Muslim traders have returned from
Cameroon. Thanks to the support of neighbouring
countries, the World Bank and the Peacebuilding Fund,
civil servants and members of the national security
forces are being paid, which has helped to stabilize the
situation.

However, clashes in Batangafo and, more recently,
in Mbres are a stark reminder that the security situation
remains extremely volatile and that civilians remain at
risk in most parts of the country. Twenty-six people,
including two MISCA peacekeepers, were killed as
result of violence by anti-balaka against ex-Seleka
in Batangafo on 31 July and there were subsequent
reprisal attacks. Further violent clashes involving
ex-Sele'ka elements and international forces on 5 August
led to the death of at least 50 more people. In Mbres,
38 people were killed due to sectarian violence.

The human rights situation remains dire. Although
more limited in scope, sectarian violence and the cycle
of violent attacks and reprisals continue in many places
in the country where State authority remains largely
absent. During my recent visit to Bambari, the local
authorities noted that most of the violence was initiated
by anti-balaka, who are hiding among displaced
populations. They underscored the high level of
tension and antagonism between Muslim and Christian
communities, highlighting the de-facto partition of the
city between Muslim and Christian neighbourhoods.

Addressing rampant impunity through effective
measures remains a key priority in order to hold
the perpetrators of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law accountable. In that
context, the agreement with the transitional Government
on the modalities for implementing urgent temporary
measures is an encouraging first step. Supporting
the Government in establishing the proposed special
national jurisdiction, in which international judges and
prosecutors will be attached to a special national body,
will require the support not only of MINUSCA but
also of the broader international community. Efforts
are under way to support the transitional authorities
in drafting the required national legislation, while we
have begun identifying experienced personnel who
would be part of that jurisdiction.

Humanitarian needs remain immense in all sectors.
Two and a half million people - more than half of the
population of the Central African Republic - are in
dire need of humanitarian assistance. Those needs
are exacerbated by the precarious conditions and
extreme vulnerability of the population. Immediate
and sustained support for humanitarian operations
therefore remains of the utmost urgency.

We are less than four weeks from the transfer of
authority from MISCA to MINUSCA. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank the African Union and
MISCA for their excellent cooperation over the past
months on the basis of mutual respect and transparency.
We will be re-hatting the majority of the MISCA
police and military personnel and have recruited some

qualified civilians from that mission. Efforts are under
way to combine the joint operations centres of MISCA
and MINUSCA and to co-Iocate the MISCA and
MINUSCA police and military headquarters.

A United Nations mobile training team is carrying
out in-mission training of trainers for the MISCA
military and police personnel that will be re-hatted. The
curriculum encompasses material on United Nations
standards, as well as key mandated tasks, including the
protection of civilians, child protection and conflict-
related sexual violence.

In parallel, the Departments of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support have
been active in the generation of additional capabilities
for MINUSCA. Force generation processes have been
accelerated. Similar efforts are under way to speed up
contracting and movement timelines.

Although completing the deployments of the
additional military, police and civilian capacities will
take time, we are confident that MINUSCA will reach
its initial operating capability on 15 September. Efforts
are also under way to open integrated field offices in
Bouar, Kaga Bandoro and Bria before 15 September.
The presence ofMINUSCA military, police and civilian
personnel outside Bangui will be essential in order to
bring about an immediate improvement in people's
lives and to create an environment in which sustainable
peace can take hold.

(spoke in French)

Before concluding, I would like to recall that almost
a year ago, on 14 August 2013, I briefed the Security
Council in person (see S/PV.7206). I concluded my
briefing by saying that it was time to act. One year and
four resolutions later, we note the start of a political
process, a United Nations peacekeeping operation that
will begin operations within four weeks and the ongoing
support of the region and the entire international
community. I believe that we are fulfilling our duty,
but it is truly our moral duty to continue to mobilize
for the crisis in the Central African Republic and the
suffering of its people.

