The President (Spoke in Arabic): As this is the
first formal meeting of the Security Council this year,
I would like to extend my warm wishes on the occasion
of the New Year to all members of the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the United Nations as a whole.

In presiding over the first formal meeting of the
Council in 2014, I am happy to welcome the other new
members, namely, Chad, Chile, Lithuania and Nigeria.
We all look forward to their participation in the work
of the Council. Their experience and wisdom will be of
invaluable assistance in the discharge of the Council's
responsibilities.

I also take this opportunity to express the Council's
gratitude to the outgoing members - Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo - for their
important contributions to the work of the Council
during their terms in 2012 and 2013.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President (spoke in Arabic): I also take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to His Excellency Mr. Gerard Araud, Permanent
Representative of France, for his service as President of
the Security Council for the month of December 2013.
I am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing my deep appreciation to Ambassador Araud
and his team for successfully conducting the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Central African Republic

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/2013/787)


The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
of Her Excellency Ms. Leonie Banga-Bothy, Minister
for Foreign Affairs, African Integration, Francophonie
and Central Africans Abroad of the Central African
Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/787, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.

1 now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.


