Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda for their information on the
current state of affairs at the Tribunals and on measures
being taken to complete pending legal proceedings.

The reports of the Tribunals and today's briefing
are very important from a practical point of view
because the Security Council, in its resolutions 1900
(2009) and 1901 (2009), affirmed that it would take a
decision on a further extension of the terms of office of
the judges, taking into account the updated schedule of
proceedings prepared by the Tribunals. In its decisions,
the Security Council has confirmed the timelines for
the functioning of the Tribunals.

By now we should already have been moving
towards a countdown to the completion of their work.
However, the picture that has taken shape is dismal.
One thing that is bewildering is the fact that, in
December 2009, the Security Council received reports
containing completely different timelines for the
completion of proceedings. What has happened in the
past six months that was so unforeseen and
extraordinary that the ICTY, for example, is reporting a
substantial increase in the length of all trials without
exception?

We are not talking here of one- or two-month
extensions. The case of Vojislav Seselj is being drawn
out for an additional 20 months beyond the information
previously reported to the Council; that of Mic'o
Stanisie and Stojan Zupljanin for an additional 14
months; that of Jovica Stanisie and Franko Simatovie
for an additional 13 months; and that of Zdravko
Tolimir for an additional 12 months. This is true for
every case.

Moreover, a number of the accused have been in
custody for six or seven years already. Is such a
practice really in line with universally recognized
human rights norms and civilized standards for the
administration of justice? Given the fact that the work
of the Tribunals is entering its concluding phase, we
would like to receive more realistic projections from
them and, most importantly, to see these projections
carried out in practice. We call on the Tribunals to
exhibit the utmost concentration to carry out
operational work on current trials and to show
flexibility on technical issues.

One key factor in the effective completion of the
Tribunal's mandates is ensuring the effective
cooperation of States 4 and above all the States of the
regions - with the Tribunals. In this connection, we
note the positive assessments contained in the report of
the ICTY Prosecutor Serge Brammertz about the level
of cooperation of the Serbian authorities with the
Tribunal. It is regrettable that other States in the
European and African regions have not been successful
in significantly increasing the effectiveness of their
cooperation with the Tribunals or ensuring timely and
effective responses to requests from the Prosecutors of
the Tribunals.

The Security Council is actively preparing the
model for the future residual mechanism that will
partially inherit the tasks and prerogatives of both
Tribunals. We can say with certainty that the Security
Council's decision on this issue will set a precedent,
for in the history of international justice there has been
no case of an international tribunal completing its
work. That is why it is so important to analyse in detail
the whole host of issues related to the establishment of
a new international structure, including its status,
jurisdiction, working methods and cooperation with
Member States.

The nature of the residual mechanism is still
difficult to ascertain. However, our delegation long ago
set out the basic parameters that we consider absolutely
necessary. It must be a compact mechanism with
clearly defined jurisdiction that operates on the basis of
a fixed mandate and that exists for a finite period. In
addition, the archives to be handed over to the
mechanism should remain the property of the United
Nations. We believe that, if those conditions are
fulfilled, it will be possible to create a genuinely
effective structure that is capable, in an effective
manner and at the highest professional level, to
conclude the complex and politically sensitive process
of restoring justice in the relevant regions and of
bringing the guilty to justice.

