Mr. Yacouba (spoke in French): I would first
like to express my gratitude for this opportunity to
address the Security Council on the important issue of
strengthening the capacity of Mali's security forces in
the fight against organized crime and terrorism.

The Mali context is plagued by a resurgence of
terrorist attacks in the north, and increasingly in the
centre of the country, against the Mali's defence and
security forces, as well as the forces of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), Operation Barkhane
and the civilian population. During their recent visit,
Council members were able to assess the extent of the
consequences of those attacks.

Between 2013 and 26 October this year, direct and
indirect attacks injured 387 peacekeepers and killed
86 personnel from MINUSMA, while 172 staff from
humanitarian non-governmental organizations were
subject to multiple acts of violence, including executions
and kidnappings. The Malian forces and the civilian
population are also suffering, and just this morning six
civilians were killed, and a further 10 injured, by an
explosive device in the Gao region.

The situation is equally disturbing from the
socioeconomic standpoint. For instance, more than 500
schools in the centre and north of the country remain
closed. Criminal groups are experiencing success due
to the enormous resources that they are drawing from
all types of trafficking, and through substituting the
State by providing security and basic social services
to the inhabitants of their zones of influence, where
the local population are reluctant to cooperate with
the Malian defence and security forces or international
forces due to fear of retaliation.

The security situation in the subregion is hardly
exemplary. It is in that context that, as members are
aware, the States of the Group of Five for the Sahel
are endeavouring to stand up a Joint Force to fight
terrorism and transnational organized crime - at
the heart of which the investigation and repression of
crime must be better taken into account. In line with
resolution 2364 (2017), MINUSMA is striving to
support the establishment of reformed defence and
security institutions to contribute to the restoration
of State authority and the subsequent return of basic
social services, as stipulated in the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation.

MINUSMA is also supporting the development
of a national strategy to prevent and combat violent
extremism and terrorism. That vision must in particular
unify all the relevant State and non-State bodies in order
to prevent threats linked to terrorism. That explains the
importance and urgent need to establish effective local
security measures, for which MINUSMA has developed
a detailed concept to involve the local population in
identifying and resolving its own security challenges.

Whether acting alone or in concert with partners,
MINUSMA police support the capacity-building
of Mali's structures to combat organized crime and
terrorism. At the strategic level, the United Nations
has contributed to the drafting of a national strategy to
ensure that the gender perspective is taken into account.
Through its capacity-building activities, MINUSMA
has trained nearly 24,000 security force personnel,
including 1,385 in the fight against organized crime
and terrorism. The Mission is also engaged in the
construction and renovation of infrastructure, the
provision of equipment and support for the operational
co-location and coordination efforts, particularly the
nine specialized units through which MINUSMA
provides a range of advice and expertise.
To that end, MINUSMA police continue to
support the work of the Malian specialized judicial
unit and has made available its scientific and technical
police laboratory, while supporting the setting up
of a similar national laboratory. The specialized
investigations brigade alone handled 71 cases related to
terrorism, money laundering, weapon-smuggling and
human trafficking.

The implementation of our mandate is fraught
with challenges, especially with regard to the process
of reforming the security sector, which is slow in
coming to fruition. Other challenges lie in the weak
governance of the justice, security and defence sectors,
the size of the Malian territory, the climate, the
porous nature of the country's borders, the multiple
obstacles to implementing the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation, and the deficits in the deployment of
specialized and French-speaking police and armoured
vehicles at the disposal of formed police units.

Despite the efforts made thus far, the security
and social fabric is continuing to deteriorate seriously
in the Sahel. It is therefore my humble opinion that
the countries of the subregion of the Sahel and their
neighbours would benefit from a more dynamic
approach focused on a merging of sectoral strategies.

Before concluding, I would like to recall that
MINUSMA police and the various stakeholders strongly
support the Malian defence and security forces in
carrying out their activities, reform and redeployment,
despite the many challenges, as well as constraints in
terms of personnel and logistics, facing them.

