Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to begin my statement by
expressing my delegation's gratitude to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salame for the information provided on the report on
the activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) (S/2018/429) and the report on the
implementation of resolution 2357 (2017) (S/2018/451).
We also thank Ambassador Olof Skoog, in his capacity
as Chair ofthe Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for keeping us informed of the Committee's activities.

We extend our gratitude to the African Union for
its efforts to mediate and seek solutions, as well as to
the European Union military operation in the Southern
Central Mediterranean - Operation Sophia - for its
extensive work in controlling the smuggling of arms
and related materials on the high seas to and from
Libya, thereby preventing possible violations of the
arms embargo and their proliferation. Measures such
as these and those set out in resolutions 2362 (2017)
and 2380 (2017), related to the prevention of illegal oil
exports from Libya and the fight against smuggling of
migrants and trafficking in persons, respectively, will
have our full support provided that they comply with
all the guarantees of international law. We believe that
they must be extended until the conflict is brought to
an end and the Libyan Government can take full control
of the situation.

In addition, we urge the Libyan Government to
continue to work with the United Nations to put an
end to these aberrations and to redouble its efforts to
ensure that those responsible for systematic violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law, on
both sides, are held accountable and brought to justice.

Despite these small steps forward, the Security
Council and the international community must urgently
focus on the negative impact of this political and
military conflict on the economic and humanitarian
situation in the country. The ongoing clashes between
armed groups and militias and the presence of terrorist
groups from other countries affect more than 1 million
people, resulting in large internal displacements and a
great need for humanitarian assistance in much of the
country. This situation requires an immediate, or at
least relatively expeditious, solution, as we have said
on other occasions, to bring some hope to war victims.

My delegation considers it essential to eliminate
the presence of armed groups, militias and terrorist
organizations, which currently operate with
considerable impunity, as they are a major factor in
the political instability in Libyan territory, beyond the
clashes between the various communities. The regional
consequences of the situation in Libya are inescapable,
with many countries in Africa affected by the situation.
Libya's security problems and instability can gradually
affect the countries of the region, becoming genuine
threats to international peace and security.

In connection with the electoral process, my
Government fully subscribes to the African Union
Commission's 4 May communique strongly condemning
the 2 May terrorist attack in Tripoli on the High
Commission for National Elections, which claimed the
lives of 14 people and left several injured, including
Commission staff and police officers. The attack,
which is an outrage against the Libyan people and the
Government, must not undermine efforts to prepare the
country for national reconciliation and the organization
of national elections. We also appeal to Libyan political
actors and reiterate the need to create an environment
conducive to the holding of the elections, which would
constitute a significant step towards the resolution of
the political crisis. We also reiterate that the solution to
the political and military conflict in Libya depends on
Libyans themselves making use of their independence
and sovereignty. In that regard, we welcome the peace
agreement signed on 11 May in Dakar among more
than 20 Libyan political leaders, including the most
influential and representative figures of all political
and social movements in the country. We hope that
these three days of intra-Libyan reflection will lead to
reconciliation, peace and sustainable development.

We once again insist on the search for a peaceful
solution and more effective measures to protect the
most vulnerable civilians, particularly migrants, who
continue to suffer human rights violations, including
illegal deprivation of liberty, arbitrary detention and
forced labour. To tolerate that kind of activity means
regressing and reliving the pain and outrage that many
would like to forget.

In conclusion, we applaud the work of UNSMIL for
its efforts in establishing a constitutional framework,
thereby ending the political transition period in Libya
through dialogue and reconciliation among the parties
to the internal conflict, which, in our view, is the only
way to put an end to this prolonged and painful conflict
that is a source for great concern.

