Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): I thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this open briefing on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, an issue to which
we attach great importance. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his presence today and for his
intervention. I also thank Ambassador Kamel Morjane,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his comprehensive briefing. We join previous
speakers in paying tribute to him, and we commend
him for the excellent work he has accomplished as
head of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

We note that the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has generally remained calm
and that the Ceasefire Agreement continues to be
respected. There is overall progress in the
implementation of the plans and sub-plans for
disengagement and redeployment. All of these positive
developments are encouraging signs that the parties to
the conflict are determined to take the peace process
forward. However, we should not be complacent,
because the peace process is still fragile and can easily
and abruptly turn around, with tremendous
consequences.

The contribution that the inter-Congolese
dialogue will make in bringing peace to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo cannot be undermined. We
attach particular importance to the success of this
dialogue. We commend former President Masire, the
facilitator of the inter-Congolese dialogue, for his
efforts to convene the preparatory meeting. We stress
the need to ensure that the preparatory meeting
scheduled for 20 August takes place without hindrance.
Indeed, we are receiving reports that the democratic
spirit among the ordinary Congolese is very much alive
and that both the Congolese and the facilitator are on
the right path for peace. We must take advantage of this
positive development. We call on all the parties to
participate in the dialogue, which can be successful
only with the full and free participation of civil society.

However, we are concerned about reports of an
upsurge of violence in the two Kivus over the last few
weeks. We make a strong appeal to all the parties
concerned to refrain from acts of violence and to
honour their commitment under the Lusaka Agreement,
which remains the most viable solution to the conflict.
Likewise, the eastward movement of armed rebel
groups and the alleged incursions of negative forces
into Rwanda and Burundi are disturbing elements.
These events are clear indications that we can no
longer delay the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR)
process. At the same time, we believe that in order to
address the regional dimension of the conflict, it would
be important to facilitate many bilateral and
multilateral meetings among all the parties concerned.
In this context, we welcome the recent meeting
between President Kagame and President Kabila in the
presence of the Secretary-General, on the margins of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Summit in
Lusaka, as well as the meeting President Kabila held
with President Museveni. Such bilateral meetings can
go a long way towards confidence-building.

The continued reluctance of the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie (RCD) to demilitarize
Kisangani, in spite of repeated calls by the Security
Council, cannot be tolerated. It is also totally
unacceptable that the personnel of MONUC should
face obstructions and harassment by RCD elements in
the performance of their work. We strongly condemn
such uncooperative attitudes, and we appeal to all those
concerned to allow MONUC to carry out its mandate
without any hindrance.

MONUC, under the guidance of Ambassador
Morjane, is doing a commendable job and has had a
positive impact on the peace process. It is now known
that the mere presence or even the announcement of the
arrival of MONUC in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo is a compelling force that the Congolese
people respond to with great hope and enthusiasm. This
is the time when the inter-Congolese dialogue needs to
make every effort to accompany the Congolese people
in their struggle for peace and stability.

We consider the present size of MONUC to be
inadequate given the task that lies ahead. We also note
that MONUC is not yet fully deployed at the level
authorized by resolution 1291 (2000). No hesitation on
our part to make the extra effort should be allowed to
compromise the peace process in any manner. We wish
to emphasize the call made recently by the OAU
Summit in Lusaka, appealing to the Security Council,
when designing and planning the third phase of the
deployment of MONUC, to take into account the need
to guarantee the stability and security of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo after the withdrawal
of foreign troops.

We deplore the fact that full operational
information on the actual positions of parties
signatories to the Lusaka Agreement have not yet been
provided to MONUC. We call upon the parties
concerned to convey these details without any further
delay for verification by MONUC, so that the next
phase of DDRRR can be planned accordingly.

The DDRRR programme alone will not be able to
resolve the problem of Violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The programme needs to be
accompanied by proper economic assistance in order to
have sustainable peace and development. In fact, we
should already start thinking about the post-conflict
stage, when a comprehensive programme of action
should be undertaken to address the various problems
of the country, in particular the issue of the
rehabilitation and reintegration of child soldiers. In this
respect, we make an appeal to the international donor
community, including the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, to assist the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in its
economic recovery. We also look forward to the
recommendations of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of the Natural Resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Panel is
expected to deliver an addendum to its first report.
Meanwhile, we reiterate that the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo belong to the
people of that country alone, and we condemn all
illegal exploitation.

The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the region remains
another area of serious concern. While we appeal to the
international community to assist in ameliorating the
situation, we also call on all parties to guarantee
humanitarian agencies secure and unimpeded access.
Before concluding, my delegation wishes once
again to commend Ambassador Morjane for the
excellent work he has done in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. He carried his work out with full
dedication over the last 20 months. We wish him every
the success in his new assignment.

