Mr. Deng (South Sudan): I would like to begin
by congratulating you, Mr. President, on France's
assumption of the presidency for this month. I would
also like to acknowledge your predecessor's leadership
of the Council last month.

I would now like to thank you, Mr. President, for
granting me the opportunity to address the Security
Council on the important issue of sanctions against my
country. It would, however, be disingenuous of me to
say that it is with great that pleasure that I do so.

It has been an open secret for some time that the
United States was working on a draft resolutionesolution
on sanctions against South Sudan. The reasons given
for the threat of sanctions were the frustration and
impatience of the international community with the
lack of progress in the peace process. As I said in my
statement to the Security Council on 25 November,

"The frustration of the international
community with the pace of talks in Addis Ababa
is understandable, but a sustainable solution to the
current crisis in South Sudan cannot be achieved
by the imposition of sanctions" (S/PV. 7322, p. 2).

In that statement, I went on to say,

"It is a well-known fact that sanctions hardly ever
achieve their intended objective. Instead, they only
tend to harden positions towards confrontation
rather than cooperation. We believe that the
international community can play a positive role
by engaging both parties constructively to expedite
the conclusion of an agreement" (ibid)

In any case, frustration cannot be a sound rationale
for the Security Council to take such an important
decision on issues pertaining to the maintenance of
international peace and security. If, as is often said, the
goal is not to target top leaders, but some middle-level
individuals, more or less in a symbolic way, who may
not be playing a pivotal role in the peace process, such
a punishment may be an exercise in futility. On the
other hand, punishing persons who are playing leading
roles at this crucial juncture in the peace process
could be counterproductive against the cause of peace.
Prioritizing peace and accountability becomes a critical
policy consideration.

If, as we have been made to understand, resolution
2206 (2015) is merely procedural, aimed at creating a
framework for a sanctions regime and not at actually
implementing sanctions, then it amounts to a threat.
But a threat is meaningful only if it is credible, and if
credibility means that sanctions will in fact be imposed
if the parties do not make tangible progress towards
peace, then the question is what positive impact such
sanctions will have on the peace process. It has been
repeatedly stated by Southern Sudanese leaders that
sanctions threaten to undermine the peace process.
The critical question is whether sanctions are a
punishment for failure to make peace or an inducement
for making peace. The implications of either are of
critical importance. If they are a punishment, then the
issue ends there. If they are an inducement, then they
constitute a negative measure that can only generate a
negative response and be counterproductive.

Early in December 2014, a high-level delegation
of Minsters, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation and the Minister in the
Office of the President, visited Washington, D.C., to
deliver a letter from President Salva Kiir to President
Barack Obama, and then proceeded to New York to
brief individual members of the Security Council,
other ambassadors and senior United Nations officials
on developments in the peace process. The objective of
the visit was to impress upon Washington, D.C., and
the United Nations that, contrary to popular perception,
considerable progress had been made and was being
made towards ending the conflict and restoring peace
and national reconciliation. The ministers reported that
most contentious issues had been resolved and that
the two areas where there were still differences were
the structure of the Government and power-sharing
arrangements. They repeatedly stated that what South
Sudan needed was understanding and support, not
punishment.

It is truly ironic that while President Salva Kiir has
made major concessions in negotiating with the rebel
movement, whose declared objective is the overthrow of
a popularly elected Government, he has mostly received
criticism rather than appreciation for his magnanimity.
Is South Sudan going to be better off with a change of
Government in favour of the rebel leaders or without
their elected leaders? That is a question the Council
should reflect upon in earnest. I believe in constructive
criticism, but it has to be precisely that - constructive
and productive.
Recent republican orders issued by President Kiir
confirm his determination to do all he can to end the
senseless tragedy for his country. The President has
issued three orders to that end. The first republican
order grants amnesty to all those waging war against
the State. Some will see this as evidence of impunity,
which is widely condemned, but it should also be seen
as a step towards peace and reconciliation, which are
universally called for. The second republican order is a
declaration of unilateral ceasefire by the Government,
with strict instructions to the army to fight only in
self-defence, if and when attacked. That places on the
rebels the moral burden of choosing between pursuing
war or making peace. The third Republican order
gives directives for the implementation of the Arusha
agreement of 21 January 2015 on the reunification of
the SPLM.

Those republican orders should help build
confidence among the three parties to the conflict - the
Government, the SPLM. in Opposition and the SPLM
former detainees - and gain the support of the
international community for an early end to violence.
What the President and the Government of South Sudan
need is encouragement and support, not condemnation.

A lesson could be drawn from the African Union
Commission of Inquiry for South Sudan, chaired by
former President Obasanjo. Its report has not been
released, precisely because the leadership ofthe African
Union fears that it might have a negative impact on the
peace process. In any case, now that the Security Council
has adopted the resolution on sanctions, we hope that The President (spoke in French): There are no
it will refrain from actually imposing sanctions and more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
engage the parties in a constructive dialogue to bring a Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
speedy end to the conflict. of its consideration ofthe item on its agenda.

The meeting rose a111.10p.m.
