Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her briefing
and commend her astute leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Nigeria
commends the transitional Government in Haiti for the

significant progress recorded in the country's political
process. The first round of legislative elections, held
in August, attests to the commitment of the country's
leaders and, indeed, of the people of Haiti to democratic
governance. It is understood that all political parties
in the country have a pivotal role to play in ensuring
the success of the electoral process. We urge the
Government to align the decisions of the Provisional
Electoral Council with those of the courts in order to
minimize the risk of violence and foster the necessary
consensus for elections to be held as scheduled.

Successful elections will require robust
international support. That is why we welcome the
indispensable support of the international community
in the collective effort of assisting Haiti to sustain
democracy and good governance. The participation
of international election observation missions would
inspire the confidence of political parties, candidates
and voters in their electoral process.

We commend the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Office for Project
Services, MINUSTAH and other international
partners for the technical and logistical assistance
they have provided in support of the elections in Haiti.
The anti-fraud measures that are being put in place,
including the electronic transmission of tally sheets
from polling stations to operations centres, give some
assurance that the elections will be credible. That is
crucial to an outcome that reflects the will of Haiti's
voters.

Beyond those significant developments in
organizational matters, we welcome the ongoing
initiatives aimed at securing a peaceful environment
during the elections. The Haitian National Police has
worked hard to create an atmosphere conducive to
holding peaceful elections. We are hopeful that the
integrated security deployment planned by the joint
electoral cell, composed of both Haitian police and
MINUSTAH uniformed components, can eliminate
the possibility of electoral violence. We commend
MINUSTAH for arranging special protection for
female candidates during the elections, which should
help to encourage the women of Haiti to participate in
their country's electoral process.

In Haiti today, the National Police needs to grow,
both in size and in capability. We note the efforts that
have been made to strengthen its specialized units and
increase the number of trainees admitted to the police
training programme, with a view to reaching a target
of 15,000 officers by 2016. The increase in violence
and unrest during the reporting period underscores the
importance of improving police capacity in the area of
crowd control and other aspects of law enforcement.
Efforts to enhance the competence, professionalism,
accountability and discipline of the police will serve to
build public confidence in that key national institution.

Nigeria takes positive note of the Haitian
Government's ongoing efforts to cooperate with
MINUSTAH and other partners and stakeholders
in strengthening the country's legal and judicial
frameworks. Those represent noteworthy steps towards
consolidating the rule of law in Haiti. The renewal of
the mandates of seven members of the Superior Council
of the Judiciary and key administrative nominations
have greatly improved the capacity of the justice sector.
Similarly, the consultations on a draft Penal Code
involving a broad range of stakeholders, including
some from civil society, and the revision of the
Criminal Procedure Code, represent significant steps
forward in legislative reform. We want to encourage
the Government to work to expedite the process of
renewing judges' terms so as to enhance the judiciary's
efficiency.

While such positive developments in Haiti are
testament to MINUSTAH's effectiveness, we would
like to encourage the Mission to continue to use existing
means and capabilities within its mandate to enhance
stability there. There is considerable merit in the
Secretary-General's proposal in his report (S/2015/667)
to undertake a strategic assessment of the situation in
Haiti. As the situation evolves, so must the role of the
United Nations.

