The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.

At the outset, South Africa wishes to reiterate
its unequivocal and strong support for the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO). The Mission, as its name indicates, was
created almost 30 years ago, with a mandate to hold a
referendum to allow the people of Western Sahara to
exercise their right to self-determination. We lament
the fact that such a referendum has, unfortunately,
not occurred, depriving the people of the territory of
Western Sahara of this universally accepted right.

South Africa wishes once again to commend the
political process facilitated by the Secretary-General's
good offices, through his former Special Envoy,
Mr. Horst Kohler, as well as the efforts of the Special
Representative and Head of MINURSO, Mr. Colin
Stewart. A new Personal Envoy should be appointed as
soon as possible to continue this process.

Although resolution 2494 (2019), which was just
adopted, contains numerous paragraphs with which
South Africa can agree, there remain several elements
of concern to our delegation, as follows.

First, the current text, as it stands, is not balanced.
It does not provide a true reflection of the unfortunate
undertaking by the two parties, Morocco and the
Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, as the latter is
referred as a member of the African Union, represented
by the Frente Popular para la Liberacion de Saguia el-
Hamra y de Rio de Oro (Frente POLISARIO) in the
political process under discussion. Indeed, both parties
are members of the African Union.
Secondly, we note that once again terms such as
"realistic", "realism" and "compromise" are being
used in the resolution. These references are an attempt
to undermine the principle of self-determination for
the people of Western Sahara, which, as has been
established by numerous General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, is relevant to the situation
in Western Sahara. The Council must reaffirm its long-
standing and unequivocal commitment to the right to
self-determination for the people of Western Sahara in
an unqualified manner.

South Africa would have preferred a six-month
mandate for MINURSO, which we believe would have
allowed the Council to regularly meet to consider the
progress made on the appointment of the Special Envoy
and the status of the political process. The argument put
forward for the Council to meet regularly on items on
its agenda should also hold for the situation in Western
Sahara. Western Sahara should not be treated differently
from the other issues on the Council's agenda in similar
circumstances, and we should not allow for an out-of-
sight, out-of-mind approach to this matter.

South Africa welcomes the reference to human
rights in the seventeenth to twentieth preambular
paragraphs of resolution 2494 (2019). However, we
wish to reiterate that there is a need for a formal human
rights mandate to strengthen the monitoring of possible
human rights violations on all sides, by Morocco and
the Frente POLISARIO.

Lastly, we wish to note once again that the text
must differentiate between the parties to the conflict:
Morocco, the Frente POLISARIO and the neighbouring
States of Algeria and Mauritania. We wish to reiterate
once again that the Council's working methods on this
matter, whereby it delegates responsibility to the Group
ofFriends ofWestern Sahara, remain of serious concern
to South Africa. We have consistently raised this issue
as problematic, particularly the unrepresentative nature
of the Group, which does not include a single African
member of the Council, despite the fact that this is an
African issue.

The substantive concerns that we have raised
regarding the text could have and should have been
raised in negotiations on the text. However, despite
having been elected by the General Assembly to serve
on and participate in the work of the Security Council,
we were not given that opportunity. This process
presents Council members that are not members of the
Group of Friends with a text with a take-it-or-leave-it
approach, which is not sustainable and does not allow
us the opportunity to carry out our mandate.

South Africa reiterates its principled position on
the situation in the Western Sahara, which remains
the last colony on the African continent, listed by the
United Nations as a Non-Self-Governing Territory.
Given our concerns and in considering the text before
us, as the resolution renews the mandate of MINURSO
and endorses the political process embarked upon by
the former Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General,
South Africa was not able to vote in favour. That is why
we abstained.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 3.40 pm.
