Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs ofMali,
His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, whose presence is
important for all of us and for ourjoint efforts in Mali.

I would also like to thank the new Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, for his very enlightening briefing and to take
this opportunity to extend our warmest wishes for
success in his new duties.

Almost two years after the signing ofthe Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, and despite the
real progress made, Mali is in a difficult situation and
remains subject to the threat of terrorist groups. The
alliance of terrorist groups that was announced a month
ago under Al-Qaida in the Sahel, under the command of
Iyad ag Ghali, reveals a macabre competition between
Da;esh and Al-Qaida in Africa. In that context, it is
more than ever urgent that the Malian parties fully
implement the peace agreement at two levels.

First, at the political level, it is urgent that the
Malian parties fully implement the agreement. After
long months of stagnation, real progress has been
made recently by the Government and the signatory
armed group to fulfil their commitment under the
peace agreement. This includes the installation of
some interim authorities in the north of the country,
the launch of mixed patrols in Gao, and the convening
of the conference d'entente nationale, bringing together
all the actors concerned. But these achievements
remain fragile and insufficient nearly two years after
the signing of the agreement. On the ground, the
populations of northern Mali have to see any noticeable
improvement in their living conditions. The interim
administrations are not yet operational, the fight against
impunity remains insufficient, and the redeployment of
the Malian State in the north has made little progress, as
has the reintegration of veterans. We ask the signatory
parties to set their mistrust aside and demonstrate their
sincerity in implementing the peace agreement.

In their successive reports on Mali, Secretaries-
General Ban Ki-moon and Guterres have recommended
to the Security Council to impose sanctions against
those who hinder the implementation of the peace
agreement. We believe this approach to be essential in
order to remove the numerous obstacles of the peace
process and to encourage all the Malian actors on the
ground to choose the side of peace. The creation of a
Security Council sanctions regime should also target
those, be they signatories to the agreement or not, who
engage in trafficking and block any peace that may be
contrary to their interests.

In a complementary way, the international
community must reinforce its mobilization in support
of the implementation of the peace agreement. France
reiterates in particular its full support for the good
offices of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Mali, Mr. Annadif. We also welcome the
role played by Algeria as leader of the international
mediation and support his unwavering commitment.

At the security level, it is urgent that the Malian
parties also fully implement the peace agreement.
The time squandered by the Malian signatories to the
agreement is time won by the terrorist groups. The
spread of terrorist attacks in central Mali is proof of
that. Contrarily, the redeployment of the presence of the
Malian State in the north, as provided for in the peace
agreement, would restore the people's hope for peace.
The concrete implementation of the peace agreement
must demonstrate to all, and especially to unemployed
youth in the north, that the voice of terrorism and
narcotraffickers is a dead end.

In the meanwhile, the repeated attacks against the
Malian security forces in the north places the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and Operation Barkhane
on the front line against terrorist groups. On behalf of
France, I would like to salute the courage of the Blue
Helmets in Mali, who are carrying out their work in
very difficult conditions. MINUSMA, which is the
only United Nations peacekeeping operation facing
a terrorism environment, needs to be strengthened.
MINUSMA must urgently have the staff and equipment
approved by the Security Council last June in resolution
2295 (2016). We hope that new troop-contributing
countries will commit to Mali during the upcoming
special meeting on MINUSMA force generation, which
is to take place in New York on 8 May.

With its robust mandate and unprecedented
technological mans, MINUSMA is a groundbreaking
operation for the United Nations. Without the presence
of MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane to support
Mali, terrorist groups would be able to reconstitute a
safe haven that could host terrorists from throughout
the world. On its part, the French Operation Barkhane
continues to provide support to MINUSMA in instances
when peacekeepers are severely threatened. Launched
in 2014 at the request ofthe States ofthe Sahel, Operation
Barkhane is now deployed over territory larger than the
territory of Europe from Lisbon to Moscow. It includes
4,000 military personnel, drones, aircraft, helicopters
and hundreds of vehicles. One hundred and fifty
terrorists have been put out of operation, with several
tons of munitions and weapons seized or destroyed by
Operation Barkhane in 2016.

France welcomes the initiative of the Five States
for the Sahel to set up a joint force in order to counter
the expansion of the terrorist threat at the regional
level - for the first time with a focus on securing
border areas. We also welcome the support that the
Secretary-General intends to accord to that project,
in coordination with the States of the region and the
African Union. This counter-terrorism force is to
become part of the overall peace process in Mali. Only
the full implementation by the Malian parties of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali will
ensure lasting peace. In addition, the force should
complement the efforts of MINUSMA. Since the Group
ofFive for the Sahel was established (G-S Sahel), armed
forces from Mali, the Niger, Chad and Burkina Faso
have regularly carried out joint cross-border military
operations, for which Operation Barkhane has provided
operational support.

As you have recalled, Madam President, for which I
am personally grateful, a French soldier died yesterday
in Mali in the course of just such an operation close
to the border with Burkina Faso. He is the nineteenth
French soldier to die in the Sahel since January 2013.
Our determination remains intact - and I would say
even stronger than ever - in helping the countries
of the Sahel to build up their capacity to counter the
terrorist threat. We hope that the Security Council will
support the G-5 Sahel in their undertakings.

The Malian parties have a historic responsibility so
that the people of Mali can at last enjoy lasting peace.
For its part, the Security Council must step up its effort
to resolve the crisis, which threatens international
peace and security. Peace in Mali is a crucial challenge
for us all.

