Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would
like to thank the Lithuanian presidency for convening
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

Fifteen years ago, the Security Council adopted its
first resolution on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (resolution 1265 (l999)), which, inter alia,
explicitly mandated a United Nations peacekeeping
operationto protectcivilians. Indeed, sincethenanumber
of important efforts have been undertaken to increase
the attention of the international community, develop
a normative basis and enhance the implementation of
protection mandates by peacekeeping operations.

At the same time, numerous challenges remain, and
civilians continue to account for the vast majority of
casualties in armed conflicts. As the most recent report
of the Secretary-General on the topic (S/2013/689)
acknowledges, the current state of the protection of
civilians leaves little room for optimism.

The increasing brutality of armed conflicts and
the changing nature of warfare nowadays give rise
to a need for greater measures for protection at the
national and international levels. More resolute and
targeted measures are required to end impunity for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community. As the Secretary-General notes in his
report, impunity contributes to instability, allows
war crimes and serious human rights violations to
proliferate, undermines the fabric of societies and
prevents the development of lasting solutions. When
national authorities fail to take the steps necessary to
ensure accountability, the international community
should play a more proactive role in order to ensure
an appropriate response, including through the
establishment of ad hoc tribunals, international
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions.

Particular consideration must be given to the
protection of civilians forced to leave their homes as
a result of armed conflict. Azerbaijan supports the
continuing efforts to raise awareness of the problem of
internal displacement and the right of return.

My country's familiarity with the suffering of
civilians in armed conflict is not based on hearsay. The
forcible deportation of more than 200,000 Azerbaijanis
from their homes in Armenia at the end of the 19805
was accompanied by killings, torture and other crimes.
Even children were not spared.

The period from 1991 until the establishment
of the ceasefire, in 1994, was marked by an increase
in the magnitude, intensity and consistency of the
attacks on Azerbaijani civilians. In February 1992, the
Azerbaijani town of Khojaly was completely razed to
the ground, and its civilian population was subjected to
an unprecedented massacre by the invading Armenian
forces. The impunity still enjoyed by the perpetrators
of the crimes committed during the conflict continues
to impede progress in achieving the long-awaited peace
and reconciliation between the two countries.

Despite the formal ceasefire, deliberate attacks
against Azerbaijani civilians and civilian objects have
become more frequent and more violent in recent
months. Even the calls from the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly and other members
of the international community to observe the Olympic
Truce during the Olympic Winter Games in Sochi did
not prevent the Armenian side from escalating the
situation along the front line.

Azerbaijan strongly condemns all attacks against
civilians. They should not pay the price for the lack of
progress in the settlement process. In that context, it
is important that the Security Council, Member States
and regional organizations ensure that peace efforts,
inter alia, contribute to ensuring accountability,
including by encouraging the parties concerned to
envisage transitional justice and reparation clauses in
peace agreements. It is essential that such efforts and
peace agreements under no circumstances encourage
the acceptance of situations achieved by the unlawful
use of force and other serious violations of international
law, such as war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and ethnic cleansing.

It is essential that the Security Council consistently
maintain its focus on the protection of civilians and
systematically reiterate its demand that all parties to
armed conflict comply fully with their obligations
under international law.

In conclusion, I would like to again commend the
initiative of Lithuania in convening this open debate
and advancing this significant theme in the work of the
Security Council.

