Mr. Vervaeke: I am honoured to brief the Security
Council on behalf of the European Union (EU). I
recognize the presence of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, and
the Special Representative of the African Union,
Mr. Matias Matondo.

Five months after the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic was
signed in Bangui, we are now at a crucial moment.
Let me pay tribute to all those who contributed to
achieving the agreement, in particular African Union
Commissioner Sma'il Chergui. We remain deeply
convinced that the agreement provides a real chance for
a better future in the Central African Republic - ifit is
implemented by all sides in good faith, with a real sense
of responsibility. The buy-in of the population and the
support of the region will also be critical elements.

The Government has so far delivered on several
counts. A largely inclusive Government has been put in
place, and now all armed groups are represented in the
Government. The different follow-up mechanisms have
been established. We wish to congratulate President
Touadera and the Prime Minister on their leadership
and sense of compromise.

A governmental seminar is scheduled to take place
in the next few days with the support of partners,
including the European Union, to reinforce governmental
cohesion and team spirit with a view to strengthening
internal confidence. We will also be providing support
to the Technical Secretariat ofthe follow-up monitoring
mechanism, and soon start providing parallel support
to the armed groups to reinforce their ownership of the

agreement and coach them to help them deliver on their
own engagements.

Let me say a few words on the Unites speciales
mixtes de securite, a critical element of the peace
agreement as a temporary security measure. A legal basis
for the units has now been prepared and initial funding
via the Peacebuilding Fund has been secured. The
European Union has also made an initial contribution
of €3.4 million to finance the African Union support
to the unit; we will consider further support once they
are deployed. In addition, the European Union Military
Training Mission in the Central African Republic
is ready to conduct a train-the-trainers course for
designated Central African Armed Forces trainers once
they are identified. What we now need is a clear process
and chain of command placed under State authority.

Manning lists for the units, however, are still
incomplete, both on the part of the Government and the
armed groups, which is delaying their deployment. The
establishment and deployment of the first units is now
envisaged for October, after a two-month training that
will have to start in July. We must act with urgency. It is
also important that the Central African Armed Forces
fully own the process. Additional efforts are urgently
needed to fill the confidence gap. Otherwise, progress
will be impossible.

As mentioned by previous speakers, five months
after its signing, regrettably, the peace agreement
continues to be violated, notably by armed groups.
We remain deeply concerned about the slow progress
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
well as certain groups' lack of compliance and acts of
violence. Violence is irresponsible and inadmissible,
notably by parties to a peace agreement.

Events like the recent attack in Paoua run counter
to the peace agreement and cannot go unanswered.
They undermine our collective efforts and credibility,
and further weaken the trust generated by the peace
agreement. The parties, guarantors and facilitators
must use all their tools to respond to and prevent
violations, including early-warning mechanisms,
enhanced dialogue, appropriate follow-up mechanisms
and a clear strategy on addressing violations. The peace
agreement provides for all such measures, including
sanctions, and they must be fully exploited to preserve
the credibility of the process and, finally, to achieve
real and sustainable peace. In that context, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
must continue to actively engage non-compliant
armed groups - through pressure and use of force,
if necessary.

That brings me to the issue ofjustice, which plays
a crucial role in the peace agreement. The people of
the Central African Republic clearly expect justice
to be delivered impartially and speedily. Those who
are responsible for committing crimes and serious
violations must be brought to justice. We look forward
to the putting in place of transitional justice. The
European Union has contributed technical and financial
support to ongoing consultations. We will soon be ready
to consider financing for the truth, justice, reparations
and reconciliation commission, the setting up of which
is becoming increasingly urgent.

The region also has a role to play in the success of
peace process. In that regard, we welcome the recent
bilateral Cameroon-Central African Republic mixed
commission on cooperation as a positive development.
We encourage the strengthening of relations with all
of the neighbours of the Central African Republic, in
particular Chad.

The Central African Republic will hold elections in
18 months' time. Those elections are part of the peace
agreement and are a crucial step to consolidating the
country's gains, including its democratic achievements.
Holding timely, credible and legitimate elections is key
to the peace process, as it ensures greater inclusivity.
Elections and electoral competition also bring about
tension. As such, all political actors should act
responsibly. Calling for violence and using hate speech
should be considered a violation ofthe peace agreement.

We are ready to support the elections and call
on all partners to the Central African Republic to
mobilize their support. MINUSCA's mandate should
be adapted to reflect the Mission's necessary role in
the peace agreement's implementation and in support
of the upcoming elections. The European Union will
continue to coordinate and cooperate fully with the
African Union and the United Nations through its
integrated multidimensional approach. I was recently
privileged to represent the European Union on a joint
mission, together with Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Pierre Lacroix and Commissioner Smai'l Chergui.
Projecting together the coherent and complementary
support of our institutions for the peace agreement sent
a powerful message.

Finally, I would like to update the Council on
the European Union's support of the Central African
Republic. I already mentioned the European Union
Military Training Mission. Apart from training and
advising the national forces, we will soon start training
new recruits in Camp Kassai and in Bouar. The Training
Mission also provides strategic advice to the presidency,
the Defence Ministry, the headquarters of the Central
African Armed Forces, the Interior Ministry and the
Directors-General of the gendarmerie and the police, in
accordance with its mandate. Our substantial support
for mediation and the implementation of the peace
agreement will continue.

On the development front, I inform the Council
that the European Union, together with its member
States, has mobilized over €850 million to support
the population since the beginning of the crisis. We
will provide an additional €60 million for the specific
purpose of adapting activities to support the peace
agreement by operating in new geographic areas, such
as the east. Governance, justice, the rule of law and
support for democratic institutions will remain core
considerations of all of our actions and engagement.

On the humanitarian side, as the Special
Representative highlighted earlier as a critical issue, the
European Union remains fully committed, particularly
with regard to increasing access to remote areas
and communities.

The situation in the Central African Republic
remains complex and fragile. A protracted humanitarian
crisis will exacerbate structural weaknesses. It is
therefore essential to continue to focus on structural
reforms, especially in the security and governance
sector, and to stay actively engaged in finding a long-
term solution.

For its part, the European Union will continue to
work with its partners in the Government and civil
society, with the African Union and the United Nations
and with the region. High Representative Federica
Mogherini is planning to visit the Central African
Republic in July as a testament to the European Union's
exceptional support for the people of the Central
African Republic and the peace process.

