Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the outset to express my thanks
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan
Salame, and his team for their broad-ranging and
detailed report on the situation in Libya.

I would also like to thank the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Sweden, Ambassador Irina Schoulgin
Nyoni, for her outstanding briefing in her capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Her input helps us to better understand the situation
in the country. We would also like to thank Ms. Hajer
Sharief, co-founder of Together We Build It, for her
very illuminating briefing.

Since 2011, Equatorial Guinea has been closely
following developments in Libya, now more than ever
given that we are a member of the Security Council,
because this is a brotherly country to whose problems
we cannot be indifferent. We all are witness to the
importance of the effects and consequences of the
destabilization that has affected this previously stable
country. Equatorial Guinea wishes to express here its
full commitment to the peaceful stabilization of Libya
and a return to peace and normality there.

In 2011, His Excellency the President of Equatorial
Guinea, Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, Acting Chairman of
the African Union, invited the international community
and African Union partners to provide unreserved
support to the parties to the conflict so that they could
work together to put an end to hostilities, ensure the
effective protection of the civilian population and create
conditions favourable to a dialogue between the parties
to the conflict, thus beginning the reforms necessary
to address the causes of the current crisis. It is in this
regard that our Head of State, in his statement before
the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session, said:

"The use of force in a conflict is not a unifying
factor but rather one of division" (A/66/PV11, 
p. 35).

That is why Equatorial Guinea believes that in order
to achieve the desired stability and peace in Libya, it
is vital that the parties and the various stakeholders in
the country commit to this process through transparent,
frank and inclusive dialogue in good faith.
The Libyan Political Agreement of 2015 must
serve as the basis for all efforts at reconciliation and
should serve as a framework until the process has been
concluded and has been determined to be sufficiently
inclusive to accommodate the aspirations of the two
assemblies and lead to an end to the political crisis in
Libya. The Agreement must also make it possible to
progress in legislation with respect to the process that
should lead to transition.

The launching, on 20 September 2017, of the United
Nations action plan for Libya aims to build upon and
strengthen the Libyan Political Agreement in order to
create the right conditions for the holding of free and
fair elections. The United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) has provided the necessary technical
support to the High National Electoral Commission
and is working assiduously to create the right political,
legislative and security conditions for the holding of
elections this year. The elections should enable the
country to return to political, institutional, economic
and social normalcy. In the same vein, UNSMIL is also
involved in the preparations for the national conference
that should bring all of Libya's people to the table to
address, frankly and comprehensively, the myriad
problems affecting the country.

We are pleased to note that the action plan has
made some headway. The United Nations convened
meetings at UNSMIL offices in Tunis of the joint
drafting committee, composed of members from
both the House of Representatives and the High State
Council, to agree on a set of amendments to the Libyan
Political Agreement, in additon to it's having indicated
that this framework could end the crisis. As as result,
the provisions of article 12 of the Political Agreement
were implemented. The action plan also includes a
commitment to assisting armed groups, by developing a
strategy that would enable them to gradually reintegrate
into society. The Libyan people are eager for peace and
an end to seven years of uninterrupted conflict.

Equatorial Guinea believes that the assistance and
efforts of the various international entities to bring about
peace in Libya are indispensable, since the complex
nature of the situation and the hostility of the parties to
the conflict require external mediation, which, in this
case is provided through the quartet partners - the
African Union, the League of Arab States and the
European Union - and the role played by neighbouring
countries, such as Egypt, Tunisia and Chad.

In spite of the considerable progress made
in the country, major challenges remain, such as
insecurity, impunity, the humanitarian situation and
migration-related issues. The proliferation of armed
groups operating outside the law leads to serious
violations of human rights, whose perpetrators go
unpunished. That situation results in flagrant cases of
impunity and anarchy. The humanitarian crisis is also
an important element of the crisis because the country
is still far from achieving the levels of education,
security and health care it enjoyed prior to the outbreak
of the crisis in 2011. Groups, entities or individuals in
today's Libyan society posing a threat to Libya's return
to normalcy must be subject to exemplary sanctions.

Immigrants remain the main targets of such issues
and become the victims of extreme violence, forced
labour, trafficking, extortion, murder and other serious
abuses and harassment, such as the odious trafficking
in migrants, both inside and outside of official
detention centres. We call upon the Government of
Libya to address such challenges through a direct and
comprehensive approach in order to find a definitive
solution that respects both the rights of immigrants and
those of the country's host communities.

Lastly, I would like to convey our firm support
to the United Nations Support Mission in Libya for
its laudable and tireless efforts to promote peace,
security and stability in this brotherly country, despite
challenges, sacrifice and loss in an environment that is
at times exacting. We encourage UNSMIL to continue
to support the Libyan authorities and institutions in
their efforts to build peace in this brotherly country.

