Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Let me begin by thanking
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), Ambassador Roman Oyarzun
Marchesi, for his briefing and by commending him
greatly for his effective leadership.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), almost
11 years ago, signalled the Security Council's
determination to respond robustly to the threat posed
to international peace and security by the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
means of delivery. As the second Council resolution to
invoke Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
outside of a country-specific context, resolution 1540
(2004) has been aptly described as filling a gap in
international law by addressing the unacceptable risk
of non-State actors obtaining and using weapons of
mass destruction. While the three main treaties on
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons address
non-proliferation, it is evident that they do not take into
account the possibility of such weapons falling into the
hands of non-State actors. Therein lies the significance
of resolution 1540 (2004) in its complementarity to the
three global treaties on weapons of mass destruction.

Today we realize that the emergence of extremist
groups has introduced a sense of urgency and the need
for the international community to take stock of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and close
the gaps that could be exploited by such groups to
obtain and use weapons of mass destruction. As the
Chair rightly underscored in his briefing, no State is
immune from the threat and consequences of an attack
with a weapon of mass destruction by non-State actors.
That should serve as a clarion call for us to vigorously
confront one of the key security challenges of the
century. Meeting this challenge and other evolving
threats to international peace and security requires that
we strengthen compliance with resolution 1540 (2004).

We welcome the engagement of the Committee
in regional partnerships and outreach activities,
including its collaboration with the African Union, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, INTERPOL, the
Financial Action Task Force and other relevant actors.
We commend the Committee for adopting an original
approach to improving its assistance to States with
challenges in meeting their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004). It is our hope that that will yield positive
results in the effort to promote compliance with the
resolution.

The introduction of training courses for national
1540 points of contact is a highly commendable
innovation. According to the Chair's briefing, it has
promoted an understanding of the obligations of Member
States under resolution 1540 (2004). We express our
appreciation to China for hosting the training course
for national 1540 points of contact for the Asia-Pacific
region in September. We also thank Chile for its offer
to host the course for the Latin American countries in
2016.

The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
across the world, we believe, is a potent tool to prevent
the vertical and horizontal proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Success in that direction would
promote transparency in non-proliferation - the
second pillar of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. Nigeria will continue to support
efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones, as we
did in Pelindaba, in parts of the world where they
currently do not exist.

As we respond to the challenges of today, we must
adopt a proactive approach that produces a long-term
strategy to deal with potential avenues for the illicit
acquisition and use of nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons by non-State actors. We must remain
especially vigilant to developments that may threaten
international peace and security. Member States must
stay abreast of and remain seized of emerging issues
and maintain their commitment to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).

As we make our exit from this hallowed Chamber,
I am reminded of Shakespeare's metaphor in his play
As You Like It. In the monologue, he depicts the world
as a stage where all of the men and women are merely
players. They have their exits and their entrances, he
says, and each one, in his act, plays many parts. I believe
that, as we collectively leave the Council, the five of
us have indeed played our various parts. I believe that
team Nigeria has played its part, albeit with the support
of all of the Member States around this table. We pray
for the same measure of support for our colleagues from
the entering countries f the new actors on this stage,
the new actors in the Security Council cast - Egypt,
Japan, Senegal, Ukraine and Uruguay.

In a world that is increasingly disturbed by
conflict, the Security Council is the body charged
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, and the rest of the
world looks up to it as 15 voices of reason. The world
finds its anchor in this Chamber. For that reason, I want
to believe that the Council is an orchestra that is always
trying to play a symphony. Who writes the notes is left
to the imagination, but the symphony must be played
to alleviate the sufferings of so many people in dire
humanitarian situations, people who have left their
homes with nowhere to go, no bed to sleep on, no food
to eat. They look up to the Council. My prayer is that we
will always provide the succour that the world needs.

