Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): My delegation is
pleased to address this timely public meeting of the
Security Council. We welcome the first report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1526 (2004) and express our sincere appreciation to the
Monitoring Team. We also congratulate Ambassador
Heraldo Munoz, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, for his clear and
comprehensive presentation of the report and his
personal commitment towards the Committee's work.

I should like to convey the deepest sympathies of
my delegation to the families of the victims and to all
those injured or affected by the heinous crimes of
terrorism that recently occurred in Russia and Jakarta.
Malaysia categorically condemns all acts of terrorism
and remains convinced that terrorism is never
justifiable, irrespective of its motivations and
objectives or its forms and manifestations.

My delegation appreciates the efforts of and the
role played by the 1267 Committee in combating
terrorism, in particular through the sanctions regime
that it has elaborated. That regime constitutes an
important instrument in our common struggle against
terrorism. We also appreciate the Monitoring Team's
first report on the implementation of measures by
States and its recommendations on ways to make those
measures more effective and on new measures for
consideration by the Security Council. In that regard,
we have taken note of the recommendations and
proposals that could be implemented by Member States
to improve further the efforts to combat terrorism.

With regard to the great variation in the quality of
reports submitted by Member States, my delegation
looks forward to a more focused questionnaire that
could help in the standardization of reports and in the
easier preparation of the reports. We hope for improved
coordination between the Monitoring Team and the
Committee with a view to enhancing its performance
and helping the Team to continue and improve its
analytical reporting to the Security Council. We also
hope that cooperation between the 1267 Committee
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) will continue to
improve so that the problem of apparent overlap with
the reporting requirements of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee can be overcome.

We are satisfied that the Committee's Chairman,
Ambassador Mufioz, and the Monitoring Team plan to
continue their field visits and dialogue with Member
States. The Monitoring Team recently visited Malaysia.
In our assessment, it was a good Visit. The Malaysian
authorities gave their fullest cooperation. We look
forward to continuing the dialogue and to further
cooperating with the Team and the Committee in our
common endeavour against terrorism.

My delegation remains concerned that there is yet
to be an internationally agreed definition of terrorism.
Malaysia believes that a universally accepted definition
of terrorism is important to enable the international
community to take concerted and effective action
against those who have been defined as terrorists.
Listing designated individuals, groups and entities in
the Consolidated List as a result of the absence of such
definition has resulted in the list losing its credibility
and operational value. It is imperative for the
Monitoring Team to update the List in terms of its
relevance and accuracy, with the full cooperation of
Member States, including the delisting of people as
appropriate.

It is encouraging to note that sanctions against the
financing of terrorism have had some effect. A large
amount of assets has been frozen, although there is still
a need for continuous updating based on the Al Qaeda
modus operandi for raising and transferring money.
The Monitoring Team has also identified similar needs
to improve the travel ban and the arms embargo to
reflect current Al Qaeda methodology. In this regard,
Malaysia stands ready to implement new measures
within its means so that international efforts to combat
terrorism can be carried out in an impartial and
objective manner, in accordance with the principles of
international law.

It is essential to bear in mind that combating
terrorism is one of a number of often interrelated
priority tasks of this Organization. In many parts of the
world, a central challenge remains the eradication of
poverty and underdevelopment, which constitute a
serious threat to peace and security. To this end the
campaign against terrorism should also take into
account the poor of the world, who require resources to
extricate themselves from their poverty and
underdevelopment,

Terrorists take advantage of the sense of despair
and the frustration that arise when people are forced to
live without hope and without freedom. Terrorists also
capitalize on situations where States violate human
rights during their counter-terrorism operations.
Terrorism feeds on many things: the use of force and
foreign occupation, territory forcibly occupied, land
wrongfully seized, homes bombed and bulldozed to
rubble, ethnic cleansing, religious persecution,
trampling of legitimate political aspiration, oppression,
poverty, deprivation and, most of all, the absence of
satisfactory avenues to seek redress. Malaysia strongly
believes that it is absolutely essential that curative
approaches in dealing with terrorism be prescribed.
The root causes of terrorism must be addressed.

The challenges facing the international
community in combating terrorism require a
multipronged and multidimensional approach. Such an
approach includes national, regional and international
efforts in identifying and addressing the root causes,
undertaking strict and stern enforcement measures,
undertaking psychological warfare programmes to
counter the destructive influence of the extremists and
terrorists, and providing training and expertise to
officers and institutions involved in counter-terrorism
activities.

In line with our recognition that action to counter
terrorism requires integrated efforts at the regional and
international level, Malaysia established the South East
Asia Regional Center for Counter Terrorism
(SEARCCT) in July 2003. The establishment of
SEARCCT has received endorsement from the thirty-
sixth ASEAN Ministerial Meeting in Phnom Penh in
June 2003. The Center primarily focuses on training
and capacity building in prevention of terrorist
activities and management of post-terrorism situations.
These include actions against money-laundering and
terrorist financing, border control, documentation and
maintaining a database of terrorist activities. The
Center has participated and conducted in various
activities, workshops and seminars since its inception.
These include the Seminar on Counter-Terrorism
conducted in Langkawi, Malaysia in October 2003 in
collaboration with Australian Government, and a
course on financial underpinnings of terrorism in
Southeast Asia, conducted in Kuala Lumpur in April
2004 in collaboration with the United States. The
Center has a full schedule of activities to be conducted
through 2004 and beyond, including workshops on
capacity-building in combating terrorism and a course
on fraudulent document detection. Malaysia remains
fully committed to the struggle against terrorism. Our
efforts to enhance our counter-terrorism capabilities
under the auspices of the United Nations are
complemented by the collective actions of our partners
through multilateral organizations such as the
Association of South-East Asian Nations, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the
Commonwealth and the Non-Aligned Movement. My
delegation continues to value the close working
relationship that we have established with the
Committee and the Monitoring Team, especially at a
time when there is a need for greater enhancement of
cooperation in our common cause against terrorism.

