Ms. Loj (Denmark): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting
on children affected by armed conflicts. I would also
like to express our gratitude to the Secretary-General,
the Special Representative for Children in Armed
Conflict, the Executive Director of UNICEF and
Mr. Oling Olang, representing Save the Children, for
their statements and for their dedication to children
affected by armed conflict.

Let me also associate Denmark with the
statement to be delivered later by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/826)
is yet again deeply disturbing reading, and we fully
support the recommendations contained therein. As we
speak, thousands of children continue to be forcibly
recruited to participate in the killings of innocent
people, or are being killed themselves. Children are
being raped or exposed to other kinds of grave sexual
violence. Places where our children should feel safe,
such as schools and hospitals, continue to be the targets
of deliberate armed attacks and atrocities.

The report clearly demonstrates why the issue of
children affected by armed conflicts is on the agenda of
the Security Council. In the absence of direct and firm
international involvement in the solution of this
multifaceted problem, brutality and impunity will
continue to reign.

For most of us, this conclusion is not a surprise.
In all armed conflicts, children are the most vulnerable
group and the first to be exposed to the violence, abuse
and negative consequences of the general breakdown in
society. However, the fundamental question is whether
we - international society - just shrug our shoulders
at the inevitability of these violations and turn our
backs on the children in need, or whether we
acknowledge our responsibility to protect those
children.

Decisive action to improve the situation for
children in armed conflict must make use of all of the
relevant tools at our disposal. A solution to the problem
can be reached only by taking a comprehensive
approach, including legal, political and socio-economic
measures. We need to take action against Governments
and other parties that recruit or force children to
become armed combatants. But we also need to be
mindful of the close interlinkage between security and
development, and address the underlying root causes to
conflicts and their effects on children. Children
affected by armed conflict must be provided with real
alternatives to war.

It is clear to us that, over the past two years, the
Council has made a resolute decision to actively
engage in the protection of children in armed conflicts.
In a much appreciated effort of cooperation between
United Nations entities, Governments and civil society,
the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children
has been established in a number of conflict situations.
We fully support and applaud those measures, which
are indispensable stepping stones in the process.
However, as we work to consolidate and improve our
approach to ending abuses against children, it is
obvious that further steps need to be taken in the
foreseeable future to complete the established
framework for child protection.

The scope of both the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and the Working Group must - as
envisaged in resolution 1612 (2005) - be truly
thematic in nature and cover all situations of concern,
in particular those identified in the two annexes to the
annual report of the Secretary-General.

Furthermore, the Security Council, in cooperation
with the Secretary-General, must reinforce its efforts to
engage in dialogue with all parties in armed conflicts
that continue to violate the rights of children, so as to
ensure an end to such practices. A particular focus for
action should be the development of concrete and time-
bound action plans to end the recruitment and use of
child soldiers.

Finally, the Security Council must reaffirm its
willingness to use all of the tools at its disposal and
must not shy away from more difficult measures, such
as sanctions, the referral of violators to international
courts or stronger enforcement of peacekeeping
mandates to protect children, if the gravity of the
situation calls for them. In this regard, special attention

should be paid to the 16 so-called persistent violators
that have been named in each of the Secretary-
General's annual reports listing parties that use child
soldiers.

As we move ahead, we will undoubtedly be faced
again and again with the arguments that either it is not
proper for the Security Council to focus its attention on
the rights of children, which should be dealt with by
other United Nations bodies, or that the Security
Council should not address the suffering of children in
situations that are not on the agenda of the Council.

In both cases the criticism surely misses the
point. The continued recruitment of child soldiers and
the vicious violations and abuses perpetrated against
children by parties to armed conflicts are at the heart of
our efforts to maintain international peace and security.

Much more work needs to be done on this issue,
but we have made a promising start. It is now of key
importance that we follow through on our promises to
children trapped by conflict. We will continue our
efforts to ensure that this happens.

