Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, Ijoin colleagues in thanking you, Mr. President,
for arranging this important meeting. I also thank the
representatives of Switzerland and Germany for their
briefing. We believe that the Interlaken process and the
Bonn-Berlin process are very beneficial to the
Council's discussion on the question of sanctions. The
briefing they have given us and the booklets they have
distributed are also very helpful to our discussion.

I also thank the State Secretary of Sweden for his
statement. I am pleased that Sweden will organize
relevant activities to continue the discussion on
sanctions. China will actively participate in the
Stockholm process, and hopes for its success.

Sanctions are a mandatory tool bestowed by the
Charter on the Council to fulfil its duty of maintaining
international peace and security. Over the past 10 years
the Council has resorted to sanctions more frequently,
which has caused the international community
increasing concern over the tremendous damage done
to civilians by comprehensive sanctions. Making
sanctions smarter and more clearly targeted, avoiding
or reducing their humanitarian consequences, and
effectively resolving the economic problems caused by
sanctions to third countries: all these questions require
careful and thorough consideration by the Council.

The Chinese delegation has always stressed that
sanctions are only a means, and not an end in
themselves. Recently there has been much talk about
the so-called exit strategy of peacekeeping operations.
We also need an exit strategy for sanctions a that is,
when deciding to impose a sanctions regime, the
Council should consider and decide how to end the
sanctions once the goal has been reached. There should
be no more sanctions with no clear objective, no time
limit and no well-defined conditions for lifting them.

Last year the Council held an open debate on the
question of sanctions and established a Working Group.
Under the leadership of Ambassador Chowdhury of
Bangladesh, the Working Group produced a draft
report after in-depth consultations. The draft report is
comprehensive and detailed, and contains positive and
pragmatic recommendations. We hope that it will be
adopted and implemented as soon as possible.

