Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): My delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his briefing
and for his leadership in consolidating the relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
which he has so well conceptualized in his statement
this morning.

We also want to express our appreciation to
Ms. Federica Mogherini for her inaugural briefing
to the Security Council in her capacity as High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy. We take this opportunity
to pay tribute to her predecessor, Catherine Ashton, for
her contributions to strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and the European Union (EU), and
especially for her efforts to advance the achievement of
peace and security around the world.

Nigeria acknowledges the pivotal role of the EU as
a key partner of the United Nations and various regional
organizations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We believe that over time the EU
has demonstrated a high level of commitment to the
promotion of human rights, development cooperation
and humanitarian assistance on a global level. In terms
of the maintenance of peace and security, the European
Union has made substantial contributions in various
arenas across the world. In 2014, the European Union
deployed a peacekeeping mission to the Central African
Republic to support African Union and French forces
already on the ground. Nigeria pays tribute to the men
and women who served in that mission, and commends
them for the strident efforts made in the execution
of their mandate, even in extremely challenging
circumstances. The mission contributed significantly
to the protection of civilians in and around Bangui.

In the case of Mali, in April 2014, the EU
established the European Union Common Security
and Defence Policy Sahel Mali mission, with an initial
mandate of two years. The mission is a key aspect of
the EU's support to Mali. It involves the training of the
country's security forces and helping the State to restore
and maintain its authority across the entire Malian
territory. The European Union Capacity Building
Mission complements the EU training mission, which
is involved in the reorganization of the Malian military.
Nigeria commends the EU for its assistance to Mali and
recognizes its significant role in enhancing the capacity
of the Malian military and security forces in meeting
the enormous security challenges of that country.

In today's world, we all agree that terrorism
constitutes one of the greatest threats to international
peace and security. The Sahel is one of the regions
where terrorism is assuming alarming dimensions.
Through its Sahel strategy, the EU is working with the
States in the region to promote good governance and
social cohesion and to strengthen political stability and
security. The strategy involves enabling sustainable
development, creating prosperity and combating violent
extremism in the Sahel so that the region will cease to
be a safe haven for terrorist groups. Nigeria commends
the EU for the resources it is commiting to fighting
terrorism in the Sahel, which demonstrates a clear
recognition that terrorism in any region of the world
is a threat to all regions, and that fighting terrorism is
indeed the collective responsibility of all nation States.

In the European arena, the European Union
was a major contributor to the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), which authorizes international
organizations to establish a security presence in
Kosovo. Today, the EU plays a key role in promoting
the rule of law in Kosovo through the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosova (EULEX), established
in 2008. EULEX has also supported the dialogue aimed
at normalizing relations between Kosovo and Serbia.
Some of the Mission's notable achievements in that
regard include the implementation of the freedom of
movement agreement between Kosovo and Serbia. That
agreement allows residents of Kosovo to travel freely
in Serbia with identity cards and vehicle licence plates
issued in Kosovo. We see that as creating an avenue for
person-to-person contact between Serbs and Kosovars,
which could lead to better understanding between
them. EULEX also facilitated the integration of Kosovo
Serb police officers into the northern command of the
Kosovo police.

The inextricable link between security and
development makes it essential for greater attention
to be paid to the development needs of States. In
many developing countries, resource constraints are
major impediments to development. That is when and
where donor support becomes very vital. In terms of
development cooperation, the EU provides more than
half of global development assistance, making it the
largest donor in the world. The European Development
Fund, through which the EU disburses development
assistance to the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group
of States, has been used to support receiving countries
in a broad range of sectors, including agriculture, the
environment, infrastructure, education and health.
The Fund also supports the promotion of the rule of
law, good governance and democracy. The eleventh
European Development Fund, which covers the period
2014-2020, involves a total of €31.5 billion. That
represents a substantial increase over the €22.6 billion
provided under the tenth Fund, which covered the period
2008-2013. Nigeria appreciates the EU's unwavering
commitment to the promotion of international
development. Through that, the EU has touched the
lives of millions of people around the world.

We would like to reiterate our strong support
for the engagement between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in consonance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The European Union model is an exemplary one that
demonstrates how cooperation among States can work
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
That model of engagement is even more urgent in our
world today, as unprecedented threats and challenges
have not only transcended national boundaries, but
moved beyond the capacity of any single State to tackle.
All the inputs around the table this morning point to
that one single phenomenon: no one State can handle
the level of threat in the world today. This is a call for
collective action.

