Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
various briefers for their presentations and would like
to pay special tribute to the British Foreign Minister,
who took the initiative to convene today's important
meeting and travelled to New York to preside over it.
I would also particularly like to thank the President of
the Federal Republic of Somalia for his statement via
video link.

Once again, on behalf of the Government of France,
I would like to express our strongest condemnation
of yesterday's terrorist attack in London and convey
our deepest sympathy to and full solidarity with the
United Kingdom.

I should like to make three points. First, with regard
to the political and humanitarian situation in Somalia,
the electoral process has been satisfactorily concluded.
France welcomes the uncontested election of President
Farmajo, which sparked a genuine wave of enthusiasm
among the people. We are well aware that the holding
of elections called for considerable logistical and
security support from the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), respectively. And that is indeed
an achievement. I warmly congratulate Mr. Keating
and the representative of the African Union, as well as
my Ethiopian colleague, and, through him, all troop-
and police-contributing countries.

The new Somali Administration is already under
immense strain. The Secretary- General has just returned
from a visit to Somalia and was able to see for himself
the seriousness of the humanitarian situation, which, as
we know, is being exacerbated by famine affecting the
region. The newly formed Government must respond to
that situation with the full support of the international
community. Above and beyond that emergency
situation, it is important for the Somali Government
to be resolutely committed to institution-building and
the establishment of the genuine rule of law in order to
promote improved respect for human rights and lasting
stability in the country.

My second point relates to AMISOM. and prioritizing
the work of the United Nations. Now that elections have
been held this year, security will be our primary concern
in the years to come. AMISOM. has been deployed in
Somalia since 2007. Its work, which receives logistical
support from the United Nations and financial support
from the European Union, is particularly challenging.
I would like to pay special tribute to all those who lost
their lives in the fight against Al-Shabaab. That fight is
a collective endeavour that cannot be won by AMISOM
alone. Moreover, it was never intended for AMISOM
to be perpetually deployed in Somalia. In that regard, I
believe that two points should be underscored.

With regard to the financing of AMISOM, which
is not sufficiently predictable or sustainable, France
had hoped that other donors would agree to join the
European Union in providing considerable financial
support. The European Union has already provided
some $1.7 billion, in addition to contributions that its
member States have made to the budget of the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia and the bilateral
contributions of some member States. Regrettably,
AMISOM. funding is still not geographically diverse.
The European Union continues to finance 80 per cent
of the total required and hopes that other donors will
join in that effort.

With regard to the withdrawal of AMISOM, we
understand that some troop-contributing countries are
ready and willing to withdraw, and, once again, we
pay tribute to them. Nonetheless, it is important that
the withdrawal not be dictated only by the schedule
of requirements, but that it be linked to developing a
security solution for Somalia.

That leads me to my third point, which relates to
the ability of the Somalis to be responsible for their
own security. That appears to be the key issue on the
table for the next reporting period. There are 10,900
soldiers in the Somali army who are eligible for the
logistical support provided by the Support Office for
joint operations with AMISOM. At the same time, there
are local militias, referred to as the Dervish, that also
provide security functions.

That raises several questions that could be useful in
guiding our discussions. Are the soldiers of the Somali
National Army well identified? How might the training
and operationalization of the Somali National Army
be conducted? Could UNSOM. step up its efforts to
coordinate training and furnish equipment, with a view
to providing a more coherent response to the needs of
the Somali National Army? How can existing Somali
security forces be more involved in security operations
in the country and in Somali National Army offensives?
We welcome the holding in May of the London
conference, which we hope will provide some answers
to those questions, and we look forward to future
reports on AMISOM. and the presence of the United
Nations in Somalia in the new post-election period.

The meeting rose at 12.25 pm.
