The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a
statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Luxembourg.
I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Eliasson, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Ambassador Patriota, and the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Porgramme
(UNDP), Ms. Helen Clark, for their presentations.
They highlighted the close links that exist between
the various actors and entities of the United Nations
system, the United Nations Development Group and
the peacebuilding architecture established in 2005.
The Deputy Secretary-General, who was one of the
founding fathers of that architecture, urged the Council
to embark upon a reflection in the light of the in-depth
review of the peacebuilding architecture planned for
2015. I hope we will respond to that call and be able
to continue today's discussions between now and
the annual debate on the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission, to be held in July, and beyond.

Our briefers underlined in their presentations that
peacebuilding involved everybody. That is a long-
term endeavour that must mobilize all the life force
of a country or region as a whole, and the consistent
support of the international community. There are
positive examples that should encourage us in our
efforts - I am referring in particular to Sierra Leone,
where the transition from the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone to the United
Nations country team will be completed successfully
at the end of this month. I am also thinking of Guinea,
where the smooth holding of legislative elections in
2013 and the acceptance of their results allowed for the
transition in that country to bear fruit, on the basis of
an inclusive political dialogue facilitated by the United
Nations. In Guinea, all of the key players were directly
involved - the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for West Africa, UNDP. United Nations
funds and programmes, the European Union, bilateral
partners and civil society, including women's groups
and the Guinea configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which Luxembourg has had the honour to
chair for three years now.

However, examples of relapse into deadly conflict,
as in the Central African Republic and South Sudan,
show that there remains some way to go when it comes
to peacebuilding. Whenever human rights are violated
or dynamics of exclusion or marginalization arise, or
the narrowing of political space threatens the progress
achieved, vigilance and action are required. That is the
crux of the "Rights up front" initiative, launched by the
Secretary-General and the Deputy Secretary-General
last December.

Peacebuilding and the strengthening of the State
also have a political dimension. We cannot ignore
the realities of the political economy of a country,
the underlying causes of conflict, the risks posed
by corruption, governance that is not conducive to
development, political, economic or social exclusion,
organized crime or political cultures in which the
winner takes all. Building lasting peace requires the
establishment of inclusive political processes and
settlements, competent and accountable national
institutions, and ongoing support and attention from
the international community.

We welcome the efforts of fragile States in the Group
of Seven Plus and the conclusion of national agreements
under the "New Deal". Mutual accountability exists
not only between the Government of a fragile State
and its international partners, but also between that
Government and its citizens. Peacebuilding requires
the achievement of a new social compact. The State
should be able to fulfil its regulatory functions that
confer its legitimacy. The State should ensure its
responsibility in the areas of promoting and protecting
human rights, establishing the rule of law and providing
public services for the benefit of its citizens. As others
today have highlighted genuine national ownership is
essential. The process of peacebuilding has to be an
inclusive one. It has to reflect true national consensus.

That is why it is also very important to ensure the
full involvement of women. Women are essential actors
in the peacebuilding process, as shown by the examples
mentioned by the Deputy Secretary-General and some
of the previous speakers. That is true in Guinea, in
Guinea-Bissau, in Liberia and in Yemen.

The Secretary-General's action plan for
mainstreaming the issue of the equality of women
and men in peacebuilding remains relevant. It is
unacceptable that women continue to be the main
victims of violence during and after conflict and that,
at the same time, they are marginalized when the time
comes to resolve those same conflicts and to rebuild the
country after the conflict.

I would also like to say a few words on the regional
dimension of peacebuilding by invoking the example of
the Mano River Union. Three of the four countries of
that region - Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone - are
being assisted by the Peacebuilding Commission. Last
July, the three country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission organized a joint meeting
with the participation of the Secretary-General of
the Mano River Union in order to discuss challenges
common to the countries of the region. Last October,
those countries adopted a security strategy focused
on border security of the Mano River Union, with the
support of the United Nations Office for West Africa.
The implementation of the strategy should make it
possible to prevent conflicts and thereby build peace at
the regional level.

To conclude, I would like to come back to the
peacebuilding architecture established in 2005. I think
we need to duly acknowledge the potential of the
Peacebuilding Commission as a consultative body that
could offer advice to the Security Council, and as an
adviser and constructive partner for countries emerging
from conflict. There is considerable scope to maximize
the potential of that body. Let us do that without waiting
for the results of the review scheduled in 2015.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.
