Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's important meeting.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Shehu for their briefings. Although we are focusing
today on terrorism in Africa, we recall the victims of
terrorist attacks everywhere, as well as their families.
From Karachi to Kano, Mogadishu to Benghazi and In
Aminas, and from Baghdad to Boston, the thousands of
lives lost and shattered remind us, tragically, that the
scourge of terrorism affects us all and that combating it
requires our shared determination and common efforts.

Terrorist groups continue to threaten peace, security
and stability across Africa. In the Sahel, Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) joined with mercenary
fighters fleeing Libya to exploit the Tuareg rebellion
and overrun the northern two-thirds of Mali. In Nigeria,
Boko Haram and Ansaru are taking advantage of poor
socioeconomic conditions and popular discontent to
challenge State authorities and sow communal conflict.
In Somalia, Al-Shabaab is still launching ferocious
attacks on the Somali Government and people as it
seeks to derail the country's transition.

As we saw just eight days ago in Arusha, Tanzania,
terrorism is not confined to conflict zones, but can
happen anywhere and at any time. Nevertheless, the
fight against terrorism in Africa has made progress over
the past year. Somalia and Mali show how international
and regional cooperation in action can help to weaken
terrorist groups that pose grave threats to entire nations.

In those cases, African nations, with critical support
from the international community, have actively
confronted terrorist threats. Working together, French,
Chadian and Malian forces have taken on a growing
terrorist haven in Mali. The Council imposed United
Nations sanctions against the Movement for Unity
and Jihad in West Africa, Ansar Dine and associated
individuals in Mali, and authorized two successive
missions to help stabilize the country. At the same
time, the persistence and sacrifice of African Union
peacekeepers, with international assistance, has helped
Somalia start to reclaim its country from the brutal grip
of Al-Shabaab.

Yet, Al-Qaida and affiliated groups remain
dangerous, and are becoming more diffuse and
entrepreneurial. With fragile new Governments in North
Africa and unrest elsewhere on the continent, violent
extremists have increasingly exploited porous borders,
political vacuums, local grievances, socioeconomic
stresses and diminished focus on counter-terrorism to
pursue their deadly objectives.

Meanwhile, terrorists in Africa continue to fund
their operations through illicit activities, while their
tactics become more sophisticated. Transnational
terrorists are trafficking weapons, drugs and even
human beings to raise money for heinous attacks.
We remain deeply concerned that AQIM. and related
groups are using kidnapping for ransom to finance
terrorism. The international community cannot turn a
blind eye to that crime and must stop paying ransoms.
Furthermore, terrorist use of improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) is on the rise in Africa, as Al-Shabaab's
recent car-bombing of Somali Government and Qatari
aid delegation members demonstrates. That troubling
trend warrants increased Security Council attention,
and we welcome opportunities to develop counter-IED
initiatives with African and other partners.

The multifaceted threat of terrorism in Africa
requires a multidimensional response. The United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy recognizes
as much. A comprehensive approach not only involves
tactical efforts and capacity-building to thwart attacks
and degrade terrorist infrastructure, but also features
strategic initiatives to reduce violent extremism and
shrink the pipeline of terrorists.

The United States has therefore intensified
capacity-building assistance to African partners.
Our Trans-Sahara Counterterrorism Partnership and
our Partnership for Regional East African Counter
Terrorism programmes help African States to tighten
border security, promote economic development,
disrupt terrorist networks, prevent attacks and
prosecute perpetrators. Over the past year, the United
States has trained over 2,320 officials in 18 African
countries, conducting law enforcement and rule of law
activities. United States legal attaches and advisers are
working with host country Governments in Mauritania,
the Niger, Nigeria, Tunisia, Senegal and Algeria to
strengthen justice-sector capacity to address terrorism.

In addition, to counter violent extremist propaganda
online, the United States has established the Center for
Strategic Counterterrorism Communications, which
has supported citizen journalists in disseminating
accurate, non-extremist information across northern
Mali, and has funded projects in Nigeria and the Niger
to highlight local stories of resilience in the face of
terrorism.

We furthermore welcome the contributions that
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, in partnership
with the United Nations and the African Union, has
made in addressing terrorism across the continent. The
good practices memorandums of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Forum on criminal justice, the rehabilitation
and reintegration of violent extremists and the
prevention of kidnapping for ransom by terrorists are
practical tools for Governments to use in combatting
terrorism within a rule-of-law framework. However,
such guides are only as useful as the political will and
capacity to implement them.

Building States' capacity to fight terrorists
and enlisting communities in that fight remain
indispensable, but we must be wary of repressive
approaches, which often fuel the very radicalization
that they seek to eliminate. Indeed, reducing the threat
of terrorism in Africa demands a broader effort to
create freer, more prosperous and tolerant societies in
which radicalization is rare, opportunity is palpable
and hope thrives. That requires fighting poverty and
corruption. It requires expanding trade and investment
and building critical infrastructure, so that African
economies can grow sustainably. It requires effective
conflict prevention and resolution. It requires
improving Governments' delivery of services to their
peoples, from high-quality education to health care and
justice, and it requires ensuring that people are able to
hold their Governments accountable.

Through that framework and in partnership with
the peoples and Governments of the continent, the
United States is working to empower citizens, promote
good governance, strengthen human rights and the rule
of law and boost economic growth and development. In
doing so, we remain mindful that no one nation can fight
terrorism alone. We must work together as partners with
shared commitment and mutual assistance to end that
scourge. We owe nothing less to the legions of victims
and to future generations.

