Mr. Siddig (Sudan): Allow me, at the outset, to
express my delegation's appreciation for the exemplary
manner in which you, Madam President, have been
leading the work of the Security Council during the
month of August.

My delegation would also like to convey its thanks
to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Commissioner
Chergui for their contributions regarding the situation
in Darfur. Our gratitude also goes to the members of
the Security Council for their respective interventions
during this meeting and for the support they have
expressed towards my Government and country to
ensure the transition's success.

The Darfur of today is completely different from
the Darfur of some years ago, when the Security
Council began addressing the situation. Even the
Sudan of today is no longer the Sudan the Council has
known over the past 30 years. The Sudan of today is
a country that upholds democracy, justice, the rule
of law, transparency, liberty, freedom and equality.
It is a country where youth and women will be fairly
represented at all levels of Government.

Allow me, once again, to salute the peacekeepers
all over our planet and direct my special respect to the
women and men who serve in the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Our
condolences and sympathy go to the families of those
who lost their lives serving in Darfur as they protected
civilians there. Our regard and esteem are directed
to the United Nations, the African Union and to the
Council for their follow-up and perseverance in the
quest for peace in Darfur.

My Government will dedicate the first six months
of its transitional tenure to realizing durable peace and
sustainable stability throughout the country. We call on
the international community to join my Government in
inducing the revolutionaries who fought to topple the
previous regime to join hands with us in order to relieve
the plight and miseries of our people, who have suffered
the consequences of war. We also encourage countries
that host some leaders of armed groups to convince
them or prompt them to embrace peace in good heart
and good faith, since the pretexts upon which they took
up arms are no longer there.

Based on the current realities, we reiterate that
peacekeeping is not the right option in Darfur. It is
time to shift to peacebuilding, recovery, development,
security and stability for my people there. The Security
Council adopted resolution 2479 (2019) in June.
The resolution decided to defer the consideration of
UNAMID's timetable for withdrawal until October
based on hypothetical expectations on developments
that were then taking place in Khartoum. However,
time has proved the opposite. My delegation calls for
new members of the Security Council to pave the way
for UNAMID's withdrawal by June 2020, as stipulated
and agreed upon.

Prior to June 2020, the date set for UNAMID's
complete withdrawal, we believe that it is incumbent
on the Council to revisit resolution 1591 (2005), in
particularly the restrictions that the Council imposed
on the movement of arms and of troops in and within
Darfur. It is of particular and paramount importance
to empower the Sudanese law enforcement bodies to
be fully equipped in order to bulwark law and order,
protect stability and prevent any relapse into or recourse
to violence in Darfur.

The Security Council is aware that Darfur is
adjacent to volatile hotspots in the region, where
terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Al-Qaida and Boko Haram are active
and where illegal migration and human trafficking are
rampant. For those and other reasons, the Council may
agree with us regarding the necessity of fully equipping
different Government agencies and law enforcement
entities in the post-UNAMID period. My Government
reiterates its commitment to working closely with the
United Nations country team and the entire United
Nations system in realizing the stability and recovery
of Darfur.

The realization of peace is my Government's
priority during the coming six months. Stabilization
and sustaining peace are our ultimate objectives during
the three years of the transition and the post-transitional
period in the democratic rule of the Sudan.

We are cognizant and aware that peace has its
merits and requirements, particularly with regard to
the returnees, be they internally displaced persons
or refugees. Preparations for their return require the
international community to help the Sudan in creating
a conducive atmosphere and services for them. The
international community's assistance is also required
in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, the rehabilitation of deserted or destroyed
services infrastructure, mitigating the negative effects
of desertification and climate change and ensuring
transitional justice and reparations. Those needs and
others will be discussed with relevant United Nations
bodies and other regional organizations.

My Government is committed to ensuring access for
all those in need of receiving humanitarian assistance.
We again reiterate that all sites vacated by UNAMID
will be assigned to and used for humanitarian and
civilian purposes.

Finally, I am pleased to say that my country
has taken the first step in the lengthy road towards
recovery, along which we anticipate the international
community to be a power by our side. We are ready to
engage positively with all.

