Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in French): I will
set another good example today by speaking in French.

Our delegation welcomes your initiative, Sir, to
convene this important thematic debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his participation today, and
express our deep appreciation to the Assistant
Secretaries-General, the Under-Secretaries-General and
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
for their valuable contributions.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of Morocco on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

My delegation has closely followed the Security
Council's efforts over the past 15 months
simultaneously to promote the maintenance and
building of peace. Lebanon is convinced that
successful United Nations peacekeeping operations and
their transition and exit strategies require partnership
between the Security Council, the Secretariat, the
troop-contributing countries and host countries, as has
often been noted.

As you note, Sir, in your concept paper
(S/2010/67), peacekeeping missions have reached an
all-time high in recent years, with over 96,000 men and
women in uniform deployed in 15 missions and a
budget of about $7.8 billion. These figures are
unprecedented. We therefore need to ensure adequate
resources, which are presently disproportionate to the
complexity of activities of the peacekeeping
operations. It is also vital that the objectives of the
operations be well defined; they must clearly help to
resolve conflicts and to establish lasting peace through
a successful exit strategy.

In the Middle East, the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian territories is at the
heart of the conflict and must be resolved if we are to
achieve a comprehensive settlement of the conflict in
the region and the successful drawdown of the United
Nations missions there.

It is mostly through a comprehensive and
inclusive political process that peacekeeping
operations are able to help protect civilians and achieve
sustainable peace. A successful transition also depends
on defining clear and achievable mandates and on
adequate financing. In the southern part of my country,
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
is an example of how the clarity of objectives has been
translated into close cooperation and coordinated
action between the Lebanese Army and the mission.

The scope and complexity of peacekeeping
operations are currently incompatible with existing
capabilities. We must therefore set realistic goals and
ensure that missions enjoy adequate financing and
appropriate logistical support that will facilitate
successful transition and exit strategies. Lebanon
stresses the close link between the maintenance and
building of peace. Indeed, recovery and peacebuilding
activities are essential from the earliest phases of
peacekeeping. They must be undertaken in
coordination with host Governments and through
development programmes, as well as by strengthening
national institutions and the rule of law. In this regard,
we very much appreciate the role that UNIFIL is
playing and call on international partners to assist in
building the capacities of the Lebanese armed forces.

We also stress the importance of the consulting
role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and call
for regular coordination with the Commission. Indeed,
peacebuilding efforts made right from the start of
peacekeeping will help to ensure stability, especially in
the area of economic recovery, which will help
strengthen security and build trust in peacekeepers and
their mission. In this regard, a post-conflict country's
initiative to prioritize its peacebuilding needs is
essential to constructive dialogue and effective
partnership with the international community. The
involvement of the PBC in Burundi and Sierra Leone
has facilitated the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, largely through the support of
integrated peacebuilding strategies defined and
implemented by national Governments.

In Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic, the involvement of the PBC has resulted in a
new generation of integrated United Nations offices.
Lebanon welcomes the PBC's review exercise, which
will open a unique opportunity to strengthen its role in
the countries where it is operating.

Finally, we note yet again that the success of
peacekeeping missions and their transition and exit
strategies require genuine partnership among all
stakeholders. We also draw the Council's attention to
the key role played by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations in developing political plans,
and the role of the General Assembly's Fifth
Committee in providing adequate financing.

