The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

We thank Special Representative Abou Moussa for
his final briefing. The Republic of Korea appreciates
his leadership and the contribution he has made during
the past three years since the launch of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), one of the
most persistent and brutal armed groups in Africa,
has been substantially weakened. The joint strategy
of the African Union and the United Nations has
been instrumental in countering the LRA. In order
to eliminate the LRA's lifeline, however, further
cooperation and enhanced coordination among all
stakeholders are crucial. We are concerned that the
worsening situation in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan could provide the LRA with a breathing
space. We call on all relevant countries to fully support
the efforts of the African Union (AU) Regional Task
Force to combat the LRA. The missions of the United
Nations and national Governments should enhance
their information-sharing and cross-border cooperation
in order to effectively implement the AU's Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the LRA.

Through its unanimous adoption of resolution
2149 (2014), the Security Council made clear its strong
commitment to multidimensional engagement in the
Central African Republic. It is important that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic maximize
its cooperation with the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur on a common approach in support
of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement efforts across the area
affected by the LRA.

Other subregional threats, unfortunately, remain
unabated. We are particularly concerned about the
unacceptable criminal activities of Boko Haram. The
Republic of Korea strongly condemns its terrorist attacks
and abductions of schoolgirls. We call for a concerted
effort on the part of the international community to deal
with the threat posed by this terrorist group. We should
seek accountability for gross human rights violations,
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
by any armed groups in the Central African region and
beyond.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today's meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2014/8.
It is so decided.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. Given that this was his final briefing to the
Council as Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, I
would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Moussa
for his exceptional service.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.
