Ms. Bishop (Australia): The adoption of resolution
2166 (2014) is a decisive step by the Security Council.
It is an unambiguous response of the international
community to an utterly deplorable act - the shooting
down of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7, killing
all 298 passengers and crew on board, including
80 children. The passengers were citizens of Australia,
Belgium, Canada, Germany, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, the Philippines and the
United Kingdom. The Governments of those countries
have all co-sponsored this resolution today. For that
I am deeply grateful. A number of victims were dual
nationals of other countries. They were all innocent
people on a commercial aircraft. Their plane was shot
down over territory controlled by separatists in eastern
Ukraine. This is an absolute outrage.

Our nation is devastated by the loss of so many
Australians - 37 people who called Australia home.
They were travelling home from Europe - a couple,
both teachers, on holiday to celebrate their retirement;
a 25-year-old travelling in Europe, like so many young
Australians do. Yesterday, I spoke to a husband and wife
from Perth who had been on a family holiday in Europe.
They had decided to stay on for only a couple of days,
while their three children ~ aged 12, 10 and 8 - had
to return to school in Australia, so they went on ahead
with their grandfather on Flight MH-17. The parents
are inconsolable in their grief. Among the victims were
scientists - medical researchers and doctors who were
travelling to Melbourne for the International AIDS
Conference that began yesterday. These were people
who had dedicated their lives to helping others.

Our nation mourns the death of all the victims.
I cannot begin to fathom the pain and anguish their
families and friends are experiencing. But grief is
now accompanied by outrage as we witness grotesque
violations at the crash site. This demands a response.
That is why Australia has brought this resolution to
the Security Council. Today, the Security Council has
responded.

Our resolution demands that armed groups in
control ofthe crash site provide safe access immediately
to allow for the recovery of the bodies, and that these
armed groups stop any actions that compromise the
integrity of the crash site. That is imperative. There
must be a ceasefire in the immediate area around the
site. The victims must be treated with dignity, brought
back to their homes and laid to rest. All parties are
required to fully cooperate with these efforts. Russia
must use its influence over the separatists to ensure
this. Russia must also use its influence to bring the
conflict in Ukraine to an end.

Our resolution also demands a full, thorough and
independent international investigation into this act.
We must have answers. We must have justice. We owe
it to the victims and their families to determine what
happened and who was responsible. The resolution
acknowledges the investigations already under way. It
demands that safe, secure, full and unrestricted access
to the crash site be provided so that the investigating
authorities can carry out their work. It is despicable
that this access is not being provided. It is an affront
to the victims and their families. All States, armed
groups - everyone - must cooperate with the
investigation. We welcome the Secretary-General's
offer of assistance to the investigation. The United
Nations will continue to have a crucial role to play.

The message from this Council to those who were
responsible for this atrocity is definitive. They will be
held to account for their actions. Australia will continue
to do everything we can to ensure that this barbaric act
is thoroughly investigated and that the perpetrators are
brought to justice. We have an overriding objective to
ensure dignity, respect and justice for those killed on
MH-l7. We will not rest until this is done. We will not
rest until we bring them home.

