Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
Malaysia for its leadership of the Council this month and
for organizing this important debate. I would also like to
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for
his statement and the Secretary-General for his recent
report (S/2015/422) on the situation in Afghanistan.

As we gather today to discuss the situation in
Afghanistan, the country has reached a critical moment
in its history. The armed enemies of the country have
embarked on a new offensive against the Afghan
Government and its people, subsequent to the end of
the International Security Assistance Force's combat
mission and the transfer of full security responsibility
to the Afghan national defence and security forces.
Just today, the enemies of Afghanistan conducted a
heinous attack against the Afghan Parliament in Kabul,
wounding dozens of civilians, including children.
We strongly condemn that deliberate attack against
democracy and the representatives of the people.

This new wave of fighting is compounded by
an unprecedented convergence of extremist and
international terrorist networks on our soil - they
consist of the Taliban, thousands of foreign terrorist
fighters and violent extremist groups such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Those groups not
only target Afghan forces and civilians with suicide
bombings, set improvised explosive devices, take
hostages and carry out assassinations, but they also
seek to take control of districts and even provinces
to use them as bases for their agenda in Afghanistan,
as well as in the wider region in South and Central
Asia. Afghan security forces have responded to those
tremendous challenges with bravery, strength, and
determination. In the past months, they have thwarted
numerous attempts to control territory, eliminated
thousands of enemy fighters and foiled plots designed
to kill, shock and terrorize the people of Afghanistan.
For the first time, Afghan forces have moved from a
defensive to an offensive posture and have shown more
capability, potential and resilience than ever before.
They have proved their capacity to protect the security
and safety of the Afghan people and to prevent the
enemies ofAfghanistan from sending the country down
a spiral of chaos and disorder.

Security is a pressing national priority and is an
essential item on the agenda oins Excellency President
Ashraf Ghani as Commander in Chief. Our efforts
to defend the country serve not only the interests of
the Afghan people; we are also fighting on behalf of
every one of our neighbours to uphold the safety and
security of our greater region. As the national unity
Government pursues that agenda, we are grateful for
the continued support of our international partners and
their commitment to train, advise and assist the Afghan
forces. In the face of the great challenges before us,
continued support to the Afghan forces, including air
support and other necessary assistance, will remain
essential.

While our counter-terrorism and military efforts
are fundamental to the security of the country, it is
clear that lasting peace requires a political solution.
To that end, the national unity Government has
prioritized the reinvigoration of the peace process.
Recent engagements between representatives of the
High Peace Council, Afghan civil society - including
women - and the Taliban have promoted dialogue
and mutual understanding and generated momentum
towards an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and Afghan-
managed peace process. The role of our neighbours is
crucial to our efforts to secure peace. In that regard, the
Government of Afghanistan has taken bold steps to open
a new page in our relations with the Islamic Republic
of Pakistan. Over the past 14 years, an undeclared state
of war between our two countries has impacted our
national security and the security of the wider region.
A new dialogue between our two brotherly nations will
allow us to move past that history and work together
for peace and stability. We highlight the recent Visit of
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to Kabul as a positive step
and expect that Pakistan's commitment to peace and
stability extends to ending sanctuaries and compelling
the Taliban to stop their violent campaigns.

Following last year's historic elections, the
national unity Government is dedicated to advancing
its agenda for political, economic and social reform.
President Ghani has appointed all of the ministers
and continues to appoint governors and other senior
leadership officials within the Government. Every
ministry has embarked upon a public lOO-day action
plan designed to achieve the national objectives
identified by the Government's Realizing Self-Reliance
agenda. The principles of merit, transparency and
accountability lie at the centre of all new appointments
and the Government's work. From tackling the Kabul
Bank case as one of the Administration's first acts to
establishing a national procurement board - chaired
by the President himself - to reviewing every single
government contract, the national unity Government
is committed to combating corruption, ending
impunity and strengthening the rule of law. A culture
of accountability has emerged across the country as a
result of our commitment to ensure the establishment
of a clean, functioning and effective Government.
The Government's dedication to accountability
encompasses a greater focus on the transparent and
effective use of international aid and assistance.
Afghanistan is tremendously grateful for the
contributions of our international partners, which have
allowed us to rebuild our country. At the same time,
it is clear that development cooperation should evolve
so that aid can play a facilitating and enabling role
countrywide. We look forward to in-depth discussions on
aid efficiency at the upcoming Senior Officials Meeting
of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework. The
Government has also requested presentations from
major donors, international financial institutions and
the United Nations on their development portfolios, and
it is actively engaged in the upcoming examination of
the role, structure and activities of all United Nations
entities in Afghanistan, as mandated by the Council.

The agenda for reform and transformation is guided
by a strong commitment to advance the rights of all
Afghan people - particularly the rights of women.
There are now 4 female Cabinet ministers and one
female governor, and President Ghani has pledged to
appoint more women to senior Government positions,
including ambassadorial posts. Last week, President
Ghani introduced Afghanistan's first female Supreme
Court nominee. That sets an important precedent and
shows that the Government's commitment to increasing
women's participation is not merely symbolic, but part
of a systematic policy aimed at including women at the
highest levels of decision-making. The national unity
Government is working closely with our international
partners to protect and promote the rights of all Afghan
citizens. Last week, the Afghanistan-European Union
Human Rights Dialogue was launched in Kabul to
provide a forum in which to discuss, coordinate and
synergize a full range of human-rights issues. The
national unity Government is also focused on fulfilling
its commitment to carry out comprehensive electoral
reforms. To that end, in March the Government
established a Special Commission on Electoral Reform,
which includes representatives of civil society and
the United Nations, and this month the Government
announced plans to finalize the election calendar in one
month's time.

Afghanistan continues to strengthen cooperation
with all our neighbours and countries in the region as
part of a broader framework for regional cooperation.
In the last three months, President Ghani has engaged
the leadership of Iran, India, Pakistan and Saudi
Arabia, and Afghan senior officials have participated
in key regional meetings - including the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process meeting on 25 May. Afghanistan
has also signed the draft Afghanistan-Pakistan-
Tajikistan Trilateral Transit Trade Agreement, and the
final pending documents for the Central Asia-South
Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project, which
will strengthen Afghanistan's potential to become the
capital of the continental economy, a hub in the Heart
of Asia.

We look forward to the Sixth Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan in September,
which will be an important step towards ensuring
further cooperation and better connections in the
region.

Our international partnerships remain vital to
Afghanistan's long-term development and prosperity.
The historic Visit to the United States of the Afghan
high-level delegation led by President Ghani in
March reaffirmed our commitment to the United
States-Afghan strategic partnership. During the visit,
President Ghani addressed the American people and the
Congress and held enormously productive discussions
with President Obama and the leadership of the United
States. Together they announced a new development
partnership, which will mobilize up to $800 million
in economic assistance for Afghan development and
reform priorities. President Ghani concluded his visit
in New York, where he underlined the importance of
the United Nations-Afghan partnership at meetings
with the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, and the leadership of the United Nations.

At a time when new conflicts and wars plague
the world and divert our attention and resources, the
continuing cooperation and support of the international
community is crucial to Afghanistan's future. While
Afghanistan faces great challenges, the country is
steadily realizing the goals ofthe transformation decade
and moving towards a brighter future. As we do so, we
know that our ongoing partnerships and the support of
the international community will be essential to the
peace and stability of Afghanistan, the region and the
world.

