Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): I too would like to
welcome to the Chamber His Excellency Vuk Jeremic',
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and His Excellency Skender Hyseni, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo, and to
thank them for their statements. We also welcome
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and thank him for his important
contribution and his tireless work. We also welcome
the presence at this meeting of Mr. Johannes Kyrle,
Vice Federal Minister for European and International
Affairs of Austria.

Croatia welcomes the continued and steady
progress that Kosovo is making on its path towards
creating a stable, secure and democratic society. We
also salute the European Union for continuing its
efforts in advancing the European perspective for all
the countries in the region on the basis of their reform
efforts and individual accomplishments.

Croatia welcomes the Secretary-General's
assessment that the overall security situation in Kosovo
has remained relatively calm. However, we are
concerned with recent incidents in the north, including
the acts of vandalism involving 26 European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) vehicles in
Pristina.

Croatia would like to commend the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) for its effective and useful role and for the
services that it is providing to both communities in
Kosovo, as well as for its support to international
organizations operating in the north, including through
its dialogue and cooperation on practical issues that
can benefit both Pristina and Belgrade.

We believe that that, in itself, confirms the useful
role that UNMIK plays in Kosovo, particularly on
issues of external relations and international legal
assistance. We call on all parties to continue to
cooperate with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team.

Croatia is pleased to see that EULEX has
continued to undertake monitoring, mentoring and
advising activities since its full deployment on 6 April
2009. Croatia, which is a contributing country to
EULEX, would like to take this opportunity to
commend the Mission's leadership and other partner
countries for their efforts, in particular for ensuring, in
a coordinated manner with UNMIK and the Kosovo
Force, effective response to instances of inter-ethnic
violence or major public disturbances.

We welcome the good cooperation that exists
between EULEX and UNMIK, which, together with
other international partners, should continue to work
together to address new challenges and build a better
future for all people in Kosovo. We also welcome the
high level of interest and support that Kosovo
authorities have shown in helping EULEX to fulfil its
mandate, as well as in planning further action.

Croatia looks forward to the successful conduct
of upcoming municipal elections scheduled for
15 November 2009, as the Central Election
Commission, with the support of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), will for
the first time be fully in charge of organizing all phases
of electoral operations and certifying the results. That
will be a further test of the maturity of Kosovo's
institutions.

We believe that all citizens of Kosovo, including
Kosovo Serbs in the north, should be encouraged to
participate actively in the elections. Moreover, we
welcome the return of almost all Kosovo Serb officers
to their positions in the Kosovo Police by the 30 June
deadline. Remaining Kosovo Serbs and other
non-Albanians will fully realize their civic and
democratic rights by actively participating in the
political process and institutions in Kosovo, thereby
improving the position of their respective communities.

In that respect, even though the number of returns
remains low, we draw attention to the assessment in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/497) that the
reintegration of minority communities continues to be
a challenge, primarily owing to the lack of employment
opportunities, the fragile economic situation and access
to services.

Finally, we acknowledge the efforts made on the
question of the reconstruction of cultural property and
the issue of returns. As stated by the Secretary-General
in his report, the number of returns remains very low,
while the reintegration of minority communities,
especially the Kosovo Serb community, continues to be
a challenge. Further progress in this field remains
critical, as Kosovo is gradually developing into a
multi-ethnic and peaceful society strengthened by its
commitment to the values of tolerance, protection of
human rights and minority rights, dialogue and
cooperation.

