Mr. Bathily (spoke in French): I have the honour to
introduce the Secretary-General's report (8/2015/339)
on the situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA). The report provides an update on the threats
to peace and security in Central Africa. It also includes
a review of the activities carried out by UNOCA over
the past six months in cooperation with Member States
and subregional organizations.

Since the publication of the Secretary-General's
previous report in November 2014 (8/2014/812),
the political and security situation in the subregion
has remained a source of concern. Central Africa is
again marked by growing pre-electoral tensions; the
economic crisis worsened by the falling price of crude
in the oil-producing countries ofthe region; rising youth
unemployment; terrorist activities, particularly those
committed by Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance
Army; and the cross-border impact of crises in a
number of countries in the region, such as the Central
African Republic and Burundi.

(spoke in English)

With regard to the ongoing crisis in the Central
African region, the Central African Republic continues
to have regional and multidimensional consequences,
with nearly half a million refugees, ongoing gross
violations of human rights, the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, growing gang-related
criminality and environmental degradation in refugee
areas. At the request of the Head of State of the transition
and with the agreement of the international mediator,
President Sassou Nguesso of Congo, in early May I
chaired the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation
and worked in close consultation with the international
mediators and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic, Mr. Babacar Gaye. That included working
to defuse pre-Forum tensions, discouraging spoilers,
advising participants, including representatives of the
armed groups, ensuring inclusivity and transparency,
facilitating ownership of the process by Central
Africans and keeping all actors mindful of a long-term
Vision for peace in that country.

The Forum concluded on 11 May with the signing
of a number of key documents, including the republican
pact forpeace, national reconciliation and reconstruction
in the Central African Republic and an agreement on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).
I wish to acknowledge the transitional authorities,
and particularly the citizens of the Central African
Republic, for that success. Moving forward, it will be
critical to capitalize on the momentum generated by the
Forum and to mobilize the required resources for the
elections and DDR.

Boko Haram remained a serious threat to the Lake
Chad Basin region. The dire humanitarian situation
in the region, resulting from attacks perpetrated by
Boko Haram, continued to affect the population,
including hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians
in Cameroon and Chad. Insecurity and insufficient
resources continued to strain the already stretched
response capacities of Governments and United Nations
entities in the affected countries.

The Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) demonstrated its commitment
to address the Boko Haram threat during several
summits of Heads of State and Government in which
I represented the Secretary-General. The deployment
of Chadian troops to the border areas of Cameroon and
Nigeria and the recent inauguration of the headquarters
of the Multinational Joint Task Force on Boko Haram
(MNJTF) signalled increasing cooperation between
States in the fight against Boko Haram. Military
operations have put Boko Haram on the defensive, but
recent attacks by the terrorist group highlight the need
for the affected States to remain vigilant and engaged.
While the fight against Boko Haram is not over, we
must start looking ahead to the stabilization phase
in order to secure military gains. That will involve
international support and regional commitment for
candidly examining and addressing the root causes of
violent extremism.

UNOCA remained both politically and technically
engaged in supporting the countries of the region
address the impact of Boko Haram's activities, in close
collaboration with the United Nations Office for West
Africa (UNOWA). My Office, supported efforts to
develop a coordinated humanitarian response and to
advance the operationalization of the Multinational
Joint Task Force. I undertook a diplomatic tour of
UNOWA with Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Chambas to engage the leaders of Boko Haram-
affected countries. We will continue to support the
region's collective response to the Boko Haram threat.

The Lord's Resistance Army continued to pose a
threat to regional security, particularly to populations
in the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. During the period under review,
in spite of ongoing efforts, the number of abductions
unfortunately increased. More than 200,000 persons
still remain displaced across the region. The group is
also involved in the illicit trade in natural resources to
finance its activities.

The surrender of senior LRA commander Dominic
Ongwen in January 2015, and his subsequent transfer
to the International Criminal Court, marks a significant
step forward with regard to criminal justice. Ongwen's
removal from the battlefield sends a strong message to
remaining LRA fighters and signifies that international
efforts to combat the group within the framework of
the regional strategies of the United Nations and the
African Union are bearing fruit.

UNOCA remained actively engaged on the LRA
issue to ensure the implementation of the United
Nations Regional Strategy to Address the Threat and
Impact of the Activities of the LRA and to ensure
international coordination through the convening of
the biannual coordination meeting of LRA focal points.
UNOCA also worked in close collaboration with the
African Union to ensure the political commitment of
LRA-affected countries to this cause. The African
Union Special Envoy for the Lord's Resistance Army
Issue, General Jackson Tuwei, and I met with the
Ugandan authorities in Kampala to emphasize the
importance of the Government's sustained political and
operational commitment to the African Union Regional
Task Force. I would like to express my gratitude for the
work undertaken in that process by the African Union
Regional Task Force, whose mandate was recently
renewed, on 18 May, by the African Union Peace and
Security Council.

Maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea
continued to pose serious security threats and to
have economic consequences for Central Africa and
West African States. In coordination with UNOWA,
UNOCA continued working with the States concerned
to consolidate their efforts in combating maritime
insecurity.

Central Africa remained plagued by cross-border
criminal activities, including the illicit trade in wildlife
to support the activities of armed groups such as the
LRA. Further to the recent signing of a memorandum
of understanding between the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and ECCAS, UNOCA will support
Central Africa in the development of a subregional
strategy to tackle the growing phenomenon ofpoaching.

Central Africa has entered an electoral cycle that
will conclude in 2018. Political tensions in the run-up to
elections are on the rise in some countries. Issues related
to amending constitutional term limits are dividing
electorates. Violent confrontations have led to the loss
of lives in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Burundi. There are simmering social grievances,
which are exacerbated by the economic contraction in
the subregion's many oil-producing States.

In that context, I continued to use the good
offices of the Secretary-General to engage political
stakeholders across the subregion and encourage
the peaceful resolution of disputes. As a result of the
support provided by UNOCA and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, journalists
from Central Africa adopted a code of conduct that
articulates their responsibilities in support of peaceful
electoral processes. UNOCA also organized the third
meeting of United Nations presences in Central Africa,
held on 18 May, which focused on increasing internal
coherence and efficacy in preventing and managing
electoral violence in the subregion. A meeting of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa took place in
Luanda on 4 June, with the assistance of UNOCA. The
meeting adopted ministerial declarations on Burundi
and the Central African Republic to reaffirm the
region's support.

Despite the many challenges they face, Central
African leaders have undertaken important initiatives
in the interests of their populations. On 6 May, the
Heads of State of the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community (CEMAC) decided to implement
the free movement of peoples in the six countries of the
CEMAC zone, signalling a major step towards greater
regional integration. Meanwhile, ECCAS Heads of State
continued to work collectively in the Central African
Republic as well as in response to the instability caused
by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin region. ECCAS
Heads of State also decided to appoint a special envoy
for Burundi and the Great Lakes region to appeal to the
Burundian parties to seek to resolve their differences
through peaceful means. UNOCA will continue to
support these and other subregional initiatives that
advance long-term stability.

The report before the Council also presents the
findings and recommendations of the recent strategic
review of UNOCA's mandate and activities. Since its
establishment five years ago, UNOCA has demonstrated
its added value in a fragile subregion with enormous
internal and cross-border security challenges. The
Secretary-General encourages Member States to
support the recommendations of the strategic review.
With the continued support of this body, UNOCA shall
continue to be a steadfast partner to the Central African
States in the promotion of peace and stability.

