Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): We
are grateful to you, Sir, and to the Brazilian presidency
for bringing to the Council today the issue of the
relationship between security and development. It was
good to see the many honourable Ministers in the
Council, as well as Ambassador Gasana in his first
appearance in his role as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and Sarah Cliffe from the World Bank for their
briefings.

The links between security and development are
clear cut. Countries affected by conflict and violence
have fallen far behind in development. No low-income,
fragile or conflict-affected country has yet achieved a
single one of the Millennium Development Goals. And
as we discussed last month in the debate on institution-
building (see S/PV.6472 and Resumption 1), under the
presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, fragility and
conflict are symptoms of institutional failure to manage
stress, whether that be high unemployment, organized
crime, political disputes or climate change. Building
stronger links between security and development is
therefore critical for preventing conflict and building
sustainable peace.

We have been grappling with these issues in the
United Nations for many years, particularly in the
peacebuilding arena. The creation of the peacebuilding
architecture was the result of the failure to bring
critical political, security and development components
of the international community together to address the
needs of a country emerging from conflict.

The Peacebuilding Commission has started to
provide this glue for the countries on its agenda, and
we need to continue to strengthen the Commission. The
Secretary-General's report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386*) has also
helped to highlight the need for improved leadership,
planning and financing. And we are waiting for the
review of civilian capacities. But are we now getting
the right response on the ground, in places such as the
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo?

We need to be assured that the United Nations is
geared up to deliver assistance, so that there is a rapid
progress to build people's confidence in the peace
process and in State authorities. We have heard from
Sarah Cliffe this morning that creating confidence and
trust is key. That requires building institutions that can
generate security, justice and jobs. We also need to
ensure that longer-term institutional reform gets under
way quickly so that the causes of conflict are
addressed, mechanisms to resolve disputes peacefully
are in place and States are both able to respond to
public expectations and are accountable. If we are to
achieve this, I believe we should focus on four issues
in particular in the coming months.

First, we need better integration of efforts.
Peacekeeping missions and the United Nations funds
and programmes should plan together. We need a clear
sense of who is doing what, based on a realistic
assessment of capacities, competence and the
sequencing of action.

Secondly, there must be a clearer delineation of
roles and responsibilities for the core peacebuilding
sectors. Without this, we will not get the right
investment to ensure predictable and professional
response. This is ever more important in an
environment where resources are constrained. We do
not want peacekeepers drifting into development work.
That is neither their mandate nor their field of
expertise.

Third, and in response to this, development
partners should engage earlier. This means Member
States themselves sending consistent signals about
priorities in their engagement in the boards of the

funds and programmes We should ensure that the
agencies have the flexibility to be able to scale up
action quickly enough to meet demands on the ground.

Lastly, we look forward to the release of the
World Development Report. This will give critical
insights into the issue we are discussing today. We
hope that it will also stimulate better links between the
United Nations and the World Bank in fragile and post-
conflict countries. We need the World Bank to come
actively alongside the United Nations to support
peacebuilding. Perhaps one way to help realize this is
for the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
President of the World Bank to undertake a joint visit
to a number of post-conflict countries.

The United Kingdom stands ready to support the
Secretary-General in this important endeavour.

