Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this important and
timely meeting. We are also grateful for the structured
concept note (S/2015/306), annex for this open debate,
and to the Secretary-General for his biennial report on
small arms and light weapons (SALW) (S/2015/289),
which contains valuable information and important
recommendations.

The global issue of small arms and light weapons
has long been on the agenda of the United Nations,
and the Security Council has taken action to address
it many times. The relevant Council resolutions and
presidential statements, particularly resolution 2117
(2013), constitute a sound basis that outlines the
principal directions for action to deal with the growing
consequences of the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of such weapons.

Without prejudice to the legitimate right of
Member States to self-defence, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, Turkey believes that
the illicit trade in, and excessive accumulation of,
small arms and light weapons constitutes a serious
threat to international peace and security. We share
the concerns that have been expressed in the Council
today about the destabilizing role such weapons play
in protracted conflicts, terrorism and organized crime,
including human and drug trafficking. Cognizant of
the significant threat such weapons pose to human
lives and their devastating effects on the social and
economic development of many countries, Turkey
strongly supports comprehensive efforts to eradicate
the problem of small arms and light weapons at both
the international and national levels.

To that end, we pursue policies and strategies
that are compatible with international law, including
international humanitarian law and human-rights law,
and fully comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and other legally binding international
obligations based on the conventions and other
legal instruments that Turkey is party to. Turkey
also cooperates with the relevant Security Council
sanctions committees and incorporates the necessary
measures into its national legislation with regard to
the production, export and transfer of small arms and
light weapons. With regard to international regulations
on the arms trade and transfers, I would like to point
out that Turkey has signed the Arms Trade Treaty and
intends to ratify it as soon as possible.

Turkey believes that the complementary and
mutually reinforcing actions taken by the Security
Council and the General Assembly on this issue are clear
indications of the international community's resolve to
solve this problem. Accordingly, Turkey attaches great
importance to the fulfilment of the objectives set forth
by the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects and its implementation
mechanism, the International Tracing Instrument.
Combined, they provide a comprehensive framework
for global action to fight against the illicit trade in
SALW, which has recorded much progress since 2001.

Turkey is firmly convinced that international
cooperation is crucial to attain the desired ends in
curbing the illicit trade and excessive accumulation
of SALW and preventing their misuse. We believe
that transparency and information-sharing would help
promote consistency in the implementation of agreed
multilateral standards.

Increasing capacity-building is another issue
that we need to vigorously address. Turkey believes
that increased cooperation and assistance is crucial
to improving the capacity of Member States to
pursue successful disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes to prevent their diversion
through effective marking, record-keeping and tracing,
and to better manage stockpiles and the disposal of
surplus SALW and ammunition. Furthermore, Turkey
strongly believes that cooperation between national and
international law enforcement and customs agencies,
hand in hand with industry and non-governmental
organizations, plays a key role in our efforts.

