Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this emergency
meeting on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine and
for your kind words to Mr. Gasana and the delegation of
Rwanda concerning the presidency in July.

Let me also thank John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), for his briefing.

The humanitarian crisis in eastern Ukraine,
especially in the regions of Luhansk and Donetsk, has
fast deteriorated over the past weeks. The violence
continues to put the lives of Ukrainians in grave danger,
particularly women and children; 3.9 million people
live in areas affected by violence, a number of them
deprived of basic services, including water, electricity
and health services. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
United Nations refugee agency, reported that 117,000
people have been displaced inside Ukraine and that a
total of 740,000 people have crossed into the Russian
Federation since the beginning of the year.

Some are displaced because of fear of persecution
for political views, ethnicity and possible recruitment in
eastern Ukraine, but the large majority are Ukrainians
caught in the crossfire, fearing for their own security
and seeking a safe location. We commend United
Nations agencies and other humanitarian actors for
their work on the ground, and we support UNHCR's
call for the establishment by the Ukrainian Government
of a central registration system for internally displaced
persons.

Meanwhile, Rwanda is concerned at the continued
fighting around the crash site of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH17, preventing international investigators
from doing their work. Those continued violations of
resolution 2166 (2014) cannot be tolerated, particularly
as we know that some family members have not been
able to receive the remains of their loved ones. We
renew our call on all parties - as they committed
themselves to doing on 31 July - to allow unhindered
access in and around sites so that the investigators can
safely perform their duties in an expedited manner.
Given that context, it is unfortunate that the
Council continues to be deeply divided on the crisis
in Ukraine. The risk of a full-blown war will remain
as long as there is division among Council members.
Also, the worsening humanitarian situation in Ukraine,
although it has not reached the level of that of Syria
or Gaza, should be a wake-up call for the Council and
for all stakeholders to redouble their efforts and take
meaningful action towards a sustainable solution to the
cr1s1s.

It is true that the volatility of the situation on the
ground continues to hinder political and diplomatic
efforts to find a sustainable solution to the Ukrainian
crisis. We thank the Secretary-General for his good
offices and continued efforts for a peaceful settlement
of the conflict. In that respect, we reiterate our support
for President Poroshenko's peace plan, which should
be the basis for a long-term solution to the crisis. We
also appreciate the initiatives of the trilateral contact
group of senior representatives of Ukraine, the Russian
Federation and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, as well as the commitments
contained in the joint Berlin declaration of2 July of the
ministers for foreign affairs of Germany, France, the
Russian Federation and Ukraine.

Let me reiterate our call for the respect of the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine. In that regard, we urge all armed groups in
eastern Ukraine to disarm and adhere to a ceasefire in
order to de-escalate the situation. We believe that the
Government of Ukraine has a right to restore public
order on its territory, provided that right is exercised
in a proportional manner with a view to preserving the
chance for a genuine and inclusive dialogue among all
Ukrainians.

In conclusion, Rwanda notes that today the Security
Council is considering the humanitarian situation in
the Ukraine and that in two days it will hold another
meeting focused on the human rights situation in the
country. We believe that such a piecemeal approach
of considering different aspects of a particular crisis
is not helpful, as all of them are interconnected.
Consequently, Rwanda suggests holding a monthly
meeting on the situation in Ukraine. That would enable
us to remain seized of this matter and to consider the
Ukrainian crisis in all its aspects.

