Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): The delegation of Cote d'Ivoire thanks
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his briefing
on new developments in the critical situation in several
countries in the Middle East, in particular Syria, since
the Security Council considered the issue on 9 and
10 April (see S/PV. 8225 and S/PV. 8228).

Despite the relative lull in the fighting in Syria,
the humanitarian situation remains troubling in the
light of the allegations of the recurring use of chemical
weapons by parties to the conflict. As a result of its
internal divisions, despite our goodwill, the Council
has failed to ensure the implementation of resolution
2401 (2018), which we adopted unanimously in order
to deliver humanitarian assistance to people in need.
In the light of the continuing reports of the use of
chemical weapons in Douma, the Council was unable
to reach an agreement on a statement that at the very
least would have conveyed our solidarity to the Syrian
people at this difficult time. The delegation of Cote
d'lvoire remains concerned by the current impasse
in the Security Council, which has, unfortunately,
prevented it from reaching agreement on a mechanism
to combat impunity vis-a-vis the use of chemical
weapons in Syria.

In this context, we reiterate our support for the
impartial, transparent, independent investigation
to be conducted by the Fact-finding Mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
with the aim of shedding light on allegations of the use
of chemical weapons in Douma, in eastern Ghouta.

cote d'Ivoire reiterates its strong condemnation
of any use of chemical weapons, by any party, during
peacetime or during wartime. Once again we beseech
members of the Council to unite so as to set aside their
differences and successfully set up an accountability
mechanism to ensure that those who use chemical
weapons are held accountable.

We remain alarmed by the tensions stemming
from the current political impasse, and we encourage
the Secretary-General to make use of his good offices
with stakeholders to restore peace and calm, in order to
prevent any further escalation of the situation. To that
end, my country invites all parties to exercise restraint
so as to peacefully resolve this issue and in so doing
safeguard international peace and security, which is
our shared legacy.

Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms our conviction and our
principled position that there can be no military response
to the crisis in Syria. The solution needs to be sought
through dialogue and an inclusive political process, as
stipulated in the road map set out by resolution 2254
(2015). My country remains convinced that dialogue
alone will lead us to an equitable settlement of the
conflict in Syria.

