Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to welcome Minister Nqakula and to thank
him for his briefing, in which he outlined the latest
developments of the situation in Burundi. Above all, I
commend the efforts undertaken by his country and
other countries of the subregion to stabilize the
situation in Burundi, which finds itself in a highly
unstable political environment.

We agree that the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement provides the basis for a lasting solution so
long as the parties are able to rise above their
suspicions and establish a dialogue based on mutual
trust and respect for their commitments. We agree with
all the statements made by previous speakers to the
effect that every pressure must now be exerted on the
Palipehutu-Forces nationales de liberation to persuade
it to return to the Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism without delay or precondition.

In the context of the inter- and intra-partisan
tension prevailing in Burundi, the international
community must pay closer attention, above all, to
supporting the Facilitator in his multifaceted work so
as to ensure the coordination of efforts between the
United Nations and the African Union and to mobilize
the resources necessary to carrying out the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of former combatants, the impact of which was duly
outlined by Minister Nqakula. I would also note that
the potential deadline referred to Minister Nqakula and
the representative of South Africa should be taken into
account in the context of mobilizing resources and in
all efforts to ensure the successful implementation of
the DDR operation.

The difficulties besetting the subregion are such
that the risk of a new outbreak of violence would also
have a collateral effect on neighbouring countries and
could even undo the efforts of the international
community there, including in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We therefore support the appeal launched
here today by Minister Nqakula for facilitation
assistance so as to ensure the successful
implementation of his programme of work. Any failure
of that process would have unfathomable consequences.
The Congo supports the press statement prepared
by the delegation of France.

