Mr. Preval (Haiti) (spoke in French): As
President-elect of the Republic of Haiti, it is a great
pleasure for me to address the Security Council in
order to convey to the international community the
expectations of the people of Haiti.

I would first like to thank the Security Council,
and Argentina in its capacity as President, for the
invitation to address the Council. I would also like to
thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan, the core group,
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the entire international community
for their support for the stabilization process in Haiti.

The massive turnout by the Haitian people in the
7 February elections is an eloquent demonstration of
their desire to live in peace and take part in national
reconstruction. The turnout was also an indication of
their legitimate aspiration for an improvement in their
living conditions. It also constitutes meaningful
progress in the stabilization process.

Haiti is today a country needing to be built. The
problems are enormous, and there is a sense of urgency
everywhere. Poverty, widespread unemployment, the
dilapidated state of basic infrastructure crucial to
development, and chronic insecurity are the major
challenges that the next Government must confront.
Increased financial assistance from the
international community is proving to be indispensable
to consolidate the democratic process and lay the social
and economic foundations for Haiti's sustainable
development. International assistance must also focus
on the reform of democratic institutions - including
the Parliament, municipalities and territorial
communities and the judicial system - and the
professionalization of the police.

I have therefore come here to ask for the support
of the international community by calling on it to
renew its commitment to a long-term assistance
programme for Haiti. In that regard, I would like to
refer to resolution 1212 (1998), which emphasized that
economic recovery and reconstruction are the main
tasks facing the Government and people of Haiti and
that significant international assistance is essential for
Haiti's sustainable development. In addition, that
resolution calls upon United Nations bodies and
institutions, especially the Economic and Social
Council, to contribute to the development of such a
programme. It also calls for the implementation of a
post-electoral programme based on creating jobs,
improving basic social services and creating conditions
for wide-scale private investment.

We must also take into account the Interim
Cooperation Framework, which has been extended to
December 2007. I call upon donors to continue to meet
their pledges by disbursing without delay the funds
pledged, in order to support the next Government in its
efforts aimed at stabilizing the country and at socio-
economic recovery. I welcome the idea of holding an
urgent donor conference on Haiti.

There is a close relationship between democracy
and economic development. Strengthening
democracy- to which the international community
has for some time been firmly committed with regard
to Haiti - cannot occur without the disbursement of
funds. To that end, the support and specific actions of
the international community are very important in
meeting the Millennium Development Goals, as set out
in the Millennium Declaration, as well as in putting
Haiti on an irreversible path towards sustainable
development. That calls for making available to the
people, most of whom do not share in the progress of
the twenty-first century, the necessary conditions for a
respectable life.

I would now like to turn to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, which is carrying out a
very difficult task. Along with the Haitian National
Police, MINUSTAH is working to improve the security
situation in the country. I commend its efforts. We must
now orient its mission towards current priorities and
establish an enabling environment in which law
prevails over violence and force.

Reform of the police and the Haitian judicial
system is clearly essential. It is also necessary to
develop their operational capacities and to enable them
to meet their legal responsibilities. It is important that
an agreement that conforms to the provisions of the
Constitution and the rules and regulations of the police
be negotiated in mutual respect. Similarly, I call for
financial and technical support from the international
community for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. I also call on MINUSTAH to
work more closely with the Haitian authorities to bring
about the necessary changes with regard to the
professionalization of the police and the justice system.

I am currently conducting talks with the political
class and other components of the nation so that we
can, by working together, at long last realize the goal
of laying the foundations for a peaceful and democratic
social and political system. Those are necessary
elements for stability, security, economic recovery and
building an inclusive society. I call on the Haitian
political class and the other members of civil society to
meet with the new Government, in the context of a
frank and sincere dialogue, in order to define a
governance pact that will create a propitious
environment for sound, democratic and participatory
governance.

Again, I count on the international community to
support the Haitian people in their crusade for peace
and sustainable development.

