Mr. Einaudi (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Mr.
President, and, through you, the Argentine Republic for
having convened this meeting and for having
shouldered leadership responsibilities including that of
hosting next November's Summit of the Americas.

(spoke in English)

Haiti is a founding member of the Organization
of American States (OAS), and the organization has
been particularly active in Haiti over the past 15 years.
Yesterday we had the honour of receiving Juan Gabriel
Valdes in our Permanent Council, and we had one of
the best discussions of the situation in Haiti and of the
needs facing the country with regard to the holding of
good elections.

To represent the Permanent Council, I am
accompanied today by its Vice-Chairman, Joshua
Sears. I wish simply to say that we are very pleased to
be able to be here.

Our most recent mandate from our own General
Assembly refers to support for the elections, for the
institutional strengthening of the Haitian State and for
the defence of human rights, all in cooperation with the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the United Nations as a whole. In
fact, in the first days of November, Under-Secretary-
General Prendergast and I were able to sign a
memorandum of understanding which gave the OAS
the lead in the voter registration process. I am very
pleased to say that we have received a transfer of $8.7
million from the Government of the United States - to
which I convey my thanks - for the undertaking of
that work.

Let me make just a few very simple points. The
first one is that good elections - that is to say, open,
participative, non-exclusive elections in which the
people can vote and have their votes counted and
respected - are central to democratic stability and
legitimacy in Haiti. I think there is absolutely no doubt
of that among any of us.

The second is that that will not be easy to
achieve. There are specific obstacles when one starts
trying to organize good elections. I will say that I
personally have spent almost four years working with
the Haitian Government to exactly those ends, and with
the same, so to speak, preaching: that we need to
include the opposition. Oppositions, at times, have
changed; needs remain very similar. It is very clear
that, if Haiti is to avoid going from crisis to crisis, it
needs - and the international community needs - to
develop a programme of broad support for State
institutions.

In that sense, the effort that the OAS is
undertaking in Haiti is, I think, an extremely
interesting one. Our objective is to contribute to the
institutional development of Haiti and to the credibility
of democracy in Haiti. That means that we have
developed as careful a programme of electoral
registration as we could. We are still refining it,
together with the electoral experts of MINUSTAH and
with the Haitian Provisional Electoral Council. It is
one that will draw on excellent knowledge from within
the hemisphere.

It is interesting to note that five countries -
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Peru and Uruguay - have
contributed, I believe, about 80 per cent of the
personnel for the stabilization force. Well, I would say
that there is something close to that - together with
the support of the United States, Canada and Mexico
and that of some smaller countries such as Panama and
Paraguay - in the support for national electoral
tribunals, with strong support, again, from Brazil, in
the establishment of personnel, rules, relationships and
abilities to bring the best technical capability to bear.

We have tried to develop a system, which will
begin operating in March, that will not be sui generis
and "floating in the air" but which will contribute to
institutional development by being tied to, and
facilitating, the development of the civil registry of
Haiti, which is an important institution and an
important need in all of our countries. Having the legal
right of existence is the start of human rights and of the
ability to advance. We would like to help contribute to
the inclusion of as many as possible of the 4.5 million
Haitians whom we propose to register, in a way that
ensures that their registration will not just serve for a
one-time election, but will provide the beginning of
that basis for life - to which, I think, we are all
committed.

That will not be easy. There are problems of
infrastructure, of security and of voter education that
will need to be handled. Let me simply say that I think
that this is a critical moment. Our technicians - the
OAS technicians and the technicians of the United
Nations working with Juan Gabriel Valdes - are
looking at and scrubbing the numbers one more time in
close cooperation with the Provisional Electoral
Council of Haiti. I believe that the Member States of
the United Nations, certainly the member States of the
OAS, and our observers, which have been very
generous with us, will be receiving further indications
of the financial support necessary to make that process
work effectively.

I believe the Haitian situation is a unique
historical situation. I also think it is surprisingly
representative of a phenomenon on the international
scene in which we live. But it is very difficult for local
authorities to do things well in a globalized world
without international support, and it is very difficult for
the international community to achieve things if it is
not capable of enlisting the support of the local
authorities. As Minister Amorim said, the needs are
long-term, but I think the challenge of legitimizing the
political situation and increasing the confidence of
Haitians and of the international community is a very
immediate challenge.

