Mr. Martin: As members of the Council know
and have welcomed, I was sent by the Secretary-
General to Timor-Leste to assess the situation there at
first hand, working closely with the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) and the Timorese
leadership. I was in the country from 29 May to 7 June,
during which time I had extensive discussions across
the political spectrum. These included long and frank
conversations with President Xanana Gusmao, Prime
Minister Mari Alkatiri and Foreign Minister Jose
Ramos-Horta, who also assumed the defence portfolio
during my visit. I also talked with other ministers, with
the commander of the defence force, key members of
opposition parties, the Bishop of Dili, civil society
representatives and the diplomatic community. I
travelled to western districts to meet leaders and
political supporters of protesting soldiers who have
been dismissed or put themselves outside the command
of the army.

The Council has been regularly briefed on the
unfolding crisis, and I will not revisit the tragic course
of events or its serious humanitarian consequences.
What I think the Council will most want to know is
how successfully it is now being addressed; what the
underlying causes are which require the longer-term
attention of the political leadership and the support of
the international community; and what expectations are
there now of the United Nations.

While I was in Dili, the two senior constitutional
bodies which advise the President, the Council of State
and the Superior Council for Defence and Security,
agreed upon a framework and a plan of action within

which the political leadership is addressing the security
crisis. This involves the President assuming the main
responsibility for defence and security, in close
collaboration and permanent interaction with the Prime
Minister and the President of the Parliament. The
Ministers of Defence and Interior resigned and were
replaced. All those who now share responsibility for
security matters expressed to me their commitment to
working together within that framework, which will
indeed require their close and continuous collaboration
in the weeks ahead.

Bringing the security situation fully under control
also requires effective coordination with and among
the military and police forces of the four countries
whose deployment the Government of Timor-Leste
requested and the Council has welcomed. There, too,
the Timorese leadership has committed itself to regular
coordination meetings of the key actors, and the forces
themselves continue to work on operational
arrangements. I left Dili just as the Portuguese police
force began its operations there and before the advance
parties of police from Australia, Malaysia and New
Zealand were joined by the numbers necessary to begin
patrolling. I believe that, as they do so, the arson and
looting in Dili will be brought fully under control.
Fortunately, it has not spread beyond the capital,
although disturbing tensions are emerging in some
districts.

That, however, will not in itself be the end of the
security crisis. The leaders of the soldiers or ex-
soldiers outside the command of the defence force told
me, as they have told others, that they would take no
offensive armed action and would respect the authority
of the President. The defence force itself is cooperating
fully with the international forces, and its commander,
Brigadier-General Taur Matan Ruak, assured me of his
commitment to the Constitution and of his
determination that there should be no more war in his
country. However, weapons from the defence force and
from the police service have been distributed to
civilians, including former resistance fighters.

The President's plan of action provides for the
controlled return and audit of weapons of the security
forces, with international participation. The
international forces have already recovered substantial
numbers of weapons, and the defence force command
states that it has recalled those it had distributed. But
as long as groups which remain armed or have access

S/l'V.5457

 

to arms remain disaffected, the security situation
cannot be said to have been resolved.

Parliamentary and presidential elections are due
in Timor-Leste by May 2007, and are, of course, where
political competition should be democratically
resolved. But segments of the population are not
accepting that the present Government should remain
in place until then. Such opposition is reported to be
widespread in western districts and in the church.
Following the resignations of the Ministers of Defence
and Interior, there has been one sizeable demonstration
in Dili calling for the resignation of Prime Minister
Alkatiri. At times this has been stated by the leaders of
the soldiers or ex-soldiers outside the army command
to be a precondition for dialogue. Such demonstrations
carry the prospect of those loyal to FRETILIN, the
ruling party, staging counter-demonstrations. There
thus remains the potential for violent clashes between
different groups of demonstrators, at what remains a
tense time in the capital.

The most serious underlying cause of the current
crisis, and perhaps the biggest challenge for future
stability, lies in the security sector. The crisis has
revealed political cleavages not only between the
defence force and the police service, which has long
been a subject of concern, but also internally in each
institution. Initial recruitment to the defence force was
from the former FALINTIL fighters for independence;
selection was controversial at the time and has been
since. The majority of officers and first recruits were
from the eastern districts, where FALINTIL remained
active until 1999. Later recruits were younger and
mostly from western districts; it is many of them who
have alleged discriminatory practices against them by
eastern officers.

Long before independence, Xanana Gusmao, as
commander of FALINTIL, had taken the resistance
forces outside FRETILIN to be the army of the nation
rather than of a political party, but it is now alleged by
some that FRETILIN has been trying to draw the
defence force command closer to itself.

Initial recruitment to the police service was also
controversial, with criticism of the absorption of men
and particularly officers from the Indonesian police.
The Minister of the Interior, Rogerio Lobato, who has
now resigned, was seen from the time of his
appointment in 2002 to be politicizing the police,
initially as a counterweight to the President's perceived

influence over the defence force. In November 2002,
the President called publicly for his dismissal. In 2004,
heavy weapons were imported for three special units
formed within the police service. The Minister was
alleged to have favoured westerners within the
command structure, as a result of which an eastern so-
called nationalist faction arose within the police, which
broke from the chain of command in recent weeks. The
national command structure, at least two of the special
units and the Dili police have disintegrated during the
recent violence, although the police in the districts
have mostly continued their regular duties.

The immediate issues are thus the future of the
soldiers or ex-soldiers outside the command of the
defence force, and the re-establishment of a national
police command structure and a Dili police force. But
many of my interlocutors saw a need for fundamental
reconsideration of the role of the defence force, the
existence of special units within the police service, and
the nature of its weaponry.

The sudden elevation of East-West friction as
ostensibly a central factor in the crises in the army, the
defence force and the police force is potentially the
most dangerous of the cleavages for national unity. It
has been reflected in the targeting of houses for arson
attacks in Dili and even in tensions in the camps of
internally displaced persons. Although this division has
some historical roots, political and religious leaders
maintain that it is not deep-seated. But their active
leadership will be required to heal the recent wounds in
which regional tensions have played a part.

In political terms, the current crisis is centred
upon the dominance of the ruling FRETILIN party and
the challenges to it. Critics accuse the FRETILIN
leadership of heading the country towards a one-party
State by using its dominant position in Parliament and
its superior political machinery, which has been further
strengthened by access to power and State resources.
The manner in which a challenge to the party
leadership was countered at the recent FRETILIN
Congress has added to this perception, and opposition
parties express no confidence in the intention of
FRETILIN to allow a level playing field for free and
fair elections next year. The opposite perspective, held
by FRETILIN's leadership, is that the current crisis
stems from the failure of opposition parties and
domestic critics, including the church, to challenge the
Government democratically and from their efforts to

S/l'V.5457

 

create an institutional crisis and even bring about a
coup.

This conflict is exacerbated by the fact that
FRETILIN's opponents look to President Gusmao as a
guarantor of pluralism, as indeed he sees himself. He
remains the most important national figure and has the
political legitimacy of direct election, while some
believe that the Constituent Assembly elected under
United Nations administration in 2001 should not have
become a full-term post-independence Parliament. But
the presidency is constitutionally almost powerless,
and the current crisis has thus led to pressure on the
President to act outside the constitution, which he has
resisted.

I reiterated to all the Secretary-General's
message- broadcast, as he said, to the people of
Timor-Leste - that corrective measures should be
taken within the framework of constitution, that the
United Nations would stand with Timor-Leste in this
time of trial, and that it will stay to assist in the
resumption of the task of nation-building. I have
reported back to the Secretary-General what was said
to me about the role the Timorese would like to have
the United Nations play in the period ahead.

First, there is a pressing need for an impartial
investigation of recent events involving loss of life, in
particular the disputed number of killings that occurred
in Dili on 28 and 29 April and the killing by soldiers of
unarmed police officers under United Nations escort
and injury to two United Nations police officers on
25 May, as well as several other incidents between
these dates that involved the use of lethal force. Those
events were part of the spiral of violence involving
soldiers, police and civilians. Each party to the conflict
has its own accusations to make against others. Thus
not only is there the need for accountability for serious
human rights violations, there will be no political
reconciliation unless these accusations are investigated
and the truth established and made known.

The Government has requested, in the Foreign
Minister's letter of 8 June to the Secretary-General,
that the United Nations establish an independent
special inquiry commission to conduct the necessary
investigation, and I strongly support this request. My
interlocutors all believed that evidence of criminal
responsibility should be conveyed to and further
investigated and prosecuted in the Timorese justice
system, in which international judges, prosecutors and
defence lawyers provided by the United Nations are
participating.

Secondly, there is a strong consensus that the
United Nations should play a major role in the
organization of elections in 2007 and in ensuring
confidence that they will be free and fair. The
Government recognizes the need for further discussion
with opposition parties and civil society about the
electoral arrangements, and that would help define the
role to be requested of the United Nations.

Thirdly, the review and restoration of the security
sector is a crucial task. In the past, international
support has been a combination of United Nations and
bilateral arrangements. During my visit I found a clear
consensus that the United Nations should play the
major role in relation to the police, and that has now
been requested by the letter of ll June to the
Secretary-General from the President of the Republic,
the President of the Parliament and the Prime Minister.
Required international assistance to policing now
extends from actual policing during the period until the
national police service is again able to take full
responsibility, to the long-term institutional
development that was not completed and has now
encountered a serious setback and need for review.
Police arrangements in the context of the elections
require special attention, as had already been
recognized.

Fourthly, the crisis appears to have led many
Timorese political leaders to see a greater need for
international support to State institutions than was
previously envisaged and a greater desire for the
United Nations to offer its good offices, sensitively and
with full respect for national sovereignty, to foster
political and community reconciliation.

It was a great personal sadness for me to witness
again, as I did in 1999, houses burning in Dili and
families displaced from their homes by fear and to
know that many people had been killed. But the current
situation is not about Timor-Leste being a failed State.
Rather it is about a four-year old State struggling to
stand on its own two feet and learn to practice
democratic governance. The message I carried from the
Secretary-General, and which he broadcasted directly
to the people of Timor-Leste, was that now is not a
time for despair, but for action. It is time for the
leaders to act together and time for the international
community to remain focused and engaged in Timor-

S/l'V.5457

 

Leste. If this crisis leads to the necessary reflection,
acceptance of responsibility and renewed commitment,
then I believe it can prove to have been a terrible
wake-up call, which sets Timor-Leste back on its path
to a united and prosperous nation.

