Mr. Cunningham (United States): I would like to
start by commending you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1308 (2000). This is a vitally
important subject. I also want to thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno and Mr. Piot for their
updates, their statements and for their work.

It is clear that collectively we have accomplished
a lot, but we can also see the need for strong continued
joint efforts in the future.

Nearly four years ago, on 10 January 2000, we
witnessed the very first meeting of the Security
Council to discuss a health issue, HIV/AIDS. I recall
very well that at first we debated whether we even
ought to be addressing the issue and whether
HIV/AIDS did indeed present a threat to international
peace and security. In the end, the members of the
Council reached agreement that HIV/AIDS merited the
attention of the Security Council because HIV/AIDS
threatens to kill more people and undermine more
societies than any specific conflict we deal with in the
Security Council. Indeed, how could it not be a threat
to international peace and security?

Moreover, because HIV/AIDS strikes the
young - young soldiers, young parents, young
Government workers, young doctors and young
teachers, it threatens the futures of many countries.

As United States Secretary of State Powell said in
his remarks at the United Nations General Assembly
special session in June 2001, "No war on the face of
the earth is more destructive than the AIDS pandemic"
(A/S-26/PV.I). Ambassador Jones Parry noted his
comments to the special session in September 2003.

There cannot be any doubt that today, nearly four
years after that first discussion in the Council and three
years after the adoption of Security Council resolution
1308 (2000), that HIV/AIDS remains an urgent threat
to peace and security.

Security Council resolution 1308 (2000)
addresses the linkages among HIV/AIDS, peace and
security. The last discussion held on the resolution took
place in January 2001, nearly three years ago. Today
we have heard from the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) on
the challenges of implementation and the progress
made so far, and they do, indeed, have much to
report - more than could be easily contained in brief
oral presentations to the Security Council.

Much of what we have heard today is
encouraging. It is good to hear of the strength and
cooperation between UNAIDS and DPKO. We are
pleased with the placement of an HIV/AIDS policy
adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
We note the significant progress this individual has
made on implementing DPKO's responsibilities with
regard to Security Council resolution 1308 (2000). We
also note the placement of HIV/AIDS policy advisers
and designational focal points in certain missions. They
should be with all missions and I note Mr. Guehenno's
description of DPKO's intent to see that that they are.
We are also pleased to hear of the significant
efforts DPKO is making with regard to awareness
training. The HIV/AIDS awareness cards that were
called for in January 2001 now represent a powerful
potential tool in the education not only of
peacekeepers, but also national and regional armed
forces. They should be standard issue for all
peacekeeping operations as soon as possible.

I commend Mr. Piot's personal commitment to
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1308
(2000) and acknowledge the contribution of the
Director of the UNAIDS office on AIDS, Security and
Humanitarian Response. We commend UNAIDS for
the work it has done in support of national responses to
HIV/AIDS among uniformed services. This is essential
to dealing with the problem, and they have done a lot
of good work. We are particularly impressed with the
document series entitled "Engaging uniformed services
in the fight against HIV/AIDS, including the review of
policy and programmes among peacekeepers and
uniformed services". Members have some of the
documents on their desks in front of them.

It is important to acknowledge that progress has
been made, but so much still remains to be done.
Mr. Guehenno spoke of the key challenge of increasing
awareness among participants in peacekeeping
operations and local communities they come into
contact with, about the causes of HIV/AIDS and how
to prevent its spread. I noted his comments about the
difficulty of working with 92 nations and 42,000
personnel in the field. This is certainly a daunting task,
but UNAIDS efforts to work with national militaries
are a key instrument in dealing with HIV/AIDS, as are
the United Nations own efforts.

I also took note of What Mr. Guehenno said about
the need for more systematic mission assessments and
the need for expanding constantly evolving
programmes. That is certainly correct. In that regard
we would be interested to know if it is possible to
measure the relative success of HIV/AIDS focal points,
as compared with that of HIV/AIDS policy advisers in
the missions that have them. We are also gratified to
see that there is now a full time position for an
HIV/AIDS adviser and acknowledge the generosity of
the Government of Denmark in funding the DPKO
HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. We are concerned about what
will happen with this position when funding runs out
for it in 2004. I would like to ask if DPKO and
UNAIDS have plans to establish a permanent position.

At the very highest levels my Government is
totally committed to the global fight against
HIV/AIDS. The United States is the largest donor of
HIV/AIDS assistance, providing almost half of all
international HIV/AIDS funding in 2002. We have
bilateral programmes in over 75 countries, and in
January President Bush announced a $15 billion five-
year emergency plan for HIV/AIDS relief. In May that
plan was signed into law with overwhelming
congressional support. That represents the largest
single commitment of funds in history for an
international public health initiative on a specific
disease. The plan continues our broad bilateral
programmes, while focusing on 14 of the most afflicted
countries in Africa and the Caribbean. The United
States is also the single largest contributor to the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
with pledges totalling $1.6 billion. In addition, we are
specifically committed to helping to implement
resolution 1308 (2000) nationally and in our bilateral
relations.

As part of the international partnership against
HIV/AIDS in Africa, the United States Department of
Defense has been working with African armed forces
to help create policies dealing with HIV/AIDS within a
military setting by developing prevention education
programmes that reach both African troops and African
communities, in order to reduce the spread of
HIV/AIDS among their personnel. Recent legislation
expanded the programme to include global HIV/AIDS
prevention among additional military services. Through
this programme, our Department of Defense has helped
selected armed forces to establish HIV/AIDS policies
for their personnel, adapt and provide HIV prevention
programmes, train military personnel to implement,
maintain and evaluate HIV prevention programmes and
assist countries to develop effective intervention into
military culture to reduce high-risk attitudes and
behaviours.

The United States also underwrote the
preparation and printing of a United Nations training
booklet on HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention to be
used by peacekeeping forces.

Within our own uniformed services, the United
States military has a policy of mandatory testing. Each
year commands are required to conduct a certain
amount of mandatory prevention training, emphasizing
avoidance of high-risk behaviour. And, significantly,
initial training for military personnel on this issue is
documented in their service records. My Government
remains committed to pursuing the full implementation
of resolution 1308 (2000) and we are exploring ways to
making implementation more effective. HIV/AIDS is
entirely preventable and by effectively implementing
this resolution transmission among peacekeepers,
national uniformed services and the communities they
serve can be prevented.

I listened with interest to the proposals of my
British colleague and would like to second his request
that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UNAIDS submit a formal report to the Council next
year, with the Council returning to this issue on a
regular basis.

