Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Since this is the first
time that my delegation has taken the floor this month,
let me begin, Sir, by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for March 2003.

Let me also convey my Government's
condolences to the Government of the Republic of
Korea for the tragic loss of five members of the
peacekeeping force in Timor-Leste.

My delegation takes note of the Secretary-
General's report describing the recent changes taking
place in, and the challenges faced by, the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste, particularly with regard
to security-related issues.

However, permit me first to underline the
significant improvements in our bilateral relations with
Timor-Leste since last year. The convening of a
trilateral meeting between Indonesia, Timor-Leste and
Australia, as well as the first Ministerial Meeting of the
Southwest Pacific Dialogue, have already laid the
foundations of a cooperative framework which
promises to strengthen and build our relationship.
Since the first meeting of the Joint Ministerial
Commission for Bilateral Cooperation, in October
2002, several follow-up technical meetings and
contacts, including both official and private-sector
visits, have greatly served to boost our relationship on
the basis of reconciliation, mutual respect and a
forward-looking stance.

In addition, we see the opening of the Embassy of
Timor-Leste in Jakarta as a concrete step towards
further facilitating consultations and cooperation
between our two countries. This initiative should go a
long way towards promoting, on a lasting basis, our
existing friendly relations and our ongoing mutual
cooperation. For its part, Indonesia will reciprocate this
positive development in the very near future. As a
result, I would like to underline the fact that the
relationship between Indonesia and Timor-Leste has
indeed been flourishing at all levels. I therefore firmly
believe that this deserves the strong support of the
Council and of the international community.

My Government would like to express its deep
concern and sympathy to the Government and the
people of Timor-Leste concerning the security
incidents that have occurred over the past few months.
Indeed, it is our View that we should deal with them in
a meticulous and vigilant manner. It is also of critical
importance that we seek to avoid any terminology or
references that do not fully reflect the situation on the
ground and that we not reach any conclusions based on
such sketchy foundations. Indeed, such an approach
serves only to aggravate the situation and could
eventually play into the hands of certain groups or
parties that want to take advantage of it. That does not
work towards the greater good of both countries and
our growing relationship, which is based on mutual
respect and a progressive outlook.

I can assure the Council that the reconciliation
process that has been propelling our positive bilateral
relations over the past year is an ongoing one.
Therefore, we are disappointed to note that the report
of the Secretary-General still refers to the involvement
of "supported militias" in the incidents that occurred in
Timor-Leste. Indeed, the blame should go to
UNMISET for its deliberate ignorance in the way that
it seeks to protect the people from criminal elements.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that these
unfortunate incidents should not be allowed to disrupt
the growing and promising relationships between
Timor-Leste and its neighbouring countries. Indonesia
continues to support the building of a strong, united
and democratic Timor-Leste.

