Mr. Richardson (United States of America): Three
years ago, Haiti found itself staring into the abyss. The
democratically elected President was living in exile in the
United States. The aspirations of the Haitian people to
finally achieve political, social and economic reform were
snuffed out by a military dictatorship that practised terror
throughout the nation, torturing and murdering its political
enemies and those Haitians who dared to speak out. Three
years later, with the support of the international
community, Haiti is taking meaningful strides forward.
Today we come together to ensure that this progress
continues. If approved, the United Nations Transition
Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH) will assist the Haitian people
and their Government in building on their notable
achievements.

Furthering the work of its predecessors, this Mission
will help to professionalize the new Haitian National
Police Force. Most of the Haitian National Police officers
are under the age of 30. The most seasoned officers have

 

less than two years of on-the-job experience. Since its
creation just over two years ago, the Haitian National
Police has made great progress. However, if we are to help
Haiti to develop durable democratic institutions, the
international community must continue to guide this young
and inexperienced force.

Since 1994 the Haitian people have achieved much.
They have held six free and fair elections. For the first time
in Haitian history, one popularly elected President
peacefully succeeded another. As never before, an elected
Parliament now plays a prominent role in Haitian
democracy. Haiti's economy is showing signs of recovery
from years of decline.

Despite these advances, obstacles remain. Some in
Haiti even seek to reverse the progress of the Haitian
people towards a democratic way of life. Haiti's long-
neglected judicial system also needs help. Progress is being
made in this area, but much needs to be done. The creation
of UNTMIH will further bolster the rule of law,
development, democratization and peace in Haiti.

My Government welcomes the continued support for
Haiti that the adoption of this draft resolution will signify.
The international community is devoting considerable
resources to help build the foundations for a stable, open
and democratic society in Haiti. Our actions today give the
Haitian people a chance to create a future of enduring
freedom, justice and prosperity for all its people.

