The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/853, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, cote
d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2436 (2018).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

One of the themes of the United States Security
Council presidency is transparency. The focus on
outreach, inclusion and speaking the hard truths was
also the approach we brought to the development of
resolution 2436 (2018). If we were ambitious in our goals
for the resolution, it is because defenceless people in
some of the most dangerous places on Earth are counting
on us. That is hard work. It demands high standards.
We cannot be afraid to ask for and expect the very best
of our peacekeepers. Therefore, resolution 2436 (2018)
mandates a timely and transparent reporting process
for performance failures. It creates real accountability
measures for when those failures occur and applies
objective criteria - data, not politics - to match the
right police and troops with the right peacekeeping
roles.

Our team rejected business as usual for this
resolution. We focused on engaging major troop-
and police-contributing countries that are not on the
Security Council but are at the forefront of United
Nations peacekeeping.

For our non-Council friends who helped shaped
this draft - which is their resolution too - their
experiences, ideas and even criticisms are reflected
throughout the text. We are proud of this transparent
and inclusive approach, not for its own sake but because
it produced a strong final draft. The Secretary-General
has challenged all of us to step up and strengthen
peacekeeping, and today the Security Council
responded to the call. The United States is grateful for
the Council's leadership. The actions we take today
will make the United Nations a better, more effective
instrument of peace and security and a more trusted
caretaker of the people we are pledged to protect.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.


