The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by the representative of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, which led the Security Council mission to
Haiti from 22 to 24 June.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

The Security Council visited the Republic of Haiti
from 22 to 24 of June on an official mission headed
by Bolivia in its capacity as President of the Council
for the month of June. The purpose of the visit was
to: reaffirm the support of the Security Council to the
Government and the people of Haiti for the purpose of
contributing to its stability and development; review the
implementation of resolution 2350 (2017), with a focus
on the conclusion of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the transition to
the new United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH); and identify the necessary
measures for the successful implementation of the
mandate of MINUJUSTH.

The visit was conducted over three days. All
meetings were held in Port-au-Prince. On the first day,
the Security Council met four stakeholders. The first
meeting was with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of Mission, Ms. Sandra
Honore, and her team. Ms. Honore welcomed the
mission and indicated the progress being made in the
drawdown of MINUSTAH and preparations for the
transition to MINUJUSTH.

The second Council meeting was with His
Excellency the President of the Republic of Haiti,
Mr. Jovenel Moise, and members of his Cabinet.
President Moise indicated the vision of his Government
to respond to the major challenges facing his country,
while emphasizing the Caravane du changement and
the joint legislative agenda. He expressly mentioned the
wish that MINUJUSTH be reclassified under Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations, instead of
Chapter VII. He deplored the cholera situation and
expressed his support for the new focus of the United
Nations. He also expressed his concern about the well-
being of orphaned children and cases of sexual abuse
and exploitation.

The third meeting was with the officials of the
United Nations team in Haiti. They indicated that the
United Nations has before it an opportunity to focus
on decentralization, the rule of law, agriculture and
education. The first day of the visit ended with a
meeting with the diplomatic corps, during which the
many complex challenges and needs that the country is
facing were enumerated.

On the second day, we had six meetings. We first
met with the Supreme Council of the National Police,
under the Prime Minister, Mr. Jack Guy Lafontant, who
thanked the Security Council for its visit and reaffirmed
his country's commitment to the professionalization
of the police. Another senior member of the Supreme
Council of the National Police, the Director-General of
the Haitian National Police, Mr. Michel-Ange Gedeon,
reviewed the many achievements and challenges of
the police and informed us about the priorities of his
institution set out in the strategic development plan for
the period 2017-2020.

After this meeting, we held an event to pay tribute to
the victims of, and persons affected by, the earthquake
of 2010. The second meeting we had on 23 June was
with main authorities of the National Assembly and the
commissions for justice, public security, human rights,
constitutional reform, ethics and anti-corruption.

Parliamentarians were grateful to the United
Nations for the support in stabilizing the country and
the deployment of MINUSTAH in 2004. They requested
that the new Mission be placed under Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations. They reviewed the
legislation, highlighting parliamentary initiatives under
way and the constitutional review process. Lastly, they
explained the difficulties faced by women with respect
to gender equality and the exercise of their rights.

After that, we met representatives of civil society
and the private sector. In a meeting with civil society
we highlighted issues of access to justice and impunity
and the inadequate response to the challenges of
cholera. Civil society representatives spoke of the need
to review the work conducted by MINUSTAH with
respect to the rule oflaw. In the meeting with the private
sector, emphasis was placed on the need for economic
development in Haiti, as well as the relationship
between strengthening thejudicial system, encouraging
investment and employment creation. Also mentioned
was the appropriateness ofimplementing MINUJUSTH
under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
in order to improve Haiti's international image, thereby
making it possible to attract greater investment.

The fifth meeting we had was with the High Judicial
Council. During that meeting, Council members
discussed the various difficulties faced by the judiciary
and the need to modernize the system and be able to
access the appropriate technology.

The sixth and last meeting of the day was with the
representatives of the Office of Citizen Protection, the
Central Financial Intelligence Unit and the Superior
Court of Accounts and Administrative Disputes,
national entities for accountability and safeguarding.
The three entities requested the technical and financial
support of the future MINUJUSTH, as well as support
for criminal legislation and procedure reform.

The third and last day of the visit, we visited
one of the formed police unit camps. The Police
Commissioner, Mr. Georges-Pierre Monchotte, reported
on the support that the United Nations provides to the
Haitian National Police. After that visit the Council
hailed the work of the commanders of the troop- and
police-contributing countries.

In conclusion, we can affirm that the mission of
the Security Council to Haiti was successful because of
the large amount of first-hand information we obtained
in the face-to-face meetings, gathering thereby a better

understanding of the challenges, concerns and the
expectations that Haitians have about the conclusion
of MINUSTAH and the transition to the new mission
of MINUJUSTH. The information gathered will be of
great use with respect to defining more precisely the
nature of the implementation of the new mission.

The Security Council was informed by various
actors of the existing concerns and the need to deal with
the situation of cholera, as well as the existing concerns
about the cases of sexual exploitation and abuse. The
issue of cholera was mentioned at every meeting as a
serious concern that requires attention. In the opinion
of many members of the Security Council, Haiti is at a
stable political crossroads, one that represents a window
of opportunity to implement the reforms the country
needs in order to respond to challenges related to the
rule of law, justice sector reform, the provision of such
basic services as health care and education, the supply
of water and sanitation services, the improvement of
tax-collection levels, economic growth, the promotion
ofinvestment and the creation ofjobs for the sustainable
development of Haiti.

Security Council members all expressed their
support for the new focus of the Secretary-General to
solve the problem of cholera in Haiti.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

On behalf of the Council, I should like to express
appreciation to all of the members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat who participated in the
mission for the manner in which they discharged their
important responsibilities and for all their support.

The meeting rose at 10.50 am.
