Mr. Dauth (Australia): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for holding this open-format meeting on an issue
which, obviously enough, is of deep interest to the
countries of the Pacific Islands Forum. It is only
appropriate, surely, that the countries of our region, as
contributors to the resolution of the Bougainville
conflict, should also be involved in the Security
Council's deliberations. We also very much appreciate
the very useful and comprehensive briefing provided
by Kieran Prendergast this morning. We want to thank
him and his team for the efforts they are making, in
difficult circumstances, to bring this conflict to a close.

Australia strongly supports the continued
engagement of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB). We are encouraged by the
progress achieved in the Bougainville settlement
efforts. Much has been achieved; nevertheless, a good
deal remains to be done before the peace process will
be complete. The involvement of the United Nations
has been, and remains, an essential element of the
overall process, and it will be important that the United
Nations remain engaged well into 2003.

But the presence of the United Nations needs to
be genuinely catalytic; it should be a spur to the parties
to re-energize and successfully conclude, for example,
the weapons-disposal process. The parties must
understand that the presence of the United Nations and
that of the Peace Monitoring Group is of a limited
duration. Every effort should be made while they are
on the ground to accelerate progress. Under no
circumstances should their presence - comforting
though it might be - become the cause of delay or of
putting back hard decisions. The Group's presence
cannot and should not substitute for committed
implementation by the parties of peace and weapons-
disposal measures.

In this context, the recent slowdown in weapons
disposal and the removal of weapons from containers
has been, unquestionably, a setback. It risks
undermining the confidence that the parties and the
international community have in the peace process.
That said, opportunities exist, and must be taken, to re-
energize weapons-disposal efforts, especially through
UNPOB and the parties urging all ex-combatants to
conclude weapons disposal and destruction as soon as
possible in 2003. Bougainvillean ex-combatants have
identified 24 December 2002 as a target date for the
conclusion of stage II of the weapons-disposal process.
We welcome that decision.

The target may be achievable, but it will require
UNPOB, in consultation with the parties, to redouble
its efforts to speed up stage II containment efforts and
help bring about the earliest possible declaration that
this stage of the weapons-disposal process is complete.

The final fate of the weapons - stage III - is to
be decided within four and a half months of the stage II
declaration. We believe that, unless current rates of
progress are lifted substantially, UNPOB will have
little prospect of concluding its work until late in 2003.
UNPOB has monitoring and verification
responsibilities for contained weapons throughout stage
III. It will be important for the success and integrity of
settlement efforts that this process be advanced
expeditiously. It will be difficult for the United Nations
to depart while weapons remain in containers under its
lock and key.

The declaration by UNPOB that stage II has been
completed is the trigger for the constitutional
amendments giving force to the autonomy provisions
of the Bougainville Peace Agreement. UNPOB has
recommended a Bougainville-wide consultation
process to determine the general level of security felt in
the respective districts. That is a sensible proposal. It
would be helpful, however, if the process were
undertaken concurrently with stage II containments.

It goes without saying, of course, that the views
of the Papua New Guinea Government will also be a
factor in the acceptance by all parties of the validity of
any stage II declaration. UNPOB will need to consult
closely and early with the Government of Papua New
Guinea to ensure that its definition of "substantial
compliance" is accepted by all parties, including the
Papua New Guinea Government.

1 want to conclude by underlining Australia's
support for the Bougainville peace process and for
UNPOB, including through the Peace Monitoring
Group. It is precisely because we want to see the
process brought to a successful and durable conclusion
that we have emphasized the need for a redoubling of
efforts to make progress on weapons disposal. This will
also enable the other downstream benefits of peace, not
least, of course, economic development and autonomy,
to begin to make a real and welcome difference to what
have been the blighted lives of the people of
Bougainville for far too long.

