Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): I would first like
to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting the European
Union to this important debate. I would also like to
thank all those who have spoken, particularly the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Migiro, Executive
Director Costa and the Secretary-General of the
Economic Community of Central African States,
Mr. Sylvain-Goma. Their statements help us better
understand the scope of the problem.

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and members
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union (EU) is strongly committed
to efforts to combat the stockpiling, uncontrolled
spread and illegal trade of conventional arms. Besides
the fact that they can fuel terrorism and organized
crime, small arms and light weapons play a decisive
role both in destabilizing and weakening States and
their social and political structures, and in triggering
and spreading conflicts. They are a security problem
for us all, and a major obstacle to the development of
the affected countries.

That is why in 2005 the heads of State and
Government of the European Union adopted a strategy
to counter the illicit accumulation of and trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and their ammunition.
The strategy promotes a comprehensive approach and
seeks to mobilize all the instruments that the European
Union has at its disposal to tackle both supply and
demand in the small arms and light weapons trade.
Almost €500 million has been allocated to small arms
and light weapons programmes since 1992.

In order to deal with the problems created by the
illicit trade in and excessive stockpiling of small arms
and light weapons, we continue to View the United
Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms as the
most appropriate multilateral instrument. The European
Union is currently designing a programme that will
support implementation of the Programme at the
regional level by organizing regional seminars. Three
of those will cover Africa and one will deal with
Central Africa. The Union will support implementation
by the countries of the Great Lakes region of United
Nations technical guidelines for managing the
stockpiling of conventional munitions.

The European Union strategy on small arms and
light weapons has a universal scope, but it identifies
Africa as the continent most affected. The adoption of
the EU-Africa strategy, particularly the Peace and
Security Strategic Partnership - one area of which is
dedicated to small arms and light weapons - has made
possible a major strengthening of our cooperation at
both the continental and subregional levels,
complementing the efforts under way at the national
level. The first pan-African cooperation programme to
combat small arms and light weapons has just been
launched in cooperation with the African Union, the
subregions and the Police Chiefs Regional Cooperation
Offices. The aim of this project is, on the one hand, to
strengthen the regional police offices' capacity to
conduct the fight against arms trafficking in a
coordinated way and, on the other, to raise awareness
among national authorities and civil society so that
they can intensify their efforts.

The European Union also supports the African
Union's formulation of a small arms and light weapons

strategy that will include guidelines for African Union
action in this area. I would also like to recall here the
initiative the European Union is currently developing
to combat air transport of small arms and light
weapons. That project, which identifies Africa as a
priority region, seeks to develop software and good
practices to enhance checks on airlines suspected of
such trafficking.

The Central African region has not been spared,
unfortunately, by the proliferation and traffic in small
arms and light weapons. In this regard, the European
Union supports the request of United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security in Central Africa to
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) to draft a legal instrument on the control of
small arms and light weapons and to produce an action
plan and a code of conduct for security and defence
forces in Central Africa.

The European Union firmly intends to support
every commitment made in this regard. As
Mr. Sylvain-Goma said this morning, the European
Union already supports the ECCAS efforts to deal with
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and
we support the efforts of Central African countries to
implement, at the national level, the Brazzaville
Programme of Priority Activities, which is part of the
United Nations Programme of Action.

The European Union is convinced that only a
global approach to the problem of the proliferation of
conventional arms can have a tangible impact on
security. That is Why we need to deal with the source of
the problem by regulating international trade in
conventional weapons through an arms trade treaty.
The European Union is firmly convinced that a legally
binding global instrument, in line with States'
responsibilities under international law on this subject
and establishing common international norms for the
import, export and transfer of conventional weapons,
will go a long way to combating the proliferation of
such weapons, which is neither desirable nor
responsible.

The Union is ready to work with all United
Nations Member States to negotiate the terms of this
international instrument within the framework of the
negotiation process established by the General
Assembly resolution adopted in 2009 (resolution 64/48). That process should take into account specific
regional and national characteristics without
compromising the quality of the future treaty. In that
regard, in 2009 the European Union encouraged
discussion on a regional level through a series of
regional workshops, two of which were held in Africa.
We plan to repeat that initiative with regional debates
on the political and technical aspects of a future arms
trade treaty.

The European Union would like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm its full commitment in the fight
against traffic in conventional weapons, particularly on
10-27987

the African continent. In our conviction that the
implementation of the EU-African Strategy can
contribute to this goal, the Union is committed to
pursuing its efforts to promote the implementation of a
genuine architecture of peace and security in Africa.

