Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I too
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes
for his briefing today. I would also like to express the
deep gratitude of the United States for the work of the
United Nations humanitarian workers and
representatives of non-governmental organizations that
are helping vulnerable populations in the Sudan and
Chad.

I shall make a few comments on the Sudan. Both
the Under-Secretary-General and the Secretary-
General, in his 17 October report (S/2008/659), paint a
grim picture of the situation there. Despite the 2007
joint communique and multiple promises of ceasefire,
military operations and banditry against civilians and
aid workers in the Sudan are on the rise. Since January,
230,000 civilians have been forced to flee Violence,
and violence against aid workers in the first eight
months of 2008 surpassed the totals in 2007.
Hijackings, kidnappings and break-ins have forced
some non-governmental organizations to suspend work
in the region. The United States joins others in urging
the Government of the Sudan to prevent such attacks,
to honour its promises of ceasefire, to adhere to
monitoring mechanisms and to fulfil its responsibility
to protect civilian populations and humanitarian relief
workers.

The United States places a high value on
humanitarian assistance and humanitarian programmes
designed to improve the protection of civilians and
prevent gender-based violence in Darfur.

Since 2004, the United States has contributed
more than $3 billion for humanitarian programmes in
the Sudan and eastern Chad. We are deeply disturbed
that the Government of the Sudan continues to harass
international non- governmental organizations operating
in Darfur and impedes their work. The Government of
the Sudan must fully support humanitarian
programmes designed to address the safety of
populations made vulnerable by the ongoing conflict.

The United States also expresses grave concern
regarding the situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in Chad. We urge the
Government of Chad to maintain the integrity of the
refugee and IDP camps in eastern Chad, prevent the
recruitment of refugees by armed groups and expedite
the deployment of Chadian gendarmes to refugee and
IDP camps in eastern Chad.

We continue to support a follow-on mission to
succeed the current United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and
the European Union-led military force in Chad and the
Central African Republic (EUFOR), whose mandates
are set to expire in March 2009. We believe their
activities are critical to the security of vulnerable
populations and humanitarian workers and applaud the
sacrifices made by MINURCAT and EUFOR
personnel.

We note that the Governments of Chad and the
Sudan are making efforts to normalize relations. We
support the Chad-Sudan contact group and the
Government of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya facilitating
these efforts. However, much more progress is needed.
We continue to urge Chad and the Sudan to
immediately cease support for opposing rebel groups in
the region and implement the Dakar agreements and
previous accords.

We call on all parties to respect the rights of
civilian populations in eastern Chad and in the Sudan.
08-63132

