The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank the
President of the Security Council for convening today's
meeting on women, peace and security in Afghanistan,
and the Council for its continued engagement around
this issue.

Let me start by expressing my deep condolences
to the Government and the people of Afghanistan
for the horrific attacks that took place yesterday.
Indiscriminate attacks that kill women and children
are an affront to our humanity and a crime under
international humanitarian law. The United Nations
stands with Afghans as they work for lasting peace
and security.

I returned this week from a visit to Afghanistan,
which I undertook with the Under-Secretary-General
for the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and the Executive Directors of UN-Women
and the United Nations Population Fund. This was the
third visit of its kind, following visits to Nigeria and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2017, and to
Chad, the Niger and South Sudan last year. We wanted
to assess and build on progress since the Secretary-
General visited Afghanistan two years ago and to
explore the United Nations support for the women
and peace and security agenda. I sincerely thank the
Government and the people of Afghanistan for their
hospitality and the robust and constructive interactions.
I thank the members of the international community
who took time to meet us and share their hopes while
we were in Kabul. I thank the United Nations system in
Afghanistan for upholding our values at great risk.

During our visit, we were privileged to hold talks
with His Excellency President Ashraf Ghani, His
Excellency the Chief Executive, the First Lady and other
senior leaders and religious scholars. We made a field
visit to the province of Bamiyan and talked to many
extraordinary women leaders and decision-makers,
many of them young, working in civil society
organizations, in the security sector, as entrepreneurs
or as health-care workers.

Afghan women have paid a high price during the
conflict that has affected their country for most of the
past four decades. Under the Taliban Government,
women and girls were denied access to education,
health services and protection from extreme Violence
and could not participate in political or public life. Over
the past 18 years, there has been significant progress.
Women are in senior roles in the Ministries of Defence,
Foreign Affairs and Interior Affairs. Some 27 per cent
of the civil service is female, and there are women
serving as mayors and provincial governors.

Critical elections are scheduled for September, and
the heads of the Independent Election Commission and
Electoral Complaints Commission are both women. It
is vital for the legitimacy of the political system that
all stakeholders, including the Government, political
leaders, candidates and parties, contribute to an
enabling environment for a credible electoral process.
I know that in due course Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo will talk in more detail on this issue.

As we witnessed again yesterday, conflict continues
in Afghanistan. In 2018, the country suffered the
highest number of civilian casualties since the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan began
recording figures in 2009. In the first five months of
this year, more than 100,000 people were displaced by
conflict, and we know displacement increases the risk
of gender-based violence in all areas. In areas where
the Taliban have reclaimed control, there are reports of
honour killings, stoning and other attacks on women's
rights. Peace, security and economic stability are
urgently needed.

During our visit, we heard a strong call from Afghan
women for peace - but for peace that safeguards their
hard-won rights and does not backtrack on what has
been achieved. All the women we spoke to want an
inclusive peace centred on women, and, I would say
here, on the victims and the survivors over the years.
Afghan women, like women everywhere, must play
a part in decisions that will affect their future. In
Bamiyan, we saw the incredible mine-clearance work
that women are doing with the support of the United
Nations, risking their lives alongside men to bring
safety to their communities.

Inclusivity is not only the right thing to do for
women and girls. It is the only way to make durable
peace. As one woman told us: "It is an illusion if you
think that you are going to give away people's rights
and then have any real peace." It will take time for
peace to be sustainable and it must be inclusive of the
Whole country, of women and of victims. Building a
culture of peace means addressing the violations and
divisions of the past. The country needs closure.

Inclusion and consensus are also essential
to creating the greatest possible peace dividend,
benefiting all parts of the economy and all sections
of society. We must continue to support Afghans in
rebuilding trust across communities and in addressing
stigma and discrimination based on gender, ethnicity or
regional differences.

Afghanistan has made great progress for women
since the fall of the Taliban. More than 3 million
children are back in school, with 9 out of 11 million
Afghan children now enrolled. Investments in
reducing maternal mortality are saving thousands of
lives. Improved infrastructure and power supplies are
connecting more remote areas to national economic
opportunities, including exports to neighbouring
countries. We saw that in Bamiyan, where a provincial
hospital dispenses free world-class care to people of
Bamiyan and the neighbouring areas. That is possible
thanks to the innovative partnership between the
Government and the Aga Khan Foundation.

Afghanistan has done more to invest in women's
leadership than many countries with greater means.
Women, especially young women, are rising to reclaim
their rightful place in all areas of society, and many
are quite simply inspiring. One entrepreneur, who has
created hundreds ofjobs for women in a factory and
a market, told me: "When we empower a woman, we
empower a generation."

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
holds great promise for the lives of Afghans across
the country. Twenty-four United Nations agencies are
working in strategic partnership with the Government
on issues from food security and clean water to the rule
of law, often risking their lives. The reform of the United
Nations development system is enabling our country
team to work in a more integrated way than ever before,
responding to the President's call to be more effective,
efficient and responsive to country-led priorities.

Achieving Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
5, on gender equality, will be essential to ensuring
that women have access to education, health care
and decent work and that women are represented in
all areas of society and in all political and economic
decision-making processes, including in Government
and especially the peace negotiations. SDG 16, on peace,
justice and strong institutions, will also be essential to
holding free, fair and credible elections, to building trust
in State institutions and to facilitating reconciliation
and the reintegration of former combatants after the
signing of any peace agreement.

In the short term, 6.3 million people need urgent
humanitarian aid across Afghanistan. Halfway through
the year, the humanitarian response plan is only 27 per
cent funded. We must increase the level of urgency to
provide immediate support and protection to displaced
people and those in greatest need.

Afghanistan is at an important crossroads. We
welcome the Government's commitment to peace and
to upholding the democratic rights of all Afghans, who
have suffered beyond imagination over recent decades.
Afghan women play a central role in creating peaceful,
inclusive communities with opportunities for women,
girls, men, boys, people with disabilities and victims
and survivors of the conflict. They need and deserve
the support of the entire United Nations system and the
international community to invest in building on the
gains, while sustaining the peace.

The voices of women, especially the victims, must
be heard at the table in the peace process and beyond. I
am pleased to say that we are considering a significant
investment in preventing and ending violence against
women in Afghanistan through our joint Spotlight
Initiative with the European Union.

During our visit, my colleagues and I saw enormous
grounds for hope. We left with great optimism for a
better future for Afghanistan and its impressive people.
I urge the Council to do all in its power to support
Afghans in realizing their hopes and aspirations for a
lasting peace, stability and prosperity.

