Mr. Webson (Antigua and Barbuda): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, and your team for leading
this debate. I thank the Special Representative for her
very informative update and briefing this morning and
for her leadership, with the Universite de la Fondation
Dr. Aristide, in the work in Haiti.

I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the 14 States members of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM).

CARICOM. believes that our active engagement
and concern for Haiti is not just a demonstration of our
solidarity towards a sister Caribbean nation, but also
a message as to the willingness and capacity of our
CARICOM. community to live up to our international
responsibilities.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2015/ 157) provides
us with very incisive and useful information on the
progress of the efforts of the United Nations in bringing
lasting peace and stability to Haiti. CARICOM
commends the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the international community
for their continued efforts in stabilizing Haiti. At the
same time, CARICOM. wishes to pay tribute to those
injured or killed in the line of duty.

CARICOM. welcomes the recommendation of the
Secretary-General for the extension of the mandate of
MINUSTAH until 2016. We believe that stability and
economic development in Haiti is linked to the wider
development agenda of our subregion and to its stability
and opportunity for sustainable growth.

CARICOM. welcomes the plans to encourage
investment, which will play a critical role in furthering
social and economic development opportunities for
Haiti. Nevertheless, we submit that international
assistance must be aligned with Haiti's own national
development interests and plans. We believe that
national development must be grounded locally.

We remain optimistic that the forward momentum
achieved thus far will be sustained and that all parties
involved in the political process will aim to sustain such
progress as has been made, and also work together to
put in place the machinery for the next electoral cycle,
about which we have heard much this morning.
CARICOM. notes with caution that this is the
third consecutive year of downsizing the Mission
in Haiti. We therefore emphasize the need for a
continued military presence on the ground in Haiti to
be maintained. The security of Haiti and its people is
paramount, particularly given the fact that at this time,
as the elections approach, the drawdown of military
resources introduces significant political challenges
and risks, particularly as we know and have heard about
the growth in the electorate in the country. It would
be unfortunate if the gaps created by this downsizing
compromised the gains that have been made thus far.

Nevertheless, we in CARICOM. are encouraged by
the performance of the Haitian National Police. We are
pleased at the progress towards national security, for
which the police has taken increased responsibility. We
note, however, that the targets for the Haitian National
Police development plan fall short, and we recognize
the call made in the presentation this morning by the
Special Representative.

We are further encouraged by the reduction in the
levels of cholera, despite the spike about which we
heard earlier today. We therefore continue to encourage
international assistance in plugging the gaps in water
and health infrastructure and security that may have
been a cause of that increase.

While there have been a number of other positive
developments in Haiti - and we welcome the
continued development efforts for the Government
and the people of Haiti and the Framework for the
Coordination of External Aid, put in place by the Haitian
Government - CARICOM. remains gravely concern
about the decline in international aid, especially in the
area rehabilitating services in Haiti. We join the call for
continued international aid to continue to support the
development effort to uphold the gains made to date.

Haiti continues to experience a political, social
and economic crisis; as such, the discussion at these
meetings should not be whether MINUSTAH should be
concluded or by how much it should be reduced, but
rather we should recognize the challenge presented and
uphold the mission to expand and continue MINUSTAH,
as we have heard in the appeal of the Government and
the people of Haiti.

CARICOM. calls upon the international community
to convey by its action a message of confidence in
all Haitians. This is the time for us to reinforce our
readiness to lend ongoing support for Haiti's continued
development. This is the time for us to lend international
collaboration and continued support for the work on the
ground.

In conclusion, CARICOM. remains committed
to working together with other partners in the
international community in support of the agenda for
Haitian development and the agenda of the Haitian
Government and people.

