I would like to echo my predecessors and condemn in the strongest possible terms the recent terrorist attacks on a Sikh temple in Kabul on 25 March and to extend our heartfelt condolences to the victims, their families and the people of Afghanistan, while hoping for a smooth recovery for those injured. Let me reiterate the message in our press statement issued just days ago on that matter - terrorism in all its forms and manifestations constitutes one of the most serious threats to international peace and security and we ought to bring any and all of its perpetrators to justice. I would like to thank Ms. Hayden for the comprehensive briefing and to recognize the good work that the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is doing in promoting peace, good governance and development for the benefit of all Afghans. We hope that she will continue to improve coordination between all United Nations entities and other humanitarian actors in order to maximize effectiveness as we deal with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. My delegation would also appreciate it if Ms. Hayden could give us more insight into the possible impact the current pandemic will have on the peace and political processes. As the Council has stated on many occasions, there is no alternative but a political solution in Afghanistan. In that regard, we welcome the recent positive developments, particularly the agreement between the United States and the Taliban, and hope that it serves as a foundation on which to build momentum towards inclusive intra-Afghan talks sooner rather than later. We trust that such future peace initiatives will be an opportunity to showcase the rich diversity of Afghanistan through the meaningful participation of women, youth and minorities. The Niger supports such inclusiveness as history has shown that any time those stakeholders are engaged and given a meaningful place at the table, lasting peace and sustainable development follow. We must support the Afghan Government in not only fostering and enhancing the rights of women and other groups but also in solidifying the gains made in the past two decades, as mentioned by the Secretary-General in his report, so that their vision for the future of Afghanistan is fully taken into account. The peace process should result in the cessation of violence. The Niger remains, however, gravely concerned by the current political impasse and the high number of civilian casualties, of which 42 per cent are women and children. Furthermore, we would like to highlight and condemn gender-based violence and unacceptable grave violations against children and call on all parties to strictly respect humanitarian law. The Niger would like to recognize the role played by neighbours, friends, allies and donors in helping Afghanistan as it slowly but surely regains its place on the international stage. Sustained donor commitment, such as at the pledging conference, will no doubt help consolidate current and future peace dividends for sustainable stability in Afghanistan. To finish, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on a job well done, especially at a trying moment like this. We would not have been able to accomplish what we have without your patient advice. The Council is able to continue its business thanks to the alternative and innovative working methods we agreed on with regard to COVID-19, and I have no doubt that those strides will be carried over and improved during the Dominican Republic's presidency
