We thank Under Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador Olof Skoog and Ambassador Philippe Kridelka for their briefings. Back in June 2019, when my delegation made our first remarks on this item, we stated that we shared the view of the Secretary-General that the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is a hard-won achievement of successful multilateralism, nuclear non-proliferation, dialogue and diplomacy (see S/PV.8564). As we make our remarks at this meeting, our view has not changed. We are now halfway through the Security Council's consideration of the Iranian nuclear issue. We cannot afford to restart from zero and waste so much effort. In that regard, allow me to highlight the following. First, it is more important than ever to preserve and support the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). All parties must refrain from actions that run counter to the full and effective implementation of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). We remain concerned about the withdrawal of the United States from the JCPOA, the reimposed sanctions and Iran's decision to reduce its operational commitments under the JCPOA. All differences must be swiftly resolved through dialogue and diplomacy, particularly through the dispute resolution mechanism under the JCPOA. Issues that are not directly related to the JCPOA or resolution 2231 (2015) need to be treated separately and should not affect or hamper the progress that has been achieved. We continue to welcome cooperation between Iran and the International Atomic Energy Agency for monitoring purposes, as transparency is also an important element of the confidence-building aspect of the JCPOA. We also commend the joint ministerial statement by the JCPOA participants adopted on 21 December, in which they re-emphasized their commitment to preserve the JCPOA. Our views on the issue of JCPOA are clear and principled, as we stipulated in August (see S/2020/805). The provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) are still in force. Secondly, we underline the importance of upholding the rule of law. The rule of law and multilateralism are the cornerstones of the United Nations. Unilateralism has no place in our international community. Everyone must also act in good faith and take all necessary measures to meet their responsibilities, and all parties must abide by the rule of law to create order and stability. There are times where our endeavour to maintain the rule of law and stability have been tested. However, then as now, we must hold fast to principles and not be swayed by temporary short-term gains. All efforts must remain focused on our main common objective - to ensure Iran's peaceful use of nuclear energy, protect the legitimate interests of Iran and, more broadly, to maintain peace and stability and achieve prosperity for all. Thirdly, we must continue to take one step forward towards a world free of nuclear weapons. The JCPOA remains a significant element of the global non-proliferation architecture. It contributes to the creation of a nuclear-weapon- free zone in the region, which is critical to achieving a world free from nuclear weapons and promoting a balanced implementation of the three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). The entire international community - not just the parties to the JCPOA or the members of the Security Council - is obliged to support it fully. Our position on that issue is clear, as we are party to important treaties in that area, including the NPT, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the South- East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. Indonesia is also one of the main proponents of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and will welcome its entry into force on 22 January 2021. Before I conclude, since this is our last meeting on resolution 2231 (2015), my delegation would like to express its appreciation to all the members of the Council's 2231 format for their cooperation. I would also like to thank the Facilitator, Ambassador Philippe Kridelka, and his team for their leadership over the past two years and for managing to adopt the report (see S/2020/1244) in time. I also would like to pay tribute to Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve for his service to the Council. As our term in the Council is coming to a close, we continue to hope that the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) will be effectively implemented and continue to contribute to the non-proliferation regime, as well as ensuring stability and peace in the region. Our commitment to support that goal will remain even when we are no longer a Council member. Since this is also the last scheduled Council meeting for this month, I would like to thank brother Jerry Matjila for his excellent presidency this month. He has presided over the meetings with flair, charm and grace. He mentioned that the outgoing five members will leave based on the English alphabetical order, so I shall say my goodbye right before him. As our term comes to a close, I would like to say a few words. We hope that we have been able to fulfil the wishes of the whole United Nations membership over the past two years as a member of the Security Council, and hope we have duly fulfilled our mandate as Council members, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, particularly with regard to the maintenance of international peace and security and in order to save as many as human lives as possible. We would like to thank all United Nations States Members that placed their trust in us for their support. We thank all the members of the Security Council, starting from its 2018 composition. We learned from their experience. We also thank its 2019 and 2020 composition for their constructive cooperation and meaningful support to our delegation. We thank our comrades in the outgoing five for their collaboration and wish the incoming five members all the best and are confident that they will enhance the work of the Council. We extend our sincere and special thanks to Hasmik Egian and the Secretariat team, the interpreters, sound engineers, security personnel and everyone who worked behind the scenes to ensure that the Council could continue to work even during the coronavirus disease pandemic. We also wish to thank the members of the press, non- governmental organizations and think tanks who have been following our work and have become valuable partners for discussion. I would like to thank my entire team in the Indonesian Mission to the United Nations, to whom I feel incredibly indebted and grateful for their hard work over the past two years. They are the real machinery that makes Indonesia's membership in the Council a success. Lastly, I hope that we have brought colours, values and principles that we hold dear and near to the Council. We have championed the faithful implementation of the Charter and United Nations resolutions. We have tried our best to foster unity and consensus and to broker peace. We came into the Council in 2019 with a batik shirt, and we leave the Council with dignity, with that batik shirt intact. Farewell to one and all.
