Mr. Jenea: Today's briefing is taking place as
important developments unfold to end the more than
10-year Palestinian divide and return Gaza to the full
control of the legitimate Palestinian Authority.

Last month, when Hamas dissolved the administrative
committee - a parallel institution to run governmental
affairs in Gaza - it agreed that the Palestinian
Government of National Consensus should assume its
responsibilities in the Strip. President Abbas welcomed
this crucial step, promising on 20 September at the
General Assembly (see A/72/PV.8) that the Government
would soon visit Gaza. The Secretary-General, the
Middle East Quartet and several Member States
expressed their firm support and encouraged the parties
to build on the commendable efforts of Egypt to seize
this positive momentum towards Palestinian unity.

On 2 October, Prime Minister Hamdallah travelled
to Gaza with a delegation of some 150 officials,
including ministers, key security agencies and heads
of the energy and water authorities. On the following
day, the Government held its first meeting in Gaza
since 2014.

The United Nations has worked with the Palestinian
leadership and the region in support of this process.
Special Coordinator Mladenov has travelled repeatedly
between Ramallah, Gaza and the region in recent
weeks to support the reconciliation effort and alleviate
the humanitarian crisis. He also led a United Nations
delegation during the Government visit and engaged
with the Prime Minister, as well as with all Palestinian
political factions and civil society, to ensure their support
for the implementation of the understandings reached
between Fatah and Hamas in Cairo on 17 September.
These understandings included a three-step process to
advance Palestinian unity: the return ofresponsibilities
in Gaza to the legitimate Palestinian Authority;
subsequent bilateral talks between Fatah and Hamas in
Cairo, including on public-sector employees, security
and control of the border crossings; and consultations
with all Palestinian factions.

On 12 October, with Egyptian mediation, Fatah
and Hamas signed an agreement that enables the
Palestinian Government to resume its responsibilities
in Gaza. According to its provisions, by 1 November
the Palestinian Authority should take control of the
crossings of Gaza. Separately, a joint committee
will be formed to resolve the issue of public-sector
employees that should complete its work no later than
1 February 2018.
A statement released by Egypt further highlighted
that the Government should assume its full
responsibilities in the management of the Gaza Strip by
1 December 2017. It was further announced that Egypt
had called for a meeting of all Palestinian factions in
Cairo on 21 November. The agreement does not contain
any provisions related to elections, the formation of a
national unity Government or the disarming of Hamas.

The Secretary-General has spoken to President
Abbas and welcomed the signing ofthis intra-Palestinian
agreement. Its timely implementation and concrete
efforts to alleviate the humanitarian crisis will be
critical to effectively empowering the Palestinian
Government in Gaza. Its implementation should also
facilitate the lifting of the closures, while addressing
Israel's legitimate security concerns.

The agreement is an important step towards
achieving the goal of Palestinian unity under a single,
democratic Palestinian National Authority on the basis
of the platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
the Quartet principles and the rule of law. The United
Nations will continue working with the Palestinian
leadership and the region in support of this process,
which is critical to reaching a negotiated two-State
solution and sustainable peace.

I would like to take a moment to discuss the acute
severity of Gaza's humanitarian crisis and continuing
human rights abuses.

In an urgent call to action, during his August visit
to the region, the Secretary-General called it one of the
most dramatic humanitarian crises he had ever.seen.
Since then, conditions have only worsened. For the sixth
consecutive month, the 2 million people living in Gaza
have received electricity for a mere four to six hours per
day. The lack of energy has had a devastating impact
on all aspects of their lives. It continues to disrupt
essential public services, including health care, the
water supply and sanitation systems. The equivalent of
over 40 Olympic-size swimming pools of virtually raw
sewage continues to flow daily into the Mediterranean
Sea, leaving the whole shoreline contaminated. Gaza is
an unfolding environmental disaster that has no regard
for borders.

The quality of health care inside the Strip is
deteriorating at an alarming rate. Access to medical care
outside Gaza has also become increasingly difficult.
As the Government returns to Gaza, it is critical that
urgent measures be taken to reverse these trends.

Meanwhile in other worrying developments, on
26 September Hamas sentenced three men to death
by hanging on the charge of murder, accessory to
murder and burglary. There are serious doubts as to
whether their trials and detention conditions in Gaza
meet international standards. As in previous cases,
if these executions were to be carried out, it would
be in violation of Palestinian law, which requires the
approval of the President. I urge Hamas not to carry
out such executions, and I once again call on President
Abbas to establish a moratorium on the implementation
of the death penalty.

Turning to the broader situation on the ground,
over the past month violence has remained at low
levels compared to the rest of the region. Four Israelis
were killed by a Palestinian attacker, who himself was
shot, at the entrance of the Har Adar settlement on
26 September. It is deplorable that Hamas and others
once again chose to glorify this attack. The United
Nations urges all to condemn Violence and stand up
to terror.

On 4 October, the body of an Israeli man from the
settlement ofElkana was found in the Israeli-Arab village
of Kafr Qasim, with signs of having been subjected to
extreme violence. Israeli authorities investigating the
death arrested two Palestinians from the West Bank
town of Qabatiya in relation to the incident. During the
reporting period, in total 80 Palestinians were injured
by Israeli security forces, and five Israelis injured by
Palestinians. On 8 October, a rocket fired from Gaza
towards Israel landed inside the Strip. No injuries or
damage were reported. In response, the Israel Defense
Forces shelled a Hamas post in central Gaza Strip, with
no injuries reported.

Turning to the question of settlements, the Israeli
High Planning Committee met on 17 and 18 October
to advance plans for more than 2,000 housing units in
Area C of the occupied West Bank. That includes in
the new settlement of Amihai and a new neighbourhood
in Kochav Yaacov, both designated for settlers evicted
from illegal outposts by court orders. Separately, a
tender was issued for 296 units in Beit El, and building
permits for 31 units were conditionally approved
in Hebron. Reportedly, the Hebron municipality is
expected to appeal that decision, which would delay
the implementation of the building permits. Work
began this week to prepare for the construction of
infrastructure in Givat Hamatos, a settlement that, if
built, would further disconnect East Jerusalem from
the rest of the West Bank.

I remain concerned about proposed legislation
that, if adopted, would expand Jerusalem's municipal
jurisdiction by incorporating several West Bank
settlements. The United Nations reiterates that all
settlement activities are illegal under international law
and are an impediment to peace.

The year 2017 has seen a significant decrease in
demolitions in Area C, as compared to the previous year.
Against that background, approximately 13 residential,
livelihood and public structures in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem were demolished in the previous month.
That brings the total number of demolished structures
for the year to over 350. Meanwhile, the number of
demolitions in East Jerusalem is quickly approaching
2016 levels, which were the highest since 2000.

I am particularly disturbed by reported Israeli plans
to evict specific communities, including Bedouin in
Khan Al-Ahmar, adjacent to the E-l area, and in Susiya,
in the south Hebron hills. Nearly all structures in Khan
Al-Ahmar now have demolition orders. Many of the
structures are donor-funded, including a school that
serves 170 children. I urge Israel to cease the practice
of demolitions, which has led to the displacement of
thousands of people.

Turning to Lebanon, the situation has remained
generally quiet in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and along
the Blue Line. On the occasion of Lebanese Armed
Forces (LAF) Commander Aoun's visit to UNIFIL,
on 22 September, the LAF formally announced the
deployment of the Fifth Rapid Intervention Regiment
to the UNIFIL area of operations, thereby fulfilling its
earlier commitment to expand the LAF presence south
of the Litani River. The regiment has since deployed,
and the coordination of activities between UNIFIL
and the regiment has commenced. On 19 September,
Head of Mission Force Commander Beary chaired a
tripartite meeting during which the parties discussed
the UNIFIL mandate extension under resolution 2373
(2017), violations of resolution 1701 (2006), Blue Line
marking and ongoing liaison and coordination matters.

On the Golan, the ceasefire between the State
of Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic has been
maintained, albeit in a volatile environment attributable
to the ongoing conflict in Syria. Both sides have stated
their continued commitment to the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement and support for the full return of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force to the
area of separation, conditions permitting.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that,
despite the overall negative trajectory that has
characterized the Palestinian-Israeli conflict for far too
long, there are reasons for cautious optimism. During
the previous month, thousands of Israeli and Palestinian
women united in a two-week march for peace that
included participants of all ages and backgrounds. The
yearning for peace among both peoples remains strong.
Such grass-roots initiatives by civil society are critical
to building the foundation for peace, and they must
be supported.

A key piece of the peace puzzle is to bring Gaza
back under the control of the legitimate Palestinian
Authority. The lack of Palestinian unity was identified
in the July 2016 report (S/2016/595, annex) ofthe Middle
East Quartet as one of the main obstacles to achieving a
two-State solution. Current Palestinian efforts to return
the Government to Gaza must be encouraged; they must
be supported; and they must be successful. The parties
have taken a crucial first step in that process. They have
demonstrated a willingness to engage positively and in
good faith. Yet overcoming their deeply entrenched
differences will not be easy. It will take time, and there
will be many hurdles to overcome along the way.

Success carries with it enormous opportunity, just
as failure carries with it great risks. Palestinians need
to decide which path they will take. The international
community must ensure that they are given every
opportunity and support to reach a positive outcome.
We must ensure that work can move forward on ending
the occupation and establishing a viable, sovereign
Palestinian State that lives in peace and security
with Israel.

