It is always such a treat to be able to see Special Representative Lyons. I thank her for her briefing and her leadership role in guiding the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in support of peace, human rights and development in Afghanistan. I would also like to thank Ambassador Dyani for chairing the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) over the past two years. I also thank all the Council members for all their hard work. Finally, I would like to thank Ms. Zadran for bringing the Council into the digital age as she uses social media to engage with young Afghans so that they can participate in building a future for themselves in Afghanistan. Sadly, in continuation of what we heard during our previous meeting on this item (see S/PV.8759), the people of Afghanistan continue to face terrible violence. The rocket attack on 21 November, which killed eight people and wounded over 30 near Kabul's Green Zone, is one of the latest crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams. The last few months have also seen barbaric attacks on educational institutions. It is time for the Government of Afghanistan, the Taliban and all Afghans to band together against this group. We also strongly condemn targeted and unlawful attacks on media representatives, religious leaders, human rights defenders, students and civilians. It is an outrage that women leaders, such as reporter and activist Malalai Maiwand, who was gunned down last week, and Mayor Zarifa Ghafari, who survived multiple assassination attempts and then lost her father to assassins, are being targeted. Afghan Government officials also continue to be prime targets, with the senseless assassination on Tuesday of the Deputy Governor of Kabul and the deputy head of the Ghor provincial council. That violence must stop. This concerning pattern of violence gives the utmost urgency to the need for a comprehensive ceasefire as a critical step towards peace for the Afghan people. An immediate reduction in violence will also help the peace process advance and is what the people of Afghanistan yearn for. The recent finalization of rules and procedures was a significant step forward and demonstrates that the two sides are capable of tackling difficult topics. The first meeting of the leadership committee of the High Council for National Reconciliation was a second significant and positive development in recent weeks. We cannot afford to lose momentum, however, while the parties consult on a proposed agenda. We urge the parties to resume talks on 5 January as agreed, to deny spoilers any opportunity to slow the process and to accelerate their peace efforts and end the country's long war. Earlier this year, the Council adopted resolution 2513 (2020), endorsing the United States-Taliban agreement, which outlines the prospective timeline for United States forces' withdrawal from Afghanistan. United States reductions in posture remain conditions-based per the agreement and will continue to be implemented after consultation with the United States Congress and in coordination with our NATO allies and partners. Meanwhile, United States efforts to stabilize Afghanistan continue through our support to Afghan security forces and our delivery of critical aid to the Afghan people. As a sign of our commitment, the United States pledged $300 million in civilian assistance for 2021 during the 2020 donors' conference, with another $300 million available depending on progress in the peace process. That pledge comes with continuing calls for progress on economic reforms, anti-corruption efforts and human rights. We welcome the discussion at the conference of the voluntary return and sustainable reintegration of refugees. We call on Afghanistan to follow through on its plans to support returning refugees, including by allocating land and providing identity documents. Over the last year, the Trump Administration has provided nearly $277 million in humanitarian assistance for internally displaced persons and returnees in Afghanistan, and for Afghan refugees in the region. Meanwhile, Afghanistan's humanitarian needs are still growing at an alarming pace, with a record 18.4 million people in the country likely to require humanitarian assistance in 2021 - nearly double the number a year earlier. Nearly half of Afghanistan's children under 5 face acute malnutrition. This discussion is an important opportunity to keep the international community focused on what lies ahead and on the need to increase funding for life- saving humanitarian aid in Afghanistan as the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees continues to provide crucial assistance to displaced and returning Afghans. The United States has also provided more than $33 million for the coronavirus disease response in Afghanistan. The pandemic has only exacerbated the challenges facing vulnerable groups. We also remain deeply concerned by the continued exploitation of children in Afghanistan, including through the practice of sexual abuse known as bacha bazi and the recruitment and use of child soldiers. Impunity is a major challenge to ending those harmful practices. The United States is committed to supporting the Afghan Government and civil society in their efforts to hold perpetrators accountable and protect and support victims. All Afghans, including those negotiating peace, must recognize and respect the universal human rights of people belonging to disadvantaged and marginalized groups in their country, whether they be women, children or members of ethnic and religious minority groups. A sincere commitment to inclusion is the foundation for future peace and stability. In that regard, there is a need for continuing efforts by the United Nations and other international partners to strengthen Afghan civil society in order to create a foundation for successful peace talks and democratic institutions so Afghanistan can move forward. I thank Ambassador Djani once again for having brought this forward.
