Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I welcome the presence of Her Excellency
Mrs. Naledi Pandor, Minister for International
Relations and Cooperation of friendly South Africa,
and thank her for presiding over this important meeting
of the Security Council. I also welcome the positions
taken by her country based on international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. I greet all those who have
focused on the essence of this agenda item, namely, the
Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli conflict and
nothing else, without deviating from it.

The founders of the United Nations sought to
establish our Organization based on the principles of
international law, foremost of which is respect for the
sovereignty and equality of States, non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States and rejection of
aggression, occupation and hegemony. The founders
gave our Organization the mission to realize and
achieve the ambitions of our peoples in terms of peace,
security, development and prosperity. However, the
winds were favourable neither to our ship nor to its
sailors. A handful of powerful Western countries have
tried to knock the ship of peace off course and turn it
into a tool to serve their agenda of hegemony and piracy.

Sincethe creation ofthe UnitedNations, we have seen
a significant increase, not a reduction, in the number of
crises, wars and practices of aggression. Unfortunately,
our Organization has been a mere spectator with regard
to many of these conflict situations. The Organization
has sometimes been used to propagate false accusations
and to provide grounds for legitimizing invasions and
occupations in various regions. The peoples of our
Arab region have been suffering the lion's share of
such aggressive practices and artificial crises. One
such conflict in particular continues to have grave
repercussions for our situation today, after 70 years of
conflict - the Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab
territories in Palestine, the Syrian Golan and southern
Lebanon. The United Nations, especially the Security
Council, has been incapable of enforcing the relevant
resolutions calling for an end to this occupation.

In light of the current backdrop and challenges,
many diplomats and interested parties are faced with
several legitimate questions. What has become of
the Organization, which today is unable to uphold
the principles of international law and the provisions
of its Charter? Will the role of the Organization be
limited to mourning the victims of wars, aggression
and occupation? Will the Organization limit itself to
addressing the rights of the peoples suffering under
the yoke of occupation in Palestine, the Syrian Golan
and southern Lebanon merely in public debates so as to
temporarily vent tensions, cause confusion and carry out
manoeuvres in order to hinder a solution? Is it possible
to accept that the Secretariat remains indifferent while
its Special Coordinator Mladenov pays no heed to the
issue of the occupied Syrian Golan in his briefings?
What significance does the Charter have if some of
its supposed guardians are those who violate it, either
directly or through their own tools? Were the provisions
of the Charter intended to apply only to small countries
and be manipulated for purposes that Violate its very
purpose? Is it time to admit that the United Nations
was a beautiful dream that has now shattered and begin
asking ourselves what the alternative might be?

Instead of witnessing efforts to achieve peace and
stability in our region, we have recently witnessed a new
chapter of the Israeli escalation that has led to record
levels of tension. The occupying Israeli authorities have
repeatedly carried out attacks on Syrian territories,
as well as the territories of other neighbouring Arab
countries, in flagrant violation of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, including relevant
Council resolutions. Moreover, Israel, the occupying
Power, pursues its attempts to distort the history of
the occupied Syrian Golan, stealing its monuments
and wealth and modifying its demographic nature and
Syrian national identity by seizing the lands of resistant
Syrian citizens in the Golan, with a view to extending its
illegitimate settlements and launching new occupation
projects, for example by building wind turbines for
energy production. Our inhabitants of the Golan are
forced to register the land they inherited from their
fathers and grandfathers with the Israeli land registry at
the risk ofhaving these lands confiscated ifthey protest.
There are also so-called local elections to appoint
Israeli puppets. All of these are serious violations of
international law and international humanitarian law,
committed by some with double standards and a great
deal of hypocrisy.

These Israeli violations would not have continued
and escalated without the blind support for the
occupying authorities from known Governments.
These Governments are therefore responsible for
the consequences of Israeli practices, crimes and
violations. We have seen the decision of the United
States to recognize Israeli sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan and, before that, to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel and transfer the United States
Embassy there. We have also seen the United States
tireless efforts to eliminate the Palestinian question.
Such events constitute an ugly manifestation of this
support, while all these decisions are null and void and
have no effect. These decisions show pure contempt for
international legitimacy.

In conclusion, the Government of my country
affirms that the occupied Syrian Golan is an integral
part of the territories of the Syrian Arab Republic and
that restoring the borders of 4 June 1967, through all
means enshrined in international law, will remain a
priority and a compass for Syrian policy. My country's
Government reiterates its call on Israel to release the
captive Sedqi Al-Maqet, the Nelson Mandela of Syria,
and all other Syrian captives in Israeli jails. We reiterate
our support for the right ofthe Palestinian people to self-
determination and to establish their independent State
throughout their national territory, with Jerusalem as
its capital. We also underscore the right of refugees to
return to their homes under resolution 194 (III) of 1948
and we reiterate our call to grant the State of Palestine
full membership to the United Nations.

