Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank

the Secretary-General, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Mr. Peter Maurer,
and the International President of Medecins Sans
Frontieres (MSF), Ms. Joanne Liu, for their briefings,
which were as moving as they were powerful and
inspiring to us to act on our shared moral and political
responsibility to implement resolution 2286 (2016),
which we have just adopted unanimously. Allow me to
commend the dedication and courage of the personnel
of MSF and the ICRC, and of all health workers in the
field who help the wounded and sick in increasingly
difficult conditions and often at the risk of their lives.

Attacks on medical personnel and health
infrastructure have increased in recent years in many
countries at war - Syria, South Sudan, Yemen,
Afghanistan and Iraq, among others. In 2015 alone,
75 medical facilities supported by MSF were targeted.
According to the World Health Organization, 654
medical personnel have been killed in Syria since the
beginning ofthe war. This sad record is still growing. As
has been noted today, last week the Al-Quds hospital in
Aleppo was deliberately bombed by the Syrian regime.
At least 20 civilians were killed, including one of the
last pediatricians in the city, who sacrificed himself to
save children. I offer a special tribute to local health
workers who are the first victims of these violations
of international humanitarian law. Who can accept that
these men and women not only are killed as they save
lives, but are deliberately targeted because they seek to
save lives?

Faced with this unacceptable situation, the Council
could not remain silent. Attacks on health personnel
and medical facilities are contrary to international
humanitarian law, as the President of the ICRC, whose
mandate is based on the Geneva Conventions, reiterates
relentlessly. We must thank him for that. Even war
has its rules, as codified, inter alia, in 1949 by the
Geneva Conventions, which apply to all parties and
must be respected in all circumstances. France takes
this opportunity to call on countries that have not
yet ratified the additional protocols to do so. It is our
collective responsibility to strengthen the protection
of all medical personnel and health infrastructure in
conflict zones. That is the meaning of the resolution
we have just adopted, with the active contribution of
France. I wish to warmly thank the sponsors for their
collective initiative and ongoing efforts. I congratulate
Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Spain and Uruguay.

In addition to the attacks on medical personnel and
hospitals, the deprivation of care, including against
civilians, is increasingly used by parties to conflict as
a weapon of war. In Syria, medical kits are removed
from humanitarian convoys. The regime's obstructions
of the delivery of medical assistance have increased,
despite the commitments made in the framework of
the intra-Syrian negotiations. As emphasized in the
resolution we have just adopted, access to care is a
right guaranteed by the Geneva Conventions; it is not
negotiable. Military hospitals are also used by the
Damascus regime as detention centres where torture
is practiced systematically as part of a deliberate State
policy, as evidenced by the thousands ofhorrific photos
from the Caesar file and the damning reports of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic. We cannot resign ourselves
to the unacceptable.

Medical personnel cannot be effectively protected
without the fight against impunity. States must
prosecute and punish those responsible for violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. This requires the conduct of impartial
and independent investigations, and bringing those
responsable to justice. France recalls in this regard that
attacks on hospitals, medical facilities or health workers
can constitute war crimes under the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. Ultimately, we must
follow up our own decisions so that resolution 2286
(2016) is followed by tangible results on the ground
and these unacceptable violations of international
humanitarian law come to an end. In that regard, all the
tools at our disposal must be mobilized.

To that end, the Council must be informed regularly
and in detail about attacks on medical personnel and
medical facilities. That is why France considers it
necessary for the Council to be seized as soon as possible
of the situation in Aleppo. That is true for all conflict
situations where violations of the protection of medical
personnel and infrastructure are committed. The
resolution we have just adopted requests the Secretary-
General to report regularly to the Security Council on
its implementation. That important step will allow the
Council to monitor this issue in a thorough, regular and
ongoing manner. It will allow us above all to highlight
and publicly disclose violations so that we can counter
them with all the might of the law. This fight belongs to
the Council and to France, and members can count on
our total mobilization.

