Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to join others in thanking Ambassador Takasu for his
first report to the Council and express my delegation's
thanks to him and his team for accepting that important
responsibility and for the excellent start that they have
made in leading the Committee's work.

The United Kingdom continues to have serious
concerns about Iran's nuclear programme. The latest
report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), which was issued last month, makes clear that,
in defiance of Security Council resolutions, Iran has
refused to suspend all its proliferation and sensitive
nuclear activities, namely, its uranium enrichment,
related activities and various heavy water projects. The
International Atomic Energy Agency reports that Iran
now has more than 5,500 centrifuges installed, of
which about 4,000 are actively enriching uranium for
which Iran has no plausible civilian use.

Iran has also refused access to IAEA inspectors to
the heavy water reactor at Arak for the second time in a
row. That is of particular concern because the design of
the reactor at Arak is ideally suited to producing
plutonium that could be used for nuclear weapons. The
IAEA report makes clear that Iran's refusal to allow
access has made it difficult to report in any meaningful
way on the construction of the reactor, as requested by
the Security Council. The report also repeats previous
statements regarding the total absence of cooperation
by Iran in connection with issues that give rise to
concerns about a possible military dimension to Iran's
nuclear programme.

In the light of that, the United Kingdom calls
upon Iran to answer the IAEA's questions and
implement the transparency measures in the IAEA
reports. We further call upon Iran to implement and
ratify promptly the Additional Protocol and to
implement all measures required by the Agency in
order to build confidence in the exclusively peaceful
nature of Iran's nuclear programme.

The United Kingdom has made clear many times
that we do not deny Iran's right to civil nuclear power
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. In 2008, the Governments of Britain, France,
09-26005

Germany and China, Russia and the United States -
the so-called E3+3 - refreshed their broad-ranging
offer to Iran of June 2006. That offer included help to
develop civil nuclear power if Iran suspended
enrichment and cooperated in a range of other areas.
But Iran has failed to respond substantively to that
offer and, so far, has not seriously engaged even on the
suggestion of a freeze-for-freeze agreement.

We and our partners in the E3+3 continue to
pursue a dual-track strategy - sanctions to persuade
Iran to change course and dialogue to lead to full
negotiations if the Iranians suspend their enrichment-
related activities. Once that has been achieved, we will
be able to forge a more productive and positive
relationship between Iran and the international
community. But if Iran remains determined to isolate
itself by ignoring the legally binding demands of the
Security Council, then the international community
must remain similarly determined to stand together to
maintain pressure on Iran to meet its international
obligations and to make clear to Iran that its choices
will have a cost.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the vigilance
and cooperation demonstrated by the Republic of
Cyprus in acting to prevent the transfer and
procurement of arms and related materiel from Iran on
the vessel MV Monchegorsk. That was a clear violation
of Security Council resolution 1747 (2007), which
requires, as Ambassador Takasu has set out, that Iran
shall not supply, sell or transfer from its territory any
arms or related materiel and that all States shall
prohibit the procurement of such items from Iran. The
transfer and procurement breach those international
obligations. The United Kingdom looks forwards to the
Committee receiving explanations from Iran and Syria
as to why the shipment was permitted by Iran as the
reported State of origin and as to the involvement of
Syria as the reported State of destination.

