Mr. Bakayoko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on
your initiative to hold this open debate in the Security
Council - of which your country, Ghana, holds the
presidency for the month of August - on a subject that
I believe is most timely: peace consolidation in West
Africa. I thank you for inviting C6te d'Ivoire, through
me, to participate. I congratulate the French delegation
on its impressive work during its July presidency of the
Council. I also welcome the presence of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs and other important figures, including
Mr. Ibn Chambas, Executive Secretary of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

To the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, I
convey my delegation's gratitude for everything he is
doing for peace and stability in West Africa.

Today's debate is highly relevant for my country,
which, as the Council is aware, has been striving -
with the assistance of the international community and
in particular of the United Nations and the Security
Council - to emerge from a serious political and
military crisis, whose destructive effects affect the
entire West African subregion. It is also timely for a
number of States of the subregion that have recently
emerged from long crises that have had a multitude of

effects. This initiative is therefore commendable and
once again attests to the spirit of solidarity that Ghana
and its President, His Excellency Mr. John Kufuor,
have always shown in matters related to peace and
development in Africa in general and in our subregion
in particular.

As I said, the topic before the Council today is
doubly important, first because it concerns peace
consolidation in our subregion and, thus, our future.
Indeed, given the many challenges posed at the
beginning of the twenty-first century - such as
globalization and technological change, which
themselves raise serious concerns about the future of
mankind - African peoples in general and those of
West Africa in particular are experiencing feelings of
fragility in the face of serious conflict or a climate of
destabilization.

During these confusing times, people thus direct
their gaze - full of concern but also full of hope - to
the United Nations. Such expectations are fully
justified because, at this very moment, West African
countries that have recently been liberated from armed
conflict are trying to consolidate the peace they have
regained. Others, such as my country, are working hard
to overcome the obstacles they are still encountering
on the irreversible path to lasting peace and
reconciliation.

The holding of this meeting of the Security
Council, the United Nations organ that takes decisions
and concrete action, gives me reason for hope. I
venture to believe that the Council will better
understand the realities of the region and will do
everything possible to further assist West African
countries in their quest for tranquillity - a sine qua
non for the economic and social development of the
subregion.

The topic we are discussing today is important
also because it places us right at the core of the raison
d'etre of the United Nations. The peoples of the United
Nations created this great institution, inter alia, to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war and to
promote social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom.

The purpose of the United Nations is to promote
peace, development and human rights - all things that
are conducive to peace consolidation and which are
still far from being a reality in Africa in general and in
West Africa in particular.

06-4607]

Our meeting attests to the will and determination
of our Governments to work, for peace, good
governance and development in our subregion, with the
ongoing support of the international community and
the United Nations. That is why my delegation hopes,
as do other participants, that our debates will yield the
clarification we need to read the signs of the times, to
interpret the complex realities of West Africa. We also
expect that the conclusions of these discussions will
lead to specific action that is lasting and oriented
towards peaceful coexistence among the populations of
our subregion.

This discussion calls upon us all, as I see it, to
have a comprehensive concept of peace. The peace that
we are trying to consolidate cannot be lasting unless
we tackle simultaneously a strategy to reduce tension
and poverty and a strategy to promote democracy and
good governance. Peace cannot be guaranteed unless
disputes are settled peacefully and conflicts are
prevented in a context of the observance of human
rights. We should no longer be preparing war or
waging war to obtain peace, but rather supporting
peace in order to prevent war, in the broadest possible
meaning of that word.

West Africa seems to have lost its legendary
tranquillity. It has become the theatre of many
conflicts. Within certain States, ethnic disputes,
political differences and conflicts of interest have been
misunderstood or mismanaged and have degenerated
into confrontation and civil war. Likewise, conflicts
separate or tear apart neighbouring, fraternal countries
because of border disputes that, for the most part, have
been due to non-compliance with the sacrosanct
principle of the inviolability of the borders inherited
from the colonial era, as stipulated in the Charter of the
African Union.

Our subregion needs peace. Like the whole
continent, it is facing multiple scourges and ills, and it
can no longer afford futile, costly wars among its
peoples, still less among the citizens of the same
country. To make peace a reality, dialogue, interaction,
tolerance, respect for the human person and respect for
life and the persistent search for consensus-based ways
to deal with apparently contradictory interests, must,
once again, become fundamental values for the
populations and the governance of this subregion.

Furthermore, it is important that, in our States,
justice be conceived as an ideal of responsibility and

fairness, needed to protect the ordinary citizen in the
exercise of his or her activities and to prevent and
punish violations of those rights. Justice, supported by
the citizenry is justice that takes into consideration the
rights of the accused, the interests of the victim and the
well-being of society at large. Our States must work to
put in place that kind of justice in our countries.

However, I do believe that, in a post-conflict
context, justice that is rendered too early can
undermine a still fragile peace and call into question
the still timid confidence among former enemies.
Justice that is too late, on the other hand, could prevent
a society from turning the page and entering a new era
through the revelation of the truth aimed at achieving
reconciliation of hearts and minds.

To bring about peace consolidation, our
subregion also expects international partners to give us
lasting support that can strengthen capacities for
intervention and provide mechanisms for resolving
existing disputes. It also expects constructive support
for our democratization processes and efforts to build
the rule of law as guarantees of peace and stability. Just
as international peace and security are the
responsibility of the United Nations under the Charter,
likewise prevention in our subregion should be one of
the primary responsibilities of regional and subregional
organizations.

In peace consolidation in West Africa, special
attention should be given to the proliferation and illicit
circulation of small arms and light weapons in our
States. This is a source of concern for the subregion.
According to statistics, 90 per cent of the victims of
these weapons are civilians, and 80 per cent are women
and children. Peace consolidation also means
developing a culture of peace among our peoples.

Peace consolidation cannot be brought about
simply by tackling political and military problems. It
should also be conceived in actions benefiting
economic development, because, as was recognized by
the Security Council following a meeting of Heads of
State and Government on 31 January 1992,
international peace and security do not mean merely
the absence of war and armed conflict. Other non-
military threats to peace and security have their source
in the instability of an economic nature.
Poverty remains a threat to peace and stability.
This is particularly true in West Africa, where, because
of recurrent conflicts that have ruined the economies of
the subregion, the majority of States are also
confronting the overwhelming burden of debt and the
constraints brought on by structural adjustment policies
and the depletion of private and public investment and
official development assistance.

One of the consequences of those constraints is
unemployment, particularly among youth. They have
no jobs, and so they easily become a reservoir
providing child soldiers and militias in the event of a
conflict. Those situations provide a fertile ground for
frustration, dissidence and violence. All of these things
are definitely a source of instability.

The underdevelopment of our States remains a
major challenge that we must and can meet together.
The stability of our subregion and the development of
our countries depend on that.

Accordingly, I wish to reaffirm, by way of
conclusion, that peace and prosperity must be sought
together, with the same devotion and the same priority
as political stability, and they must be supported by
economic development and the rule of law, with
special stress being laid on the observance of human
rights.

Let us achieve our common goal together, which
is to promote democracy and share democracy and
development in order, in the long run, to consolidate
peace in our subregion.

