Ms. Wilson: (Australia) welcomes the
recommendations of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) strategic review,
on which I will focus my comments today. The review
points the way to making the United Nations effort
in Afghanistan more strategic, agile, coherent and
focused. The international community has spent much
of 2017 reflecting on the effectiveness of its approaches
in Afghanistan and made some significant adjustments
to emphasise the primacy of getting to peace.

While noting the implementation challenges,
Australia supports proposals to restructure the
work of the United Nations Mission under political,
development and human rights pillars to better enable
UNAMA to pursue its ultimate goals of sustainable
peace and self-reliance in Afghanistan. Australia calls
on the wider United Nations family in Afghanistan to
work constructively and coherently towards enabling
and participating in that vision.

Australia supports an Afghan-owned and Afghan-
led peace process. We encourage Afghanistan to
continue its efforts, with support from the United
Nations, to build the conditions conducive to peace,
including political consensus and inclusion.

Regional countries have a crucial role to play in
supporting any peace settlement, the benefits of which
will ultimately accrue not just to Afghanistan but to
its neighbours as well. The review's observation that
the international consensus that drove early success is
fraying should move us to renew our commitment to
securing peace in and for the region. We encourage our
friends in the region to prioritize long-term strategic
stability over short-term tactical advantage.

Australia commends the proposal to retain a
significant UNAMA field presence. We emphasize the
importance of field offices for outreach, programme
implementation and visibility, particularly on human
rights concerns and early warning, including of
emerging humanitarian needs. More broadly, we
support a more prominent role for the United Nations
in strengthening donor coordination to better align
assistance with Afghanistan's priorities and improve
oversight, coordination and coherence.

Australia welcomes bringing the Senior Gender
Adviser under the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, thereby reflecting the centrality
of reaching for gender equality across all lines of
effort. Supporting women's empowerment has been
a core mission of the Australian aid programme in
Afghanistan since 2002. Our ending violence against
women programme supports services for women
affected by violence, access to justice, community
attitude changes and advocates for women's rights.
Earlier this year, our Prime Minister announced the
$30 million women and girls empowerment package, to
fund phase 2 and continue to support Afghan children,
predominantly girls in rural and remote areas, to access
basic education.

As per the review, Australia recognizes the
significant work of United Nations agencies and their
staff in Afghanistan and thanks them for their close
cooperation as development and diplomatic partners
with reach into parts ofthe country and access to diverse
stakeholders critical for Afghanistan's future. We
encourage all United Nations agencies in Afghanistan
to work together cooperatively to fully implement the
UNAMA review.

