Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I should like first of all to express my
delegation's satisfaction at seeing you, Madam
Minister, presiding over the Security Council's debate
on this very important issue. I would also like to
express my gratitude for the briefings provided this
morning by Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund.

The protection of children during armed conflict
must occupy a priority position on the Security
Council's agenda. The world's children are the most
vulnerable group in times of war, and they therefore
deserve to be the first to be protected. Today, almost
300,000 boys and girls are direct participants in armed
conflict, whether as combatants, spies or in another
capacity. Millions more are indirect victims of conflict.
Thousands of children are killed or wounded as part of
the collateral damage of armed encounters. Many
suffer from hunger and thirst; thousands more are
orphaned or abandoned, or become refugees or
internally displaced persons. Hundreds of minors are
victims of sexual abuse. Furthermore, the great
majority of children caught up in armed conflict lose
the chance of an education, and almost all of them are
scarred by the psychological trauma of war.

A year ago, when adopting resolution 1460
(2003), the Security Council called upon the entire
international community to abide by international
standards and principles concerning the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. There is no doubt
that over the past year there has been some progress.
The Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has been working tirelessly to make
the parties to conflict sensitive to the suffering of
minors who are combatants and victims of war.

Efforts have been made to include the problems
of children in the peace processes in Sri Lanka and the
Sudan. Efforts have been made to establish a better
dialogue with regional organizations, and national
commissions for war-affected children have been set
up. The General Assembly has strengthened and
secured the budget of the Special Representative's
Office.

The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/1053) also represents an important step
forward, as it provides an updated list of groups that
recruit children in situations under the Council's
purview, as well as a list relating to situations not yet
on the Council's agenda.

In some parts of the world, however, the situation
of minors worsened considerably over the past year.
Several non-governmental organizations have reported
massive increases in the kidnapping and forced
recruitment of minors in parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia and
Myanmar, by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia and by the Tamils in Sri Lanka. Much work
certainly remains to be done.

I should like to point out just some of the
measures that the Security Council will have to adopt
as a result of this debate in order to protect minors in
armed conflict. First, this body must demand that all
the entities on the two lists annexed to the Secretary-
General's report refrain from recruiting minors and
demobilize those already recruited. The Council must
give such entities a deadline for presenting evidence of
having taken measures to halt the recruitment of
minors, to punish those who continue to recruit them
and to demobilize child combatants. If no positive
response is received, the Council should impose
sanctions, such as embargoes on arms and funds,
against entities that continue to use child soldiers. It is
crucial, in this context, that the Secretary-General
maintain and periodically update the two lists of
entities that recruit minors or use child soldiers.

Secondly, it is indispensable that the topic of the
protection of minors be systematically incorporated
into all the activities of the United Nations. Any
resolution adopted by the Security Council must
include clear and comprehensive provisions aimed at
protecting the safety and the fundamental rights of
minors. Plans for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of combatants and peace-building
programmes must seek the rehabilitation of minors
who are combatants or victims of conflict.

Every peacekeeping operation must include child
protection advisers to deal with the problems of
children victims of conflict. Before any sanctions
regime is adopted, the Security Council should
evaluate the possible impact of such sanctions on
children. Every sanctions regime must include
exceptions aimed at minimizing the detrimental effects
it might have on children.

Thirdly, the Council should create permanent
institutional machinery that will enable it regularly to
monitor in a proactive and comprehensive manner the
situation of minors in armed conflict. Such a body
should receive periodic reports on violations of the
rights of children in situations of armed conflict and
must be able to rely on an independent group of experts
that can evaluate any information objectively,
undertake fact-finding missions to verify allegations,
and sound the alarm whenever a situation arises in
which the safety of minors is endangered.

Fourthly, the Council must support and lend
momentum to the efforts of the Secretary-General and
his special representatives to sensitize the parties to
conflict to the problems affecting minors.

Finally, as we said last year, it is indispensable
for the Secretary-General to refer to the Security
Council for its consideration, in keeping with Article
99 of the Charter, any situation of armed conflict in
which children under 18 are being recruited or used as
combatants.

A year ago, the Security Council committed itself
to adopting the necessary to protect minors in armed
conflicts. The time has now come to do so, and we
must take action.

