I welcome Special Adviser Karim Khan's report on the continued progress made by the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) in recent months (see S/2020/1107) - the first report since the Team's mandate was extended for a year in September. I wish to underline that this is extremely important work and we continue to support efforts to ensure accountability for the victims of Da'esh. The United Kingdom notes UNITAD's flexibility in implementing its mandate while responding to challenges posed by the coronavirus disease, particularly in terms of limitations on field-based investigative activities. The fact that six dedicated investigation units are now in place is to be commended. We also welcome the addition of thematic units, particularly in the area of gender-based crimes. The United Kingdom will continue to support the Investigative Team to ensure that it is able to fulfil its mandate. That is why the United Kingdom has provided assistance to minority-focused investigations, as well as supporting the development of Shuhud, a digital platform allowing witnesses and survivors to submit information related to Da'esh crimes remotely, securely and confidentially. We welcome contributions from other countries. Holding Da'esh to account should be a truly international effort, just as the Global Coalition against Daesh was. The United Kingdom is seized of the enormity of the task ahead to find a solution that enables UNITAD's evidence to be used effectively to bring those responsible to account in Iraq. We welcome progress on draft legislation to provide the domestic legal basis for the prosecution of Da'esh members for international crimes in Iraq. We urge the Investigative Team, the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government to collaborate closely in order to agree upon a way forward and secure an evidence-sharing mechanism that provides assurances on the use of the death penalty. We also welcome continued collaboration with the Iraqi judicial authorities. Justice also means assisting the victims of Da'esh to rebuild their lives. We welcome the Team's expanded capacities for assisting with witness protection and support, including psychosocial care and gender-attuned services for survivors and family members. Regular updates to the Security Council are key in allowing us to see the progress the Team is making. The Team must seek to engage both with us at the United Nations and with individual Member States that are providing staffing, funding and support. The United Kingdom continues to support the work of the Investigative Team, hence why we have contributed £2 million and continue to engage in New York, London, Baghdad and Erbil. The work undertaken by the Team is unique and we must ensure that it continues to provide a sustainable and internationally supported mechanism in the future. The United Kingdom welcomes continued support for the Team from Security Council members through funding, staffing and engagement to demonstrate the Council's commitment and to ensure that evidence is gathered to hold Da'esh to account.
