Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General and the other
briefers for their assessments ofthe role ofreconciliation
in maintaining international peace and security.

Lasting national reconciliation is indeed a
determining factor in the successful resolution of
conflicts and the prevention of relapses into conflict.
The achievement of peace agreements and lasting post-
conflict reconstruction and development are possible
only when long-term, mutually acceptable solutions
are reached among the parties to a conflict. And the
universal key to resolving domestic conflict is always,
and only, comprehensive nationwide dialogue. As
practice has shown, that is the only way to ensure a
robust, lasting and viable solution, regardless of the
State concerned. As the concept note (S/20l9/87l, annex) submitted for our consideration rightly points
out, during post-conflict peacebuilding, including
with regard to national reconciliation, it is important
that both Government and society recognize their
national ownership of lasting peace. That approach is
enshrined in the 2016 twin resolutions on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture (resolution 2282 (2016)
and General Assembly resolution 70/262). And in
particular, that means that the State bears the primary
responsibility for maintaining the security of its people,
while all sectors of society have to acknowledge their
responsibility for supporting peace processes.

The actions of the international community,
including individual States, their alliances and the
United Nations itself, should be aimed at assisting the
peace efforts of actors within the States concerned. The
United Nations in particular has all the necessary tools
to help States achieve national reconciliation, through
the good offices of the Secretary-General and his special
envoys and special representatives, and the work of
peacekeeping and special political missions and country
teams. However, in our View, United Nations efforts
should focus on cooperation with official Governments.
Interaction with the various actors on the ground
should take place only with the national authorities
playing a coordinating role. Furthermore, assistance
from the international community in ensuring national
reconciliation should be depoliticized and cannot
become a way to impose ready-made solutions from
outside. Attempts to support a given party to a conflict
based on one's own interests only deepens divides and
prevents healing and genuine reconciliation.

With regard to this topic, we would like to go
into more detail on the role of international justice
and holding perpetrators to account in the context of
reconciliation. Justice and reconciliation certainly
do not always go hand in hand. Often the operations
of international justice bodies lead to even greater
escalation of differences within societies. That is
currently a pressing issue in a number of States in
various regions around the world. We are witnessing
the settling of political scores with former opponents
with the help of the organs of international justice here
at the United Nations.

We firmly believe that in each individual case it
is essential to work to find the right balance between
the interests of restoring peace and justice, however
difficult that may be. In every case efforts should
be made to strengthen national justice institutions.
However, we believe that establishing the facts during
trials and prosecuting those responsible, as well as
acquitting the innocent, can make a real contribution
to normalizing the situation and appeasing feelings of
enmity and hostility among the parties to a conflict. But
that is possible only when those processes are impartial
and unpoliticized.

Regrettably, international judicial mechanisms
often manifest patent double standards. For example,
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals can hardly be called a success
story from the point of View of their contribution to the
reconciliation process in the Balkans. The unjustified
prevailing prosecutorial bias in the consideration of
cases involving accused persons of Serbian origin
was compounded by the lack of a real commitment to
uncovering the myriad evils perpetrated by Kosovo-
Albanian field commanders. It is clear that attempts to
blame one crime or another on peoples, Governments
and States generally are fomenting tension and mutual
mistrust in the lands of the former Yugoslavia, reviving
long-standing problems and inter-ethnic strife in the
region. Promoting reconciliation is therefore out of
the question.

We feel compelled to point out that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) has followed a similar path. The
cases referred to it by the Security Council are being
considered in a way that is at variance with the goal of
reconciliation, which worsens disagreements between
the warring parties, something that is particularly
evident in the ICC's Libyan dossier.

If we look at the activities of the international
tribunals generally, we can see that their relation to
reconciliation processes in post-conflict societies is
an exceedingly indirect one. Rwanda's experience is
salutary in that regard. The establishment there at the
national level of a system of local justice, in the form
of semi-traditional Gacaca courts, played a significant
role in post-conflict reconciliation efforts that
emerged owing to the low level of effectiveness of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
which considered only the cases of the main organizers
of the 1994 genocide. In practice, the job of the Gacaca
courts was not just to see justice done but also to
promote reconciliation within society by ensuring the
widest possible participation of the population in the
courts' activities, enabling ordinary people to publicly
consider cases and hand down fair decisions. The
concept of cooperation and active participation in court
hearings has become part of the public consciousness.
Proof of the Gacaca courts' effectiveness is the fact
that in 10 years they considered some 2 million cases,
at a cost 45 times less than what the ICTR spent in
handling fewer than 100 cases during the 20 years of its
existence. The results of the work of the Gacaca courts
are a testament to the effectiveness of seeking African
solutions to African problems.

In conclusion, in connection with what I have
said, I want to note that we believe that the work of
international criminal justice institutions in the context
of post-conflict reconciliation should not be considered
the last word. The harm that might be done could be far
more significant than the value it might add.

