The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first public meeting of the Council for the month of
November, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation, for his service as President
of the Council for the month of October. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Churkin and his delegation
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East

The President (Spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Lebanon to
participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its the agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council recalls all its previous
resolutions and the statements of its President on
the situation in Lebanon, including its statement
of 22 July 2016 (S/PRST/2016/10). The Security
Council reaffirms its strong support for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon, in accordance with
resolutions 1701 (2006), 1680 (2006) and 1559
(2004).

"The Security Council welcomes the election
of the President of the Republic of Lebanon,
Michel Aoun, in accordance with the Lebanese
Constitution. The election is a long-awaited and
critical step to overcome Lebanon's political and
institutional crisis. The Security Council urges
the new President of the Republic of Lebanon and
Lebanese leaders to build on their efforts thus far
by continuing to work constructively to promote
the country's stability and by swiftly forming a
Government.
"The Security Council stresses that the
formation of a Unity Government and the election
of a parliament by May 2017, in accordance with
the Constitution, are critical for Lebanon's stability
and resilience to withstand regional challenges. The
Security Council encourages all parties in Lebanon
to demonstrate renewed unity and determination
to that end, in order to ensure Lebanon's ability to
address the growing security, economic, social and
humanitarian challenges facing the country.

"The Security Council affirms that the
preservation of Lebanon's stability is essential
to regional stability and security. The Security
Council underscores its previous calls on all
Lebanese parties to recommit to Lebanon's policy
of dissociation and to cease any involvement in the
Syrian crisis, consistent with their commitment in
the Baabda Declaration.

"The Security Council commends Prime
Minister Tammam Salam for his leadership
throughout the difficult period and his efforts to
enable the Government to function effectively
without a President. The Security Council
further commends Speaker Nabih Berri for his
efforts at fostering continued dialogue among all
Lebanese parties.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for the International Support Group for
Lebanon and calls on the international community,
including international organizations, to ensure
continued support to Lebanon in addressing the
economic, security and humanitarian challenges
facing the country. The Security Council reiterates
its support to the Special Coordinator for Lebanon,
and encourages her to pursue her good offices
role in this crucial period for Lebanon, in close
coordination with the International Support Group."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2016/ 15.

The meeting rose at 3.20pm.

