Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): Like my
colleague and friend from Niger, I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your outstanding presidency
of the Council, and to express my delegation's pleasure
at taking part in this meeting.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his initiative to
deploy to the countries of the Sahel an inter-agency
assessment mission on the impact of the Libyan crisis
on the region. My country greatly appreciates the
sustained attention that he devotes to the Sahara-Sahel
region, which has for some time experienced a security
situation that is both complex and worrisome.

Mali, which was one of the countries that hosted
the United Nations mission, takes note of the report
(see S/2012/42) that has just been introduced by the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs. We also
take note of the recommendations made by the
assessment mission aimed at supporting national,
regional and international initiatives. Nevertheless,
allow me to make some additional comments.

I would like first to underscore that the report
repeats erroneous statements made by insignificant
individuals and small groups who have scorned the
spirit of openness and dialogue espoused by Mali's
highest officials and opted for violence as a way to
pursue their claims. Mali is an old nation and a land of
hospitality, dialogue and tolerance. Mali is also a
country that respects cultural diversity, democratic
principles and individual and collective rights and
freedoms. However, the Government of Mali will
tolerate no act aimed at eroding the unity and integrity
of its national territory.

As clearly underscored by the report, the Libyan
crisis has had serious repercussions on neighbouring
countries, especially those of the Sahel region,
including Mali, which has had to face huge numbers of
returning indigent migrants and heavily armed former
combatants.

It goes without saying that the presence of armed
groups serves to fuel old ambitions, just as the spread
of weapons and munitions of all sorts have exacerbated
insecurity and severely tested peace, stability and
security in the Sahara-Sahel strip.

Mali is fully aware of the scope and complexity
of the current challenges. We remain convinced that
responding to them entails not just strengthening the
military presence in the affected regions in order to
combat terrorism, cross-border crime and all manner of
trafficking, but also protecting people and their
property, improving basic infrastructure and public
services and promoting development efforts at the local
level. The many initiatives put in place by the
Government are a response to that. Those include the
special programme for peace, security and
development in northern Mali and the shared
governance programme for peace and security in Mali.

At the regional level, we should welcome the
fruitful cooperation that exists between the countries
concerned. I would like to underscore that it is they
that have the primary responsibility to ensure peace,
stability and security in the Sahel.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight here the
urgent need for the United Nations and the African
Union to help mobilize increased international
assistance for affected countries of the Sahel in order
that they can strengthen their capacities to overcome
the current challenges.

