Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to extend our sincere
condolences to the Government and the people of the
United States of America following the tragic disaster
that befell the space shuttle Columbia.

It is my privilege to read out the text of a
statement by Mr. Farouk Al-Shara', Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian
Arab Republic. It was impossible for him to participate
in person in our important deliberations.

"It gives me pleasure to congratulate you,
Sir, on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of
February. I express my confidence that your
presiding over our deliberations will lead us to a
just settlement of the issues on our agenda and, in
particular, a peaceful settlement to the question of
Iraq based on the implementation of Council
resolution 1441 (2002), which is our common
objective.
"It is also my pleasure to thank France, a
friend of Syria, for successfully presiding over
the Council's deliberations last month. We thank
France for its efforts, in more than one place in
the world, to favour peace over war.

"We listened attentively to the information
and opinions presented by Mr. Colin Powell,
Secretary of State of the United States of
America. Since time does not permit me to
discuss the content of the statement, we believe
that the way to ascertain the facts and to reach a
conclusion with respect to irrefutable evidence is
to transmit such information to the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and to the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We
urge all Member States that have accurate
information on Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction to submit such information to the
inspectors so that they can assess its accuracy and
inform the Council accordingly. We hope that
they will not be inundated with information or
opinions that do not stand up to the facts in order
not to confuse them or distract them from the
tasks entrusted to them by the Council.

"The Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1441 (2002). It is no secret that Syria
joined the consensus on that resolution after
receiving guarantees and clarifications from
permanent members of the Council that voting in
favour of the resolution meant proceeding
seriously towards a peaceful resolution regarding
Iraq's disarmament of all weapons of mass
destruction and that the resolution was not a
pretext for waging war against Iraq. The fact that
some members of the Council speak about the
need to adopt a second resolution is, in our view,
further confirmation of those clarifications and
guarantees.

"Nevertheless, two months after the
adoption of the resolution and the resumption of
inspections, which have made reasonable
progress and have not yet met with any
insurmountable obstacles, our region is at a grave
crossroads, teetering between peace and war.
Thinking that war is one of the options before the
Council is in itself proof of our collective failure
to peacefully implement resolution 1441 (2002).
We believe that the Council can still make great

efforts to reach a peaceful solution to the question
of Iraq compatible with the Security Council's
mandate to maintain international peace and
security.

"Syria believes that the existence of the
option of war is proof not only of the Council's
failure to fulfil its duties but also of the failure of
the international system, which at this stage
should rely more than ever on the Charter of the
United Nations as an indispensable point of
reference in ensuring that peace prevails all over
the world.

"Syria still believes in the possibility of
arriving at a peaceful settlement that spares Iraq
war and spares the region the dangerous
repercussions of such a war. Such a settlement
would guarantee the implementation of resolution
1441 (2002); it would save the lives of thousands
of potential innocent victims in Iraq, as well as
those of the soldiers who have crossed continents,
bringing them safely back to their families.

"Our commitment to peace is compatible
with the approach of the Security Council, which
in December 2002 adopted a presidential
statement on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/PRST/2002/41) and a few days ago
adopted a resolution on the protection of children
in armed conflicts (resolution 1460 (2003)). At a
time when our Council is adopting one statement
after another to save innocent people in many
parts of the world, it is truly odd that we can
discuss going to war against Iraq, which no
longer occupies the territories of others or
threatens it neighbours, and at a time when Israel
still occupies Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian
territories in violation of the Charter and
resolutions of the United Nations and periodically
threatens its neighbours.

"Syria has been kept informed of the work
of the inspectors and of Iraqi cooperation with
those inspectors. Those who believe that
inspections in any part of the world can be free of
occasional problems and obstacles are completely
mistaken. Nevertheless, after listening to the
reports of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, we ask
whether the obstacles to which they referred are
insurmountable. Do they truly warrant a
destructive war against Iraq? This is an important

question. Through statements by its senior

officials, Iraq has expressed its readiness to
continue to cooperate, to enhance cooperation and
to make extra efforts to find acceptable solutions
for existing problems in order to ensure that the
inspectors can carry out their tasks as established
by the Security Council.

"That requires that both parties - Iraq and
the inspectors - build a common denominator of
trust based on Iraq's cooperation with the
inspectors, so that they can carry out their task as
soon as possible, on the understanding that that
will be in the interests of all concerned parties. In
return, the inspectors' pursuit of their work,
objectively and in a way that respects the
sensitivities of the Iraqi people, would definitely
build trust between the two parties, which is a
desired goal.

"Therefore, Syria calls upon the Security
Council to continue to support the work of the
inspectors and to give them sufficient time to
carry out their task. Syria emphasizes Iraq's
commitment to continue to cooperate actively
with the inspectors and to provide everything
required under resolution 1441 (2002). In
parallel, the Council must take necessary
measures to lift the sanctions imposed on the
Iraqi people under paragraph 22 of resolution 687
(1991) and must activate paragraph 14 of that
resolution, which calls for the declaration of the
Middle East as a zone free from all weapons of
mass destruction - nuclear, bacteriological and
chemical - without excepting any State,
including Israel, which alone has acquired all of
those lethal weapons.

"Syria has made strenuous efforts, and has
engaged in regional and international contacts at
the highest level, so that we can arrive at a
peaceful solution to the Iraqi question, based on
implementation of resolution 1441 (2002). Syria
has also worked with Iraq's neighbouring
countries, which have expressed readiness to
cooperate with the Council in efforts to arrive at a
peaceful settlement of the Iraqi question. The
deliberations held in Istanbul proved that Iraq
does not constitute a threat to its neighbours. The
message of Iraq's neighbours to the world was
"no" to war and "yes" to peaceful solutions based
on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions. That message is extremely
significant, because it comes from a region that
has suffered under the scourge of many wars and
that is still suffering from the continued policy of
occupation and destruction against the
defenceless Palestinian people, its property and
its legitimate rights.
"The world's peoples look forward to our
deliberations, hoping for a peaceful settlement to
the Iraqi question - a settlement that will save
the lives of thousands of Iraqis and other people
should the military option, outside the framework
of international legitimacy, be exercised. Let us
all work for peace, because we can attain peace if
we have the good faith, the determination and the
political will to do so. Those elements are to be
found in most members of the Council, which
was entrusted by the Charter with maintaining
international peace and security. That is what
Syria and the other Arab countries are trying to
bring about, and it is what we hope the Council
and the rest of the international community will
also work towards."

