Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Burkina Faso for this opportunity for us to discuss the
consequences of drug trafficking for international
peace and security. I also thank Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa for his briefing and take this opportunity to
reaffirm my country's esteem and appreciation for his
endeavours and those of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, which he heads. France endorses the
statement to be made by the representative of Sweden
on behalf of the European Union.

The Security Council has repeatedly noted the
role played by drug trafficking vis-a-vis the emergence
of conflict in places such as Guinea-Bissau, Haiti and
Afghanistan. With respect to Afghanistan, through
resolution 1817 (2008), which was adopted as the
result of a French initiative, the Council, inter alia,
called for improved oversight of the international trade
in chemical precursors. Such examples enable us to
better understand the mechanisms that make the global
drug problem a cross-cutting threat to international
peace and security.

First of all, drug trafficking weakens States. It is
accompanied by increased crime, including cartel wars
and the development of transnational organized crime.
It encourages corruption and money laundering, both
of which weaken the capacity of Governments to take
action. In some cases, it makes possible the financing
of non-governmental armed groups. Drug trafficking
never occurs by itself; it always goes hand in hand,
ultimately, with arms trafficking, money laundering
and even trafficking in human beings.

Because of its transnational nature, drug
trafficking also contributes to the destabilization of
entire regions. The Security Council has laid repeated
stress on the threat that drugs pose to West Africa. The
magnitude of the economic stakes involved in drugs,
and their links with illicit financial flows and the
gradual erosion of the very foundations of States,
exacerbate conflicts between countries. Organized
crime networks are created at the scale of West Africa,
then grow and expand to the rest of the continent. They
take advantage of the weakness of States in conflict
situations and make the return to peace and economic
development a more protracted and more difficult
process for those States.

Finally, it is increasingly clear that drug
trafficking, owing to its links with illicit international
networks, jeopardizes international security beyond the
regional level. The recent report of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) on Afghan opium
trafficking demonstrates the role of drug trafficking in
funding not only the insurgency in Afghanistan, but also
the extremist groups in a number of countries in Central

09-6381]
Asia. The terrorist networks finance their activities
partially through drug trafficking.

France welcomes the fact that today's debate
enables the Security Council to assess the consequences
of drug trafficking for international peace and security.
We should now think about the operational ways to
better take that factor into account in our strategies for
the prevention and treatment of conflicts.

In that regard we attach great importance to
regional actions. West Africa is an example, with the
implementation of the initiative for the West African
coast and the Economic Community of African States
(ECOWAS) regional action plan on drug trafficking
and organized crime. We also commend the adoption,
on 24 November in Nairobi by 13 States, of the plan of
action of East Africa, which has to do with trafficking
in drugs, weapons, waste, counterfeit medicine, natural
resources and persons, and piracy. There are other
examples of regional initiatives, especially the Paris
Pact.

Then we need to strengthen effective
coordination among the United Nations, regional
organizations such as ECOWAS and sectoral
organizations, including INTERPOL, the World Health
Organization and the World Customs Organization.

Lastly, in the Security Council we favour taking
this issue of drug trafficking further into account in the
analysis of conflicts, prevention strategies, integrated
missions and peacekeeping operations. We will accord
the greatest importance to all the elements that could
be provided by the Secretariat in its various reports to
the Council. We again commend the major contribution
by the UNODC in the fight against cross-cutting
threats, and we welcome the regular statements by its
Executive Director to the Council.

More generally, we must seek to better mobilize
and use all United Nations bodies competent in the
area of fighting transnational threats. We need a global
strategy, both geographically and in terms of the
sectors covered. Only the United Nations can craft
such a strategy and help with its implementation and
follow-up.

The fight against drug trafficking is the subject of
one of the most long-standing examples of
international cooperation, whose one hundred years we
commemorated last year. The conventions of 1961,
1971 and 1988 provided an appropriate legal
framework, which was usefully completed by the
Palermo Convention on transnational organized crime
and the Merida Convention against corruption. We call
for the universalization and full and complete
implementation of those legal instruments.

However, one must note that despite the efforts of
the international community, the threats posed by drug
trafficking to international security are stronger than
ever. The Council therefore will need to remain
involved in this issue. My country favours further
discussions in this body in the near future.

