Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting, which has been called for so
many times by the majority of the United Nations
family, who are concerned at the dramatic worsening of
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories and
in Lebanon. For the second consecutive week Lebanon
has been subjected to intense bombardments, the
victims being the civilian population, which are
causing massive destruction to the basic infrastructure
so vital for the functioning of the country.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his presentation yesterday to the Security Council
and say here that my country takes note of the
proposals to put an end to the crisis that he detailed.
We share the concerns with regard to the alarming
humanitarian situation following the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon.
Algeria is following with the deepest concern the
developments of the tragic events in the Middle East.
We robustly condemn the blind attacks by the Israeli
army on the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples. The
incidents that appear to be at the origin of the new
aggression cannot justify or explain the collective
punishment that Israel, by flouting the rules of
international law and international humanitarian law, is
inflicting today on a sovereign State and on its
innocent civilian population.

Algeria calls upon the international community to
end its silence, to abandon the complicit silence in
which it has taken refuge since the start of the recent
dramatic events in the region, and to unreservedly
condemn the Israeli aggression and impose an
immediate and unconditional ceasefire in order to find
a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the crisis in the
Middle East.

In particular, we call upon the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities under the Charter and to
respond without delay to Lebanon's request for a
ceasefire and for the lifting of the blockade imposed by
Israel on the air and sea borders of the country so that
the Lebanese Government can extend its authority
throughout the country and recover all of its territory,
including the Sheba'a farms, and implement the 1949
armistice, as reaffirmed in the inter-Lebanese Taif
Agreement.

We also express grave concern about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation following
the attacks by the Israeli army, and we appeal to the
international donor community for a massive and
generous response to the distress call by the Lebanese
Government to relieve the suffering of the people, who
are so sorely tried.

The tragic situation in Lebanon - like the
repression, behind closed doors, in the occupied
Palestinian territories - shows us more clearly than
anything else could the urgent need for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question, which remains at the core of the
upheavals that have beset the region for decades.

Unless one wants to make entire peoples
disappear from the face of the Earth, legitimate
resistance to occupation will not go away as long as the
causes that have given rise to it are not eliminated. The
pretext of fighting terrorism through the pure and
simple recourse to State terrorism that is now being
employed against Lebanon and its people will probably
have effects opposite to what is sought. There is no
doubt that the resistance will emerge from the new acts
of aggression and the massacres being committed with
even more determination. Rather than melting away,
the resistance will simply grow in the face of the
Israeli occupation of Arab lands and the blind
repression that is being systematically carried out.

In addition to its disproportionate response and
the excessive use of force against the innocent
population and vital civil infrastructure of Lebanon,
Israel is making thinly veiled threats against other
countries, raising the spectre of a conflagration in the
entire region of the Middle East. The dubious pretexts
that have now practically put an end to a peace process
that had shown such promise must not once again fool
the international community and cause it to succumb to
the temptation to allow Israel to continue its new
enterprise. It is up to the Security Council to assume its
full responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and to oppose attempts by certain
countries that wish to impose their own vision of peace
on neighbours that unfortunately have made the
mistake of being weak.

In conclusion, I reaffirm my country's position
that a comprehensive, just and lasting peace is one
indivisible whole that cannot be achieved without
Israel's total withdrawal from occupied Arab
territories. A just and lasting solution to the conflict in
the Middle East must be based on the Arab peace
initiative adopted at the Beirut Summit, on respect for
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), 1397 (2002)
and 1515 (2003) and on the principle of land for peace.

