The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Germany.

First, I should like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his very
comprehensive briefing.

Secondly, I would like to state that Germany fully
subscribes to the statement that the representative of
Ireland will make shortly on behalf of the European
Union.

Last month, violence forced all parties involved
in Kosovo - local political leaders, as well as the
international community - to make a sober appraisal
of the policies they have been pursuing up until now.
Clearly, the lesson to learn is not that we should give
up our aim of building a democratic and tolerant
Kosovo. On the contrary, the violence highlighted the
stark choice between a civilized society and one where
extremists influence the people. We must now be clear
about what is demanded of all parties in order to realize
our goals.

For the political leaders in Kosovo, the most
important lesson is that they must leave no doubt about
their commitment to protecting minorities and to
building a multi-ethnic society. The recent letter of
Kosovo Albanian political leaders to the people of
Kosovo was an important gesture. But now, words need
be followed by deeds.

Political leaders must also be unequivocal about
their determination to isolate and punish violent
extremists. They must explain the rationale of
reconciliation to their constituents and be prepared to
pay the political costs. Funding the reconstruction of
all the destroyed houses and churches out of the
Kosovo consolidated budget may not make the leaders
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
more popular with their constituents, because other
high priority tasks must be deferred as a consequence.
Nevertheless, all the houses and churches have to be
rebuilt.

Sending extremists to prison and purging the
parties and governing structures of extremist influence
may also cost political leaders some support. Firing
those officers of the Kosovo Police Service who failed
to protect minorities may also be politically unpopular.
But all those steps are essential in order to create a
stable society.

One especially important area for improvement is
bringing government in Kosovo closer to local
communities through devolution of political authority.
Local communities in Kosovo need to have a greater
say over institutions such as schools to ensure that
government is responsive to local needs. As a
by-product of such devolution of government authority,
illegal parallel structures can be eliminated. We will
continue to promote devolution as a way to create more
stable and effective local government in Kosovo, which
is also in the interest of minorities.

The international community must also make its
own commitment clear. First, we must reaffirm that our
commitment to the minority communities of Kosovo is
iron-clad: our troops, our international police and
elements of our apparatus of civilian administration
will stay in Kosovo in adequate numbers until all
Kosovars can live in freedom and security. Secondly,
we must make it clear that we are acutely sensitive to
the difference between lip-service to ideals and the
actual fulfilment of standards, and that we will accept
only concrete actions and tangible progress. And lastly,
we will also have to analyse why, five years after the
suffering of the Kosovo Albanian population was
stopped, hatred in Kosovo is still so strong, and
identify what can be done by the international
community to help achieve reconciliation among all
communities in Kosovo.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Serbia
and Montenegro, on whom I now call.
