Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I would like to welcome the Deputy Prime Minister of Belgium, Mr. Alexander De Croo, and Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany. I would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller and Executive Director Fore for their briefings. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains extremely concerned by the humanitarian situation affecting millions of Syrians. The latest reports of aggression are alarming and continue to compound an already dire humanitarian crisis. We yet again implore all parties to the conflict to exercise maximum restraint and to recommit to a cease-fire. We must also applaud the willingness of the members of the international community to engage in dialogue on the escalating situation in the north-west. The humanitarian emergency in Syria necessitates immediate action, as underscored in the Secretary- General's bimonthly report on the implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018) and 2504 (2020) (S/2020/141). All parties must therefore facilitate the work of humanitarian actors so as to ensure timely, safe, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access to all those in need, wherever they may be. The crisis underscores the vital importance of the cross-border mechanism in maintaining the humanitarian response. We welcome the Secretary- General's report on the review of alternative modalities for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah (S/2020/139). We take note that, after careful consideration, the Tall Abyad border crossing has been designated as the most feasible alternative. It is our hope that that crossing will indeed be utilized and be able to effectively assist in addressing the existing humanitarian deficits. We once again reiterate our support for resolution 2504 (2020) and will continue to remain in favour of the most advantageous access arrangements. We acknowledge that there is a need for counter- terrorism operations to protect Syria's people and sovereignty. However, we must once again remind all parties that those operations do not discharge them of their responsibilities under international law. Military operations should never be placed above the well-being of citizens. The protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure is paramount and all activities must respect the principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution. The reconstruction of Syria, especially of its medical and education facilities, is integral to the improvement of the humanitarian situation. We therefore encourage members of the international community to contribute to Syria's rebuilding. Without that critical infrastructure, internally displaced persons are forced to remain in overcrowded camps and bombed-out buildings and access to basic necessities will continue to be a far-off luxury. Furthermore, reconstruction is a necessary precondition for the safe, dignified and voluntary return of millions of refugees. We also appeal to those countries that have imposed unilateral sanctions on Syria to engage in dialogue with the Syrian Government on that issue to aid the country in meeting its most urgent humanitarian needs. The current humanitarian crisis will only continue to deteriorate in the absence of a political resolution of the conflict. It is for the Syrian people to determine their own destiny, without interference, through an inclusive process that meets their legitimate aspirations. The humanitarian situation is at its worst. Too many people are consistently going without necessary services and children continue to be robbed of their childhoods. There is nothing left for them to do and nowhere else left for them to go. The international community must reinforce the hope of the Syrian people by taking positive action to end the conflict and bring peace and stability back to Syria.
