Mr. Valle (Brazil): I wish to start by expressing my
delegation's satisfaction at seeing you, Ambassador Park,
presiding over the Council's deliberations for the month
of May. Your professional competence and personal
qualities will ensure that the Council's work is carried out
with wisdom and efficiency. Let me add that we were
very impressed by the Portuguese presidency during the
past month, and I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Monteiro and his team for their
excellent performance.

Today's meeting has been convened to examine an
important and controversial issue which merits detained
reflection. No doubt, we all stand to benefit from an
exchange of views on the question of the Council's role
with respect to humanitarian problems in situations of
conflict. My country has shown a keen interest on this
issue and presented some observations to the General
Assembly at its fifty-first session, in the context of the
item on the report of the Security Council, last 26
November. I believe that two paragraphs of that statement
deserve to be quoted in their entirety, as they continue to
reflect our concerns on the matter. On that occasion, the
Permanent Representative of Brazil stated,

 

"The proliferation of humanitarian emergencies
calls for the definition of a collective responsibility in
the face of phenomena such as mass starvation,
disease and brutality. Not all such emergencies,
however, include a security component. Member
States should try to evolve a common understanding
as to whether the necessary international response
should be left to the General Assembly or the
specialized agencies, or whether the Security Council
needs to be activated in a particular emergency
because of security aspects." (Ofi'icial Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Plenary Meetings, 66th meeting, p. 11)

In the same statement, the Permanent Representative
of Brazil went on to add that

"appropriate criteria may have to be developed sooner
rather than later to determine under what conditions a
situation should be deemed to threaten international
security or is likely to endanger international peace,
and when a situation can be dealt with by other
organs - for example, the General Assembly. If
international security appears to be endangered but the
situation is not clear-cut, objective parameters may
have to be established to determine whether coercive
measures" - that is, chapter VII measures - "are
admissible or not." (ibid.)

We concluded that even when coercion is
contemplated and there would be no formal need to obtain
the consent of the parties, their cooperation should still be
sought as a matter of principle, as little success can be
achieved without it.

Having recapitulated the general thrust of our thinking
on this crucial problem at this stage, I would like to make
a few additional comments. It appears now, perhaps with
greater clarity than in the immediate aftermath of the cold
war, that the linkage between humanitarian crises and
international security is not one that should be accepted as
a given. Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
688 (1991) regarding the situation of the Kurd minority in
northern Iraq, there has been a tendency to place high
expectations on the Security Council's capacity to alleviate
the suffering of individuals caught in situations of extreme
instability.

In revisiting the interesting debate which took place in
the Council when that resolution was adopted in April of
1991, some of the points made are worth recalling. At one
end of the spectrum, the point was made that the mandate
of the Security Council does not include the questions of
a humanitarian nature to which Chapter IX of the Charter
is devoted. It was recalled, in particular, that Article 60
established that

"Responsibility for the discharge of the functions of
the Organization set forth in this Chapter shall be
vested in the General Assembly".

On the other hand, it was also held that the Council
should not remain indifferent to human suffering, even
though a particular crisis might be seen as essentially
lying within the limits of a country's internal affairs.

An assessment of the situation which seemed to
strike a balance was made by Ambassador Ayala Lasso
of Ecuador, who underlined that the human pressures that
displaced communities of over 1 million people were
exerting on the borders of two of Iraq's neighbours
justified action being contemplated by the Council in
response to what he perceived as "a threat to international
peace and security." (S/PV.2982, p. 36)

After the adoption of resolution 688 (1991), the idea
of humanitarian intervention was greeted with consensus
by Council members as the appropriate option for dealing
with the crisis in Somalia. But that consensus soon began
to show its fragility, as the use of force by a
peacekeeping operation stretched the Organization's
credibility to the limit. The tragic episodes of 1993, in
which several peacekeepers lost their lives, left the
Council with little choice but to organize a prompt retreat.
In the absence of a credible diplomatic process for
conciliation, the Council's emphasis on providing security
for humanitarian relief may have helped to avoid a
humanitarian catastrophe of a larger scale in Somalia, but
it did not bring about a lasting solution to the country's
institutional breakdown or its economic
underdevelopment; it did not restore a satisfactory
semblance of peace and security to the country.

Similarly, the Council's treatment of the
humanitarian situation in the former Yugoslavia cannot be
seen as entirely positive. There should be full awareness
of the risks inherent in the approach which tends to place
humanitarian relief under the aegis of an organ devised
for the maintenance of international peace and security. It
should be stressed that those risks will be greater when
insufficient regard is paid to the traditional tools of
diplomacy, which are essentially those outlined in Chapter
VI of the Charter, and when the United Nations is seen to
take sides by resorting to Chapter VII.

 

When tragedy struck Rwanda, no one challenged the
Council's responsibility to act. And yet by the time a
humanitarian intervention was put together in that context,
there were growing doubts in the Council as to the
appropriateness of the action being contemplated.

Today there is perhaps a need to look anew, with the
benefit of hindsight and experience, at the advantages and
disadvantages of involving the Council in humanitarian
affairs and, more importantly, at the conditions under which
Chapter VII can be considered an acceptable tool for
guaranteeing a secure environment for humanitarian
assistance. It is interesting to note that while some authors
portray the differences of opinion in this domain as falling
under a North-South ideological polarity, in truth there are
divergences within the North, as well as within the South.

Among developing countries there is often a feeling
that chronic conditions of underdevelopment cannot respond
to periodic food drops alone, nor can they be eliminated by
the gestures of well-meaning agents from afar, as pointed
out in a statement by the representative of Ghana before the
General Assembly at its forty-sixth session, on behalf of the
Group of 77. He declared on that occasion,

"The most lasting humanitarian assistance mechanism
we can forge is when we collectively develop the will
to eradicate global poverty in a world that can, if it
has that will, clothe feed and cure all our inhabitants."
(A/46/PV.4I, p. 37)

Other authors have stated that the growth in humanitarian
relief can be interpreted as a form of disengagement from
the South by the industrialized countries. Yet others have
called attention to the unfortunate consequences of
unintegrated military and civil humanitarian functions, as
well as to the danger of honourable humanitarian impulses
being hijacked for self-interested or political agendas.

In a recent article published in the International
Herald Tribune, the European Commissioner for
Humanitarian Affairs, Emma Bonino, defended the position
that humanitarian aid is about people, not governments. In
her own words,

"Humanitarian aid should never be devised as part of
any country's foreign policy".
How do we reconcile her attitude with the call by the High
Commissioner for Refugees for Governments to become
more active, including through the Security Council, so as
to mitigate the plight of refugees and other innocent
civilians in Africa, the Balkans or the Middle East?

The complexity of the subject does not lend itself to
immediate conclusions. But, at least for our part, we
continue to believe that resort to Chapter VII should be
considered with utmost caution, and that humanitarian
relief should - to the extent possible - not be
associated with coercion. The extraordinary contribution
made by the Red Cross, both in the development and
codification of international humanitarian law and in the
field, illustrates the scope of what can be accomplished
within a framework which has consistently abided by
impartiality and the consent of the parties.

It is true that the present international environment
has presented the Security Council with difficult
challenges and that, at times, it has had to improvise in
order not to be perceived as incapable of reacting. But if
the Council is to be expected to play a more active role
in guaranteeing safe conditions for humanitarian
assistance, our preference is for such endeavours to be
attempted in parallel with multilaterally defined
diplomatic agendas, and, if possible, within the realm of
the possibilities offered by Chapter VI - that of the
pacific settlement of disputes.

