Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The self-determination referendum in
Southern Sudan marks the culmination of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) by the Sudanese parties. Russian
representatives were involved in monitoring the
referendum; according to them, the polling took place
in a generally calm and free environment, and no
serious breaches of electoral procedures were noted.
Given the participation rate of approximately 80 per
cent of registered voters, the people were indeed able
to express their will freely.

Similar assessments were made by a range of
other international observers, including the United
Nations Secretary-General's Panel led by Mr. Mkapa.
We note the significant work carried out by the United
Nations and Special Representative Menkerios in
preparation for the voting in the Sudan.

Russia was actively involved in international
efforts to ensure the timely and peaceful holding of the
referendum. This issue was one of the main topics
addressed during a recent telephone conversation
between President Medvedev of Russia and President
Al-Bashir of the Sudan, as well as during the visit of
the Sudanese Foreign Minister to Moscow and the talks
with the special representative of the Russian President
on the Sudan.

We now await the objective evaluation of the
outcome of the referendum. During this time, all
Sudanese parties and Sudan's partners must refrain
from drawing hasty conclusions and making
declarations. We believe that the leaders of both the
North and the South will unswervingly uphold their
commitments to accepting any result as the expression
of the will of the population of the South.

In the coming six-month transition period, there
is a need to settle the main points of contention
between the Sudanese parties, such as the status of
Abyei, border demarcation, the distribution of oil
revenues, issues of citizenship and external debt. In
this context, we are particularly concerned by the
failure to settle the situation in the Abyei border region
where armed clashes led to fatalities during the
referendum. The parties to the CPA must ensure that
there are no clashes during the transition period. There
is undoubtedly a need for further active support for the
efforts of the parties in this regard.

Thus, the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, which is the basis for a settlement in
the Sudan, is entering its final phase. The full
implementation of the CPA remains crucial to both the
governance in the Sudan and to peace and stability in
the subregion. Whatever the results of the referendum,
a new chapter is beginning in the political development
of this country. We trust that this phase will see the
aims of post-conflict recovery and social and economic
progress met, and ensure the democratic rights and
interests of Sudanese citizens.

