Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. I should also add that my delegation is
pleased to see the representative of a sister
Commonwealth nation directing the work of this body.
Because of your charisma and your wealth of
experience, my delegation has absolute confidence in
your presidency for this month. I would like to assure
you of our fullest cooperation in addressing the
complex problems on the Council's agenda, especially
those pertaining to Sierra Leone.
Allow me to also pay tribute to your predecessor,
Mr. Yel'chenko, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine, for the efficient manner in which he
conducted the affairs of the Council during the month
of March.

My delegation welcomes the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, contained in document
S/2001/331, and thanks him for such a well researched
and comprehensive paper which espouses many things
that are relevant to the current situation in Sierra Leone
and to those of neighbouring countries.

My delegation particularly wishes to applaud
Mrs. Frechette, the Deputy Secretary-General, for such
an excellent briefing, and especially for her visit to
Sierra Leone, when, inter alia, she had a one-on-one
dialogue with members of the rebel Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) group and gained promises of
cooperation from them as regards compliance with the
terms of the ceasefire agreement.

My delegation carefully listened to and is
appreciative of the statement made this morning by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Mrs. Mary Robinson.

The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is, as mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report, dependent on the circumstances and stages of
the conflict in question. It is dependent also on the
scope and magnitude of the protecting forces"
capabilities against the onslaught of enemy forces. We
in the West African subregion have witnessed
barbarism unknown to mankind since the Middle Ages,
inflicted upon a civilian population by unrelenting
rebel groups.

We have introspectively sought answers to the
question of how a bona fide Government force during
the height of a crisis would set up the appropriate
mechanisms to protect its civilian population against a
raging rebel force, devoid of morality and humanism,
which is supported by external agents bent on
facilitating the destruction of nation States.

We fully concur that, based on the need for
humanitarian operations to be given urgent, safe, and
unimpeded access to vulnerable populations in conflict
areas, it is necessary for the parties to the conflict to
engage in meaningful and constructive dialogue.
However, it is also imperative for the Security Council
to complement a Government's negotiating position in
its efforts to actively engage an armed rebel faction by
further strengthening the respective mandates of
peacekeeping operations. Through the granting of more
robust mandates, hinging on peace enforcement, to
peacekeeping operations, certain armed groups will
eventually realize that confrontation with an effective
instrument of the world body may be an exercise in
futility and will comply with the requests for safe
access for humanitarian aid agencies to the vulnerable
groups.

My delegation is particularly concerned about the
issue of external actors, be they from the private sector
or from political circles, who actively render support to
these armed rebel groups in order to perpetuate their
nefarious activities in the exploitation of mineral
resources. The threat of the use of sanctions that would
be a direct blow to their operations should be strongly
emphasized and swiftly carried out, with very little
warning given to those external actors. Third entities
also participating or having an indirect relationship
with the conflict should also be appropriately advised
of the applicability of sanctions to their respective
interests. Such coercive measures would doubtless
enhance and ensure compliance with the requirement to
withdraw support for the forces of destruction.

The Council, in such cases, should be very
decisive in its actions and avoid unnecessary delays in
implementing enforcement measures. Very little
breathing space should be allowed before the
imposition of arms embargoes wherever armed
conflicts erupt on a grand scale, and the respective
customs authorities and civil forces of Member States
should be placed on constant alert to ensure that the
proper end-user certificates are issued whenever
shipments of weapons are being made.

My delegation strongly believes that civilians,
especially the young, women and the sick must be
protected in all conflicts, be they inter-State or intra-
State. We strongly believe that those who perpetrate
atrocities against an unarmed civilian population must
be brought to account for their atrocities. My
delegation also believes that international law is the
best way to accomplish such action. In this regard, my
Government supports all measures, at both the
international and regional levels, to bring the
perpetrators of crimes against an unarmed and
defenceless civilian population to account for their
actions.

This, in a nutshell, is my delegation's view on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts.

