Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
following countries align themselves with this
statement: Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia and
Turkey.

This is the first time this year that the Security
Council is dealing with the question of Kosovo. The
beginning of a new year is a good opportunity to take
stock of the events of the last few months, especially in
view of the recent changing of the guard with respect
to the post of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General.

The European Union wishes to take this
opportunity to express its great appreciation to
Mr. Hans Haekkerup for his work and for the impetus
he has given to institutional development and to the
consolidation of democracy in Kosovo. The European
Union is pleased to note that Mr. Michael Steiner has
now been appointed to replace him. We are certain that
his extensive experience in the Balkans will be very
useful to him in his new position, and we assure him of
the full support of the European Union as he takes on
his new responsibilities.
The year 2001 was marked by two events of
special importance: the promulgation of the
Constitutional Framework for Provisional Self-
Government, and the successful holding of the
Assembly elections on 17 November, with the
participation of all of Kosovo's communities.

The signing of a Common Document between the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, which marked a new relationship between
UNMIK and Belgrade and led to the Governments of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of Serbia
urging the Kosovo Serbs to participate in the elections,
has also been very important.

The establishment in May of a new Police and
Justice Pillar in UNMIK has significantly enhanced
Kosovo's law and order structures.

The beginning of the year is also a good time to
look to the future and to set priorities for 2002. There
is no doubt that this year will mark a new stage for
Kosovo. The inauguration on 10 December of the
Kosovo Assembly was a historic moment for the
province. As the Secretary-General said, it was a
milestone on the road to democracy. The European
Union congratulates all members of the Assembly on
taking up their seats, and Mr. Nexhet Daci on his
election as President of the Assembly. We urge them to
work, within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999)
and of the Constitutional Framework, for the benefit of
all the people of Kosovo.

The inauguration of the Assembly has set in train
the process of provisional self-government and paved
the way for the transfer of authority from UNMIK to
the new institutions. This will no doubt redound to the
benefit of all communities and promote stability in the
province, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999),
which remains the basis for building Kosovo's future.

The European Union is concerned at delays in the
election of the President of Kosovo by the Assembly
and the consequent delays in the establishment of the
institutions of provisional self-government and in the
transfer of authority from UNMIK to those institutions.
We appeal to all of the elected representatives to
demonstrate responsibility and leadership, so that self-
government can become a reality, which will benefit
the entire population.

UNMIK will continue to play an important role in
Kosovo. The European Union encourages it to continue
to work actively in the areas under the authority of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and to
ensure full compliance with resolution 1244 (1999), the
Constitutional Framework and other relevant UNMIK
regulations.

The European Union was very pleased that the
Serbian community finally decided to participate fully
in the November elections. We are confident that the
Kosovo Serb coalition, as the third-largest force in the
Assembly, will become involved in the political life of
Kosovo and participate actively in the functioning of
the provisional institutions.

The European Union welcomes the progress made
thus far by UNMIK and the Belgrade authorities on the
commitments undertaken in the Common Document.
Both must continue to progress in its implementation
and to make efforts to ensure that cooperation is
maintained and consolidated. The new provisional
authorities in Kosovo must also demonstrate their
commitment to the process. We look forward with
interest to the participation of their representatives in
future meetings of the High-ranking Working Group,
which should serve as a useful instrument to promote
political dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.

As the Secretary-General said on 10 December, it
is time to overcome the legacy of the past and
consolidate a political culture of tolerance, mutual
respect and constructive compromise. UNMIK and
KFOR must remain vigilant in ensuring the security
conditions necessary so that those already in Kosovo
feel sufficiently protected and are able to live in
dignity, and so that internally displaced persons feel
able to return.

The number of returnees during 2001 was
especially discouraging. Fewer than 1,000 internally
displaced persons returned to the province.
Encouraging minority returns must be a priority for all
in Kosovo. We look forward to the framework for
2002/2003, which the recently established Office of
Returns and Communities is preparing, working in
consultation with the authorities in Belgrade and
throughout Kosovo. The international community will
also have to support this process if it wishes a
significant number of displaced persons to be able to
return to Kosovo.

The issue of the Kosovo Albanian detainees in
Serbia is still of particular concern to the European
Union. During the last two years, there has been much
progress. Out of the 2,000 original detainees,
approximately 1,800 have already been released. Some
160 prisoners remain in detention in Serbia. We urge
UNMIK and the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia to agree on a rapid review of all cases
involving Kosovo Albanian detainees held in Serbia for
offences they are alleged to have committed in Kosovo.
Those found not guilty must be released immediately.
The European Union urges both Belgrade and UNMIK
to make a strong effort to resolve this issue, under the
auspices of the Common Document, in the first quarter
of this year.

We agree with the Secretary-General's assessment
that security and freedom of movement for Kosovo's
minority communities remain a serious concern,
despite the slight improvement in the last few months.
We encourage UNMIK and KFOR to continue to do
their utmost to improve security, and we urge all
political leaders in the province to make every effort
possible to put an end to violence.

Organized crime and extremism continue to pose
significant threats to Kosovo as well as to the stability
of the surrounding region. The European Union
commends UNMIK for progress in strengthening the
structures of law and order, but is aware that much
remains to be done to combat organized crime and
extremism effectively.

The EU strongly condemns the murder last
Thursday, 17 January, of Kosovo Assembly member
Ismail Hajdaraj, and urges all members of the
Assembly to show a spirit of maturity and
responsibility in addressing this new episode of
violence. The provisional institutions of self-
government must share with UNMIK a special
responsibility in confronting the ongoing scourge of
political and ethnic violence that obstructs Kosovo's
path towards a multi-ethnic society. A new spirit of
cooperation is needed in this area and in the struggle
against organized crime and terrorism, which are
priority concerns for the European Union in the
province and the surrounding region.

Finally, the Stabilization and Association Process,
launched by the European Union, and the Stability Pact
both seek to enhance the sense of regional
responsibility and to promote regional cooperation. The
European Union attaches great importance to its own
efforts to support democracy, ethnic coexistence,
peaceful relations among neighbours and regional
cooperation. We firmly believe that these are the goals
to which we all aspire in the Balkans.

