Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Like
previous speakers, I would like to begin by thanking
Mr. Edmund Mulet for his very comprehensive briefing
and the commendable work that he has undertaken as
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). I also hail the presence of
Ambassador Me'rores at this Security Council meeting,
which we believe not only important, but welcome. I
would also like to point out that my delegation fully
adheres to the statement that will be made later by the
Permanent Representative of Uruguay on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti; I will thus be able to limit
my comments in my national capacity.

Nine months after the tragic earthquake in Haiti,
the United Nations capacity to mobilize international
efforts and assistance to respond to the humanitarian
emergency and to assist with the recovery of Haiti has
been more than demonstrated, despite that country
having suffered, as we all know, great human and
material losses.

It is right to praise the Security Council's resolute
response to immediately strengthen MINUSTAH's
capacity with additional personnel, to expand its
activities within the current mandate and to give
greater technical, operational and logistical assistance
to the Haitian Government.

Even when, as we have just heard, the
Government of Haiti has redoubled its efforts to take
on a leadership role in coordinating the humanitarian
and recovery activities, as well as with regard to
measures to tackle unforeseen and natural disasters, it
is still necessary to strengthen the State's capacity so
that it can shoulder all its responsibilities. Fortunately,
we have MINUSTAH'S support in creating the
political, security, protection and recovery
opportunities that will enable Haiti to move towards an
environment conducive to its reconstruction and
development.

Without doubt, MINUSTAH has been vital in
maintaining stability, promoting reconstruction,
ensuring the survival of the national institutions and
supporting the country's population under tragic
conditions. However, Haiti will face many challenges
in the coming months, as we have heard the Special
Representative and Ambassador Merores mention.
Thus, we believe that the United Nations and the
international community will have to step up their
support and assistance to that country's people and
Government so that those challenges can become
opportunities in order to help overcome Haiti's
structural problems in the sphere of economic and
social development and its institutional fragility.

My delegation welcomes the political agreements
reached and the Government's resolve to organize and
hold elections on 28 November. These will be decisive
to guaranteeing political stability, the rule of law and
the democratic process in that country. These essential
elements will contribute to the recovery and the socio-
economic development of the country. We agree with
the Secretary-General that it is essential to guarantee a
credible and legitimate electoral process, upon which
political stability largely depends. There is no doubt
that MINUSTAH has an essential role to play in this
process in coordinating international electoral
assistance; providing technical, logistical and security
support for the Provisional Electoral Council, in
cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme, the Organization of American States and
other relevant international actors; and contributing to
generating the necessary trust in the process.

My delegation also supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the current level of
MINUSTAH staff be maintained in order to guarantee
security and stability after the elections in 2011 and
until a new evaluation of the security situation can be
made. That will provide us with specific parametres
that take into account the post-election political
environment, the capacities of the National Haitian
Police, especially in protecting displaced persons, and
support needs related to assistance activities.
The Mexican delegation has widely acknowledged
the need to restore the confidence of the Haitian people
in their institutions and to establish specific measures to
foster dialogue and national reconciliation in order to
create conditions in which Haitian society can achieve
its common future.

Mexico encourages MINUSTAH to maintain its
support for the Government in capacity-building and
its advisory capacity to the Haitian National Police and
the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, as well as
to the main judicial and corrections institutions, in
order to move ahead in police reform; support essential
judicial services; manage controversies related to land
law, property disputes, disappeared persons, custody
and inheritance; and support Government efforts to
deter and combat organized crime and illegal drug
trafficking.

In conclusion, my delegation agrees with the
Secretary-General that Haiti's reconstruction is a long-
terrn project that will require the sustained support and
commitment of the international community and the
leadership of the Haitian Government. MINUSTAH's
success and its drawdown will also depend on the
progress and feasibility of reconstruction, as well as
the establishment of institutional structures to support
the country's capacities.

