Mr. Stareevic' (Serbia): Let me, first of all,
warmly welcome His Excellency Mr. Nebojsa
Radmanovic', Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and His Excellency Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

As on all previous occasions, the delegation of
Serbia has read the report on implementation of the
Peace Agreement (see S/2010/575) that has been
presented. We have also listened with keen interest to
the views expressed in the Council today. Serbia is
fully committed to continuing, in cooperation with
Bosnia and Herzegovina and other regional
stakeholders, activities aimed at bringing about full
reconciliation and lasting stability in the region. We are
convinced that the joint efforts and cooperation of all
the countries in the region, along with the
intensification of the efforts of the international
community, will contribute to the strengthening of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as one country.

Serbia is making great efforts to significantly
advance its relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina, our
next-door neighbour and a friendly country. It is
precisely the continued development and promotion of
relations among States of the Western Balkans that will
bring us to the achievement of our common goal,
namely, integration into the European Union (EU).
We welcome democratic processes. In that spirit,
we also welcome the recently held elections, which
expressed the will of the people. We see them as an
important step forward in ensuring a peaceful and
prosperous future for all the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in creating conditions for further
advancement towards the European Union.

In order to bring greater stability to the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the country needs some
encouragement from the Union, as EU integration is a
common denominator of the aspirations of the peoples
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Encouragement and
concrete support for Bosnia and Herzegovina's
integration into the European Union would go a long
way in bringing about further stability to the country.
Serbia has been a staunch advocate of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's inclusion into the EU's liberalization of
the visa regime. We are very happy that this decision
has finally been adopted. That is exactly the much-
needed and strategically important signal of a
European future for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As a signatory party and a guarantor of the
implementation of the Peace Agreement for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and in accordance with resolution 1031
(1995), Serbia remains strongly committed to the
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and consistently
respects its territorial integrity and sovereignty. We
support the initiation of reform processes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are of the opinion that the closure of
the Office of the High Representative and the
termination of the so-called Bonn powers would
contribute to finding a solution in that regard.

We call for the achievement of a sustainable
solution in the spirit of European values, with the
agreement of the representatives of the two entities and
the consensus of the three constituent peoples. Serbia
is encouraging the participants in that process to do all
that is needed to bring about such an agreement.

Our constructive approach to the search for a
solution is based not only on our support for the
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also on our
deep conviction that only dialogue and agreement can
bring about a solution that can be sustained in the
future. Every solution in Bosnia and Herzegovina
should be followed by peace and stability and should
be reached by agreements that do not bring into
question the integrity of the country, for it is only a
stable and prosperous region that can become a part of
the European family of nations.

Based on the Special Parallel Relationship
Agreement between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Republika Srpska, Serbia views the
development of its relations with the Republika Srpska
in the context of its efforts to intensify overall relations
with Bosnia and Herzegovina. Guided by its
commitment to a complete normalization and
substantively new relations, my country is devoted to
the further improvement of relations and has taken
important steps towards comprehensive regional
reconciliation. The declaration on Srebrenica of the
National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia
demonstrates clearly Serbia's support for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but also its readiness to confront the past
and assume political responsibility for the future and
the well-being of the region. The Istanbul declaration
and the regular trilateral meetings of the Foreign
Ministers of Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Turkey contribute and lend impetus to the further
promotion of good-neighbourly relations.

We are fully aware that regional and economic
cooperation provide a special impulse to the lasting
stabilization of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the region of South-East Europe/Western Balkans.
The successful cooperation between Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina within the framework of numerous
international and regional initiatives - such as the
Process of Cooperation in South-East Europe, the
Central European Free Trade Agreement, the Regional
Cooperation Council, the Central European Initiative,
the Adriatic-Ionian Initiative and others - is a good
example of the importance that we attach to the
promotion of regional cooperation and a common
European future. We are committed to furthering ever
better and more extensive regional cooperation and
integration so that we can find common answers to
regional challenges and cooperate in our efforts to join
the European Union.

