Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): I,
too, would like to welcome Ambassador Munoz in his
new capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) relative
to Al Qaeda and the Taliban. The United States
appreciates receiving his informative briefing on the
important work of the Committee for the first half of
this year.

Ambassador Mufioz is right to underscore the
serious threat that Al Qaeda continues to represent
across borders. Its terrorist activities in 2003 serve as a
tragic reminder that our counter-terrorism work
remains unfinished. Attacks in diverse parts of the
world reflect the true global dimension of the Al Qaeda
network. They also serve to remind us that only
through international cooperation can we prevent
future attacks. No single nation can counter the Al
Qaeda threat on its own; partnership is essential.

The United States considers the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) to be a central part of the international
community's counter-terrorism efforts. Secretary of
State Colin Powell's comments during the ministerial
meeting on terrorism held on 20 January clearly
underscored that point when he welcomed the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1455 (2003), which
reinforced sanctions that are both targeted and without
time limits. The Secretary said then, and it is worth
repeating now, that "The international community
could not have sent a stronger message of its
determination to stamp out terrorism." (S/PV.4688, p. I 9). We must keep up that momentum.

Freezing terrorist assets remains a top priority of
the Government of the United States. Approximately
$135 million in terrorist assets have been frozen
worldwide since the tragic events of 11 September
2001. While that is a sizeable figure, we recognize that
more can be done to find, follow and freeze terrorist
funds. Continued success in tracking terrorist financing
will require international vigilance. We note, however,
that 39 Member States have not yet introduced
domestic legislation enabling terrorist-linked assets to
be frozen. The United States urges those States to enact
appropriate laws, in line with Security Council
expectations. The regulation of informal money
transfer systems, such as hawala, also warrants closer
Council attention.

The reports called for under resolution 1455
(2003) constitute a crucially important part of the
Committee's work. We are disappointed that more
States have not taken the opportunity to convey
information that is essential to improving the sanctions
regime. Given the magnitude of the Al Qaeda threat, a
30 per cent response rate is inadequate, and hampers
the Committee's ability to do its work. We encourage
the Committee to seek additional information from
States as necessary. Member States' successes and
challenges need to be addressed through closer
examination of those reports. Where there are gaps in
capacity, we must find better ways to address them.

The work of the Committee established under
resolution 1267 (1999), in the remainder of 2003, will
result in a concrete assessment of Member State
implementation of that key sanctions regime. That
should not be a pro forma exercise. Instead, we
anticipate the December 2003 written assessment to be
a robust analysis containing an array of
recommendations for consideration by the Council,
including on issues such as hawala and charities, which
are important themes identified by the Monitoring
Group. Ambassador Mufioz's travel planned for
October will usefully frame the Committee's remaining
work and his end-of-the-year assessment to the
Council, as well as send an important political signal to
key capitals. He, as Committee Chairman - and we, as
the Council - should not shy away from asking tough
questions. The United States believes that counter-
terrorism expectations for Member States should
remain high. We all can, and should, strengthen efforts
to meet the ongoing challenge that Al Qaeda poses.

We strongly encourage willing and able States to
do more, my own Government included. For example,
the United States can do better in a number of areas.
We are still learning how to better address the threats at
our borders, in our skies and across our territory. Our
new Department of Homeland Security has invested
significant resources to monitor the flow of
information and targeted individuals moving into and
out of our country. We remain concerned about the
status of our seaports, an area of recognized
vulnerability that our Congress has spent time
investigating. We also realize that coordination with
our geographic neighbours - Canada and Mexico -
must be supplemented by robust international
cooperation that extends beyond our nation's physical
boundaries.

The United States remains strongly committed to
help willing States achieve greater counter-terrorism
successes. Increased assistance and capacity building is
key in that effort. The work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in matching available capacity with stated
needs represents a critical step in that regard. We also
emphasize that States unwilling to implement their
obligations, whatever the reason, must be encouraged
and, if necessary, pressured to do more. The
international community cannot allow intransigence by
some to be the weak link that undermines our shared
counter-terrorism efforts.

We welcome the results achieved thus far by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), and support maintaining its robust counter-
terrorism approach under the able leadership of
Ambassador Mufioz. It is a big job, and among the
United Nations most important long-term tasks.
Resolution 1455 (2003) is a demanding resolution. The
expectations it set forth are unique in many ways, and
have required significant investment in time by
Committee experts and the Sanctions Branch of the
Secretariat - and especially by Ambassador Munoz
and the Chilean Mission. We appreciate that hard work.

Improved sanctions implementation - made
possible by vigilant Security Council oversight and
better responsiveness by Member States - will send
the right message to all Governments and translate into
improved implementation. Successfully countering the
Al Qaeda threat - a deadly threat to all of us -
demands as much.

