Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): As
a country that hosts a large population of refugees, the
United Republic of Tanzania is painfully conscious that
violations of humanitarian law perpetrated against
civilians cause mass population movements internally
and across borders. We therefore believe that there is
both a moral and a legal responsibility to protect: to
protect vulnerable populations from violent conflicts
that continue to claim the lives of many innocent
civilians while leaving many more permanently
displaced.

Regrettably, since the Council began discussing
the protection of civilians in armed conflict in 1999,
the problem has remained particularly acute in Africa.
Examples abound, from the Darfur region in the Sudan
to Cote d'Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, among others. Nonetheless, we are gratified at
the growing consensus, both within the Council and in
the United Nations as a whole, in favour of efforts to
strengthen the regime for the physical and legal
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

That is a welcome development. For today, even
in Africa, there is a strong desire to see greater action
to prevent the emergence, spread and re-emergence of
conflicts that have brought untold misery to civilians,
countries and economies. That is the essence of the
process set in motion by the First Summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
held at Dar es Salaam in November 2004. It is a
process to which we see the idea of a Peacebuilding
Commission as making a significant contribution.

In addition, the Great Lakes Summit sought to
promote ways and mechanisms for protecting civilians
as victims of conflict and upholding their human rights
as citizens of their respective countries. In these
pursuits, Tanzania is guided by two important
propositions. The first is the promotion of good
governance. President Benjamin William Mkapa put it
this way:

"Countries that govern themselves in a truly
democratic fashion do not displace their citizens;
they do not generate refugees, and are not likely
to find it necessary to go to war with their
neighbours. They form reliable, open and firm
trading partnerships. They offer better and more
opportunities for investment, trade and
development. They form a reliable foundation for
regional peace, security and the prosperity of
their people".

Our second proposition is born of our experience
in the Great Lakes, a region that has suffered one of the
most serious humanitarian tragedies - the genocide in
Rwanda - as well as wars, instability and an influx of
refugees that has over-burdened not only the refugee-
hosting countries, but even the regulatory regime itself.

Civilians are the first victims of war; they are
often displaced internally and across frontiers. The
international community has yet to devise an
appropriate regulatory and protective mechanism that
responds to those realities. Existing humanitarian
instruments offer us much to go by, but the regime that
offers physical protection to displaced civilians leaves
a lot to be desired.

Tanzania has called for a review of the 1951
Refugee Convention. In our view, its focus does not
fully take account of present-day realities. It has
shortcomings even when applied only to those civilians
that have crossed into another country. Constructed in
an era when there were a limited number of refugees,
the Convention requires receiving States to grant
refugee status on the basis of a determination of
individual applications. In the face of massive influxes
of refugees fleeing from wars, this requirement is
manifestly incongruous. The reality is that countries
such as Tanzania have been forced to grant refugee
status en masse as a consequence of the overburdened
administrative capacities of receiving States. In a
period of dwindling funds for humanitarian
emergencies - as pointed out by Mr. Egeland this
morning - the burden and environmental cost of such
influxes for host countries have become far greater and
more challenging.

Tanzania has striven to offer a solution that seeks
to offer protection to civilians by providing shelter in
the countries generating refugees through the
establishment of safe havens. Safe havens would not
only eliminate the existing distinction between
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees, but
would allow refugees of all categories - whether they
are displaced internally or across frontiers - to obtain
the same range of human rights protections without
discrimination.

We commend this proposition to the Council and
other bodies for its relevance and as a practical
response to our collective responsibility.

Finally, we must also continue to protect the
institution of asylum, just as we must protect and
promote the principle of burden-sharing. In our View,
the two constitute an important cornerstone of the
civilian protection regime. When they are weakened,
our collective resolve to act is undermined.
Regrettably, burden-sharing has proved to be more of
an ideal than a reality. It cannot be overemphasized.
We can and must do more. Burden-sharing must be
made a reality.

