Ms. Schroderus-Fox (Finland): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

The Nordic countries attach great importance to
peacebuilding. The entire international community has
a responsibility to support post-conflict countries in
recovering and establishing foundations for sustainable
peace and development. The Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) was established to ensure that the
efforts of the international community to assist post-
conflict countries are carried out in an integrated and
effective manner.

The Nordic countries are strong supporters of the
Peacebuilding Commission. It has a special role in
promoting a coordinated and coherent approach to
peacebuilding. During the past three years the PBC has
demonstrated the ability to develop innovative means
of engagement. While those beginnings show promise,
the ultimate yardstick of success must be change on the
ground. We must be willing to take a frank look at the
record so far and make adjustments where needed. The
2010 review will be a good opportunity to improve the
Commission's impact. Such a stocktaking exercise will
help us create more momentum for peacebuilding and
generate a common view on the way forward.

The Peacebuilding Commission is mandated to
bring together all relevant actors and to act as a forum
for strategic policy coordination. It should therefore
contribute to coherence between the political mandate
given by the Security Council and the development and
humanitarian mandates of United Nations agencies.
However, this is not a concern for the PBC alone; we,
the Member States, should also have coherent
peacebuilding policies and maintain a consistent
approach in our activities.
Mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding focus
on different dimensions of post-conflict needs. In this
context I especially want to highlight the link between
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. The ongoing process
of reviewing United Nations peacekeeping and the
upcoming review of the peacebuilding architecture
provide a unique opportunity to make better use of
synergies between these two areas. Furthermore, in
order to deliver on the Commission's mandated
advisory role, enhancing its relationship with the
Security Council would be highly beneficial.

Ensuring national ownership of peacebuilding
efforts from the very beginning is essential. Only
national actors can identify the most pressing needs of
their society and the most effective ways of addressing
them. Each post-conflict situation is unique; there is no
one-size-fits-all solution. The Peacebuilding
Commission's country-specific strategic frameworks
should not impose an additional layer of planning, but
should rather be flexible instruments of engagement
that build on existing assessments and strategies. Such
shared responsibility is reflected in the principle of
mutual accountability. The PBC urges national as well
as international actors to commit to peacebuilding
efforts and encourages a review of these commitments.
We support the further development of this principle,
especially through enhanced resource-mapping and
measurement of donor pledges against actual
disbursements.

The international community has to create a
space for a truly inclusive national process and
undertake all peacebuilding in a way that strengthens
the capacity and commitment of local institutions.
Priority-setting, planning and implementation need to
be genuinely shared responsibilities. The extensive
participation of civil society, private sector and
community-level local actors in the peacebuilding and
reconstruction process is essential. This applies
especially to women. Real reconciliation and
rebuilding happens at the local level, and women are
often the best experts in identifying the most crucial
needs of their communities. Their experience,
knowledge and determination are very much needed.
Yet women are still too often left out of peace
negotiations and post-conflict planning processes. We
must address this. The Nordic countries therefore
welcome the recent adoption of resolution 1889 (2009).
It takes steps towards ensuring sufficient funding for
women's needs in post-conflict situations and
addressing the participation of women in post-conflict
planning. These important steps reemphasize the
message of resolution 1325 (2000): A woman's place is
not in the margins, but in the centre of decision-making
forums.

To conclude, let me warmly congratulate
Assistant Secretary-General Judy Cheng-Hopkins on
her appointment as the head of the Peacebuilding
Support Office. A strong Support Office has a key role
in bringing the United Nations system together on
peacebuilding. At the same time, we welcome the
strong leadership of the Secretary-General in
advancing peacebuilding. I guarantee that the Nordic
countries will remain a committed partner in making
the Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture a success.

