Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): First of all, Sir, let me say how pleased my
delegation is to see you presiding over the work of the
Council today.

It has not been easy to arrive at a consensus text.
My country welcomes the fact that, after reviewing

 

several versions, the Security Council is now in a position
to vote on a draft resolution that, in essence, accents three
basic ideas. First, it recognizes the success of the
diplomatic initiative undertaken by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and unreservedly endorses the
Memorandum of Understanding signed by the Secretary-
General and by the Government of Iraq on 23 February
1998.

Secondly, it reflects the vital need to send a clear and
unequivocal message to the Baghdad regime concerning the
very severe consequences that the Security Council is
determined to consider and adopt under Chapter VII of the
Charter in the event that Iraq fails to comply with the terms
of the Memorandum of Understanding and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, especially resolution 687
(1991) of 3 April 1991.

Finally, it sets out the key concept of international
legality and the primacy of the provisions of the Charter
over any political considerations.

With respect to the first point, as early as 6 February
my country urged the Secretary-General in writing to use
his good offices and travel to Baghdad and negotiate with
the Iraqi authorities to reach a diplomatic solution to this
crisis. We unreservedly supported Mr. Annan's mission and
were against laying down parameters or terms of reference.
We said that the Secretary-General should simply travel to
Iraq and take action without any parameters or terms of
reference other than those set out in the Charter of the
United Nations. That was what the Security Council
decided; it was proper both legally and politically.

After listening to the views of all members of the
Security Council, the Secretary-General travelled to Iraq
and secured the signing of a Memorandum of
Understanding that fully and without cause for objection
conforms to the position of Costa Rica. The same reaction
has been expressed by all the other members of the
Security Council.

Nonetheless, we stated that in our view - and while
we acknowledged the position of the Legal Counsel on the
binding nature of the document under international law -
the Memorandum of Understanding ought to be formally
endorsed by the Security Council in order to make all its
terms consistent with previous relevant resolutions and with
that which is established by Chapter VII of the Charter,
with regard to actions "with respect to threats to the peace,
breaches of the peace, and acts of aggression", as the sole
and inalienable prerogative of the Security Council. Thus,
my country considers that this endorsement of the
Memorandum of Understanding is not only an appropriate
political decision that we endorse, but is also a required
under international law.

Given this essential element, Costa Rica subscribes
with no reservations of any kind to the Security Council's
clear and unequivocal message to Iraq on the grave and
severe consequences that would ensue in the event of
failure to abide by the agreed terms. Endorsing the
Memorandum of Understanding and bringing it into the
legal framework authorized by Chapter VII of the Charter
leaves no political or legal doubt whatsoever about the
seriousness and gravity of this warning by the Security
Council.

The draft resolution does not prejudge the actions of
the Security Council. It simply describes the scope of its
competence under the Charter and warns of the
consequences of a failure by the Government of Iraq to
comply - and does so in the precise terms of the
prerogatives and competences set out in Chapter VII of
the Charter.

In my country's View, these prerogatives and legal
competences are, in accordance with the Charter,
exclusively of the Security Council and cannot be
delegated by it. This is what the United Nations Charter
States. This is what all of us as States Members have
signed and ratified. These are the terms that bind Costa
Rica and the other 184 Members of the United Nations,
without exception, be it in the case of Iraq or in any other
case in which the Security Council is called upon to
decide between peace and war.

For this reason my country is extremely gratified
that we finally have before us a text in which this legality
and these essential principles of international law are
safeguarded and preserved. Thus, we should all sincerely
congratulate ourselves.

With all these key aspects resolved - and
convinced that the depth and vigour of the discussions in
informal consultations during these last few days has
strengthened the institution of the United Nations and the
international legality represented by the Charter - my
delegation will vote in favour of this draft resolution.

