Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Ijoin other delegations in expressing our
deepest condolences to the people and the Government
of the brotherly nation of Tanzania following the loss
of peacekeepers' lives, who were carrying out their
duty in maintaining peace and security in the brotherly
country of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Today the Security Council adopted resolution
2391 (2017), the second of its kind, on the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), which
demonstrates the importance that the Council accords
to the issue, given the very clear links between security
and stability in the Sahel and their effects on peace
and stability in neighbouring regions. In that regard, I
would like to emphasize the following.

The G-5 Sahel Joint Force, which began as
a voluntary and ambitious initiative launched by
countries of the region with the support of the African
Union, and was welcomed by the Security Council,
constitutes the best long-term option. It also plays a
complementary role alongside the French forces of
Operation Barkhane and those of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), aimed at re-establishing stability
and combating transnational crime and terrorism.

Secondly, the role of the Joint Force is not limited to
the borders of its member States. We must understand
that this is one of the most challenging fronts within
the context of the global effort to counter terrorism
today, which is a phenomenon that knows no borders or
obstacles. Groups of thugs are active in the Sahel, Libya,
the Lake Chad basin and other regions throughout
the world. Those groups work towards establishing a
continuum among themselves. It is therefore crucial
that the international community support the work and
sacrifices of the Joint Force at the military level within
the framework of a series of measures and programmes
so as to address the deep-rooted causes of the crisis in
the region. In that regard, we reiterate our support for
revitalizing the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel.

Thirdly, Egypt joined the consensus adoption of
resolution 2391 (2017) as part of our unconditional
support for the countries of the region and their
interests. Nevertheless, we would like to express our
disappointment with regard to the Council's failure
to address expectations relating to the manner, scope
and means of providing that support through the
mechanism so as to meet the genuine needs ofthe Force
with clear deadlines, thereby enabling it to begin its
deployment effectively.

Fourthly, it is important that the Secretariat take
all the necessary measures, in cooperation with
MINUSMA, to provide the means required for the Joint
Force to be able to discharge its mandate and to ensure
the security ofits staff, as well as so that MINUSMA can
employ its resources to provide the necessary support
to the Joint Force under the terms of the resolution.

Finally, Egypt believes that, in future, the Security
Council should periodically review the support provided
to the Joint Force, given the moral, political and legal
responsibility of the Security Council by virtue of the
Charter of the United Nations, by taking the necessary
steps to maintain international peace and security, to
review what has been done and to move forward by
giving messages of moral support. It is also necessary
to review the requirements in the future in order to
provide additional implementation mechanisms, in
particular sustainable and predictable funding so that
the Force can act as planned.

In conclusion, Egypt reaffirms that it will spare
no effort to support the brotherly nations in the region,
both within the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and bilaterally.

