Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
would like to commend the British presidency for
organizing today's meeting, and to thank Ambassador
Sacha Llorentty Soliz for his briefing and his leadership.

In these times the role of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which is to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their acquisition by non-State actors, is crucial, for
current events have shown us that with the threat of
terrorism, the risks of seeing non-State actors acquire
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons are very real.
That is why my delegation welcomed the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2016) conducted in 2016,
which is a significant element in our collective efforts to
combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The review provided an opportunity to focus on the
strategic choices of Member States and regional and
international organizations, as well as encouraging
civil society to take a more comprehensive, coordinated
and coherent approach to dealing with challenges to
international peace and security.

It is therefore important to monitor the implementation
by Member States of the concrete, practical and
appropriate steps in the light of the recommendations
resulting from the revision process and the new
resolution 2325 (2016). In this regard, strengthening
cooperation and the exchange of experience in the
areas of border control, surveillance of financial
flows and Internet networks, and legal assistance is
more important than ever. The same applies to the
development of an appropriate strategy to prevent and
combat the risk of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the wrong hands.

As far as Africa is concerned, the African Union
is to be commended for its political commitment to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by the
African States, as can be seen in its efforts to organize
several meetings on this topic. At the level of African
States themselves, the development of appropriate
legislation and the submission of implementation
reports are clearly continuing, but more needs to
be done, including the adoption of national legal
frameworks with respect to biological weapons and
effective internal control mechanisms in relation to
sensitive materials and technologies.

However, the already fruitful cooperation that exists
between the 1540 Committee and the African countries,
most of which have benefited from the Committee's
support in the implementation of the resolution, is to be
welcomed. It would therefore be useful to maintain this
cooperation in order to improve assistance procedures,
identify and analyse assistance needs, and pursue
dialogue on assistance with international, regional,
subregional organizations and, where appropriate, with
non-governmental organizations. It is also important
to encourage the training of national focal points.
Accordingly, my delegation invites Member States
with the resources to do so to provide all necessary
assistance to those countries that need it.

My delegation is of the view that for there to be
greater efficiency and synergies in our efforts, it is
important to set up a sustainable mechanism to ensure
better interaction and coordination between donors of
assistance and beneficiaries in order to avoid overlap
and duplication and identify the best practices in this
field in order to take advantage of them. The immediate
challenge is to better coordinate existing tools in order
to limit the possibility of non-State actors engaging in
proliferation, as the Chair of the Committee has rightly
pointed out. We also commend the important role of
civil society, academics and all those involved in the
fight against proliferation.

In conclusion, I reiterate the readiness and
unwavering commitment of Senegal to spare no effort
in the fight against the proliferation ofweapons of mass
destruction and, to this end, we are ready to cooperate
fully with the 1540 Committee and its Chairman,
Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty Soliz, to whom we
renew our wishes for complete success in his important
work at the head of the Committee.

