Mr. Lambrinidis (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).

In February 2015, the Security Council firmly
condemned the barbaric terrorist acts perpetrated
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), or
Daesh, and reiterated its determination to defeat that
terrorist group.

(spoke in English)

That is indeed my first point - condemnation.
We must unequivocally condemn, as we have done
in this Chamber, such acts of violence. Everyone
must do so: politicians, no matter what their political
beliefs; people, no matter what their ethnicity; and
religious leaders, no matter what their religion. That
condemnation pulls the rug from under the feet of those
who believe that they can be justified in using Violence
We have underlined the importance of preserving the
multi-ethnic, multi-religious and multi-confessional
character of the Syrian and Iraqi societies.

The European Union supports international efforts
and initiatives to address those issues and welcomes in
this regard today's ministerial-level meeting. I would
also extend our warm congratulations to France. We
are united in support for the work of the Council, in
particular its resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014),
and call on all countries to swiftly implement those
resolutions with full respect for human rights and the
rule of law.

That brings me to my second point. Respect
for human rights, the promotion of inclusive and
democratic societies, and support to vibrant civil
societies are the only way to guarantee full security and
stability for all people in the region. That obligation is
even greater when it comes to protecting the rights of
girls and women. Terrorists hate those things because
they deprive them of the monopoly of power. Human
rights give power to the powerless, and they do not want
that. If you want to fight terrorism, just look at what
they hate and support it. If you want to fight terrorism,
support human rights. If you want to fight terrorism,
educate girls. If you want to fight terrorism, empower
women.

My third point is that we have to counter extremist
discourse. Tackling terrorism means countering those
places where extremism resonates. This is a security
challenge, without a doubt, but we should not forget
its political, social and cultural dimensions. We must
redouble our efforts in reaching out to those who might
be vulnerable to the discourse of Violent extremism. If
we want to stop the cycle of violence and human rights
abuse, we must also address their root causes and work
further for the realization of all human rights.

My fourth point is that, in the Middle East, grave
violations committed against the civilian population
demand accountability, justice and an end to impunity.
The European Union welcomed the ninth report
of the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/28/69)
and condemns the crimes against humanity and
human rights violations and abuses detailed therein,
perpetrated in particular by the Al-Assad regime and
terrorist groups. We support the renewal of the mandate
of the Commission of Inquiry. We also support the
documentation of crimes in Syria to ensure that all
perpetrators are held accountable.

The European Union reiterates its call on the
Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court. We would also like to
take the opportunity to pay a special tribute to Syrian
human rights defenders, especially women human
rights defenders, for their tremendous commitment and
tireless efforts in documenting human rights violations.
The actions of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Daesh are horrific and cannot go unpunished, nor
will they.

My fifth point relates to the fundamental human
rights of the freedom of religion and belief. The
kidnapping ofmore than 200 Christian Assyrians in the
Hassakeh region of Syria at the end of February was
just the most recent in Daesh's long list ofbrutal actions
that may amount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity, according to the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
All of this is in complete contravention of international
human rights law and goes directly against the freedom
of religion and belief, which includes the right of
persons of all faiths to live and practise their religion
freely or not to believe, for that matter, without fear
of intolerance or attacks. In that context, the European
Union would like to express its deep appreciation for
the work done by Special Rapporteur on freedom of
religion or belief, Mr. Heiner Bielefeldt, including his
latest annual report (A/HRC/28/66), and by Mr. Zeid
Ra'ad Al Hussein, High Commissioner for Human
Rights, and his Office.

In terms of numbers, the first Victims of Daesh
were Sunni Muslims. We must not forget that. At the
same time, it is clear that Daesh poses a specific and
more deliberate threat to minorities in the region:
Christians, but also Yazidis, Shabak and other groups.
Daesh tries to brand theirs as a clash of civilizations,
and of course nothing could be further from the truth.
It is not some clash of civilizations that has resulted in
the terrorist atrocities; it is those terrorist atrocities that
are attempting to create a clash of civilizations among
us. We cannot allow that to happen. We will not. If we
fall into that trap, we will be falling into the hands of
the terrorists. That, of course, will not happen.

My sixth point is that we also denounce the
attacks on and destruction of world heritage sites
and the illicit trafficking in cultural properties. That
is why, on numerous occasions, we have expressed
our determination to contain and defeat Daesh and to
contribute as fully as possible, both at the individual
level of Member States and the collective level of the
European Union, to the efforts of the global coalition.

Finally, my last and seventh point is that military
action is essential, but not sufficient on its own. It is
necessary to address the underlying violence in Syria
and Iraq, which has given terrorist groups a foothold.
This is where the European Union strategy to fight
the scourge comes in. At the most recent meeting of
the Foreign Affairs Council, European Union Foreign
Ministers adopted a strategy outlining how the EU is
planning to counter the threat posed by ISIL and help
restore peace and security in Syria and Iraq. The EU
aims at a comprehensive effort to address the underlying
dynamics of the conflicts, through diplomacy and
support for political reforms, economic development
and reconciliation among various ethnic groups.

For the years 2015 and 2016, the European
Commission has allocated (51 billion to the implementation of the strategy. We will also follow
up on the outcome of the Washington, DC, Summit
on Countering Violent Extremism, in particular by
fostering cooperation. That includes education, by
engaging more with local communities, especially in
the Horn of Africa. We held our annual plenary session
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum Horn of Africa
Working Group, in Kampala on 17 to 20 March.

(spoke in French)

I would like to add a final word on lasting peace and
stability. We are engaged in in-depth discussions with
respect to the actions to be pursued in the post-2015
agenda. An agenda conveying genuine transformation
must address the importance of peace in society and the
elimination of violence. There can be no peace without
development and respect for human rights.

