Mr. Carmon (Israel): The Security Council is
convened this afternoon following a serious event that
took place early this morning local time, when a
convoy of six ships attempted to break the maritime
blockade off the coast of Gaza. Although portrayed in
the media as a humanitarian mission delivering aid to
Gaza, this flotilla was anything but a genuine
humanitarian-only mission. If it had indeed been a
humanitarian-only mission, the organizers would have
accepted weeks ago, during the planning stages for this
flotilla, the offer by the Israeli authorities to transfer
the aid to Gaza through the port of Ashdod, via the
existing overland crossings, in accordance with
established procedures.
Many States and organizations, including the
United Nations, are using those mechanisms on a daily
basis, as we have heard before. Much material and
merchandise enters Gaza daily through those
mechanisms. And I would like to stress that there is no
humanitarian crisis in Gaza. This Council heard, not
long ago, from the Secretary-General's representative
in the region, Mr. Serry, about positive developments
on this aspect. The flotilla's organizers not only
rejected this offer, but stated clearly that "this mission
is not about delivering humanitarian supplies, but
rather about breaking the Israeli siege", as Greta
Berlin, a flotilla spokesperson, told the media last
week.

What kind of humanitarian activists demand to
bypass the United Nations, the Red Cross and other
internationally recognized agencies? What kind of
peace activists use knives and clubs and fire from
weapons stolen from soldiers and other weapons to
attack soldiers who board a ship in accordance with
international law? What kind of humanitarian activists,
some with known terrorist histories, embrace Hamas, a
terrorist organization that openly shuns a two-State
solution and calls for Israel destruction, defying
conditions set by the international community and the
Quartet? The answer is clear. They are not peace
activists; they are not messengers of good will. They
cynically use the guise of humanitarian aid to send a
message of hate and to implement violence. That is
what we saw this morning.

Indeed, it is a sad day. It is a sad day because of
the results of this unwelcome provocation. Let me
remind the Council that a state of armed conflict exists
between Israel and the Hamas terrorist regime
controlling Gaza. Let me remind the Council that
rockets and mortars were still being launched by
Hamas and others towards southern Israel as recently
as a brief hour ago. That is the Gaza situation; that is
the situation of armed conflict that we have to endure
on a daily basis. Let me remind the council that Gaza is
occupied by terrorists that ousted the Palestinian
Authority in a violent coup, and that arms are
continuously being smuggled into the territory,
including by sea. Peace and security are being
threatened.

A maritime blockade is a legitimate and
recognized measure under international law that may
be implemented as part of an armed conflict at sea. A
blockade may be imposed at sea, including in

international waters. Let me stress that in this case,
Israel provided in due time not only information about
the existence of the blockade - as it is supposed to
do - but also appropriate notification to the relevant
Governments and to the organizers of the Gaza flotilla.
The organizers turned down Israel's repeated offers to
transfer the aid to Gaza because they had other plans.

Let me read out a quotation from a statement
made prior to the events by one of the main organizer:
"They [the Israelis] are going to have to stop us
forcefully". So said the leader of the IHH, one of the
primary organizers of the flotilla. Just prior to
departure, he added: "We are going to resist, and
resistance will win". Moreover, it should be noted that
the organizing group, Insani Yardim Vakfi (IHH) has a
radical anti-Western orientation. Alongside its
legitimate humanitarian activities, it supports radical
Islamic networks such as Hamas, and at least in the
past has even supported global jihad elements, such as
Al-Qaida.

Being members of a so-called humanitarian
mission, these champions of human rights also rejected
in the initial planning stage an Israeli request to ask
Hamas to allow the Red Cross to visit captured soldier
Gilad Shalit.

When it became clear that the protest flotilla
intended to violate the blockade despite the repeated
warnings, Israeli naval personnel boarded the vessels
and redirected them to Ashdod. Unfortunately, the
soldiers boarding one of the ships were attacked most
violently with life-threatening means. Live
ammunition, knives, clubs and others types of weapons
were used against soldiers of the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF). The intentions were clear: to lynch the Israeli
soldiers. This is definitively documented, and I am
sure - I hope - that the media will publish it. This
was intended to be a real lynching on the ships.

Without any doubt, the soldiers acted in self-
defence. According to reports, the unfortunate event
resulted in death and injuries to the protesters, as well
as grave injury to our soldiers. The seriously injured
were evacuated and are currently being treated at
Israeli hospitals. The IDF, as part of its standard
operating procedures, will conduct debriefing on the
matter that will shed more light on the occurrences we
witnessed today. The information will, of course, be
shared accordingly.

Let me be very clear - this was not a peaceful
protest. The IHH people on board one of the ships were
not humanitarian aid activists. The IDF operation was
not a military attack, as some have said. The operation
began as a preventive measure to counter illegal
breakage of the blockade. Any responsible Government
would act accordingly in similar circumstances. Let me
add that it is the responsibility of the organizers - the
provocateurs - some of whom are linked to terrorist
organizations.

The results of last night's events are tragic and
unfortunate, and Israel deeply regrets any lose of
innocent life. But it cannot compromise its security.
Nobody would. The full picture of the circumstances
that led to these consequences will continue, as I have
stated before, to unfold over the next few days.
However, it is important that, while assessing this
particular event, not to lose sight of the bigger picture.

Many here in the Council have mentioned
resolution 1860 (2009), and I would like to remind
members of the Council that that resolution addresses
10-38189
many aspects other than the humanitarian. Thus, we
cannot ignore the threat to peace and security posed by
Hamas, nor can we ignore the most basic necessity and
obligation of Israel to safeguard its security by
appropriate measures when threatened.

Let us not become diverted from the need to
continue advancing on the political track. While the
complicated situation in and around Gaza persists -
and today's incident is only one example of it - we
should continue to embrace, as has been mentioned, the
positive developments of the past few weeks so that we
and the Palestinian Authority can sit together for direct
talks for the benefit of our people and the region as a
whole.

