Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate the States that were recently
elected as non-permanent members of the Security
Council: the Arab Republic of Egypt, Japan, Senegal,
Ukraine and Uruguay. We are confident that they will
play an effective role in maintaining international peace
and security, pursuant to the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

I would also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country's accession to the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Herve Ladsous for his briefing on the report of
the Secretary-General on Darfur (S/2015/1027).

We do not agree with his briefing for three main
reasons - in particular, because of his interpretation
of developments in Jebel Marra and with regard to
cooperation with the Mission on the issuance of visas. I
will return to that point later.
The report of the Secretary-General states that

"[t]he level of fighting between the Government
forces and the armed movements was low during
the reporting period [and that t]he number of
intercommunal clashes over land and livestock also
decreased" (S/2105/1027, para. 2).

It also states that

"security measures adopted by State Governors
(Walis) contributed to the significant reduction in
the number of criminal incidents" (ibid).

In paragraph 3, the report states that during the
reporting period, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) received no
information on clashes between Government forces
and armed groups, with the exception of desperate
attempts by members of the Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid in East Jebel Marra.

The Security Council is well aware of the well-
known position held by the Abdul Wahid faction,
which continues to categorically reject any political
settlement. It has rejected all regional and international
appeals and mediation efforts made by the Joint Special
Envoy of the African Union and the United Nations.
Furthermore, in its resolutions, the Security Council
maintains that a political solution is the only way to end
the conflict. What, then, is the Council doing to stop
the Abdul Wahid faction? The mediators have chided
Abdul Wahid Al-Nour because he categorically refuses
and rejects all appeals made by the Council to reach a
political solution.

The Government of the Sudan has shown great
patience and wisdom by not unilaterally excluding the
Abdul Wahid faction from the ceasefire declaration
that was renewed by His Excellency the President of
the Republic, who has also offeed a series of guarantees
in an effort to convince the leaders of the armed groups
to join the national dialogue currently under way.
How did Abdul Wahid react to the unilateral ceasefire
announcement? Members of his faction launched a series
of attacks on the villages of Tawani and Rokona, east of
Jebel Marra. In addition, after attacking the markets in
those two villages, a group headed by a certain Jaffar
Toutou proceeded to establish checkpoints to levy taxes
on traders. On 1 January, faction forces cut offthe route
between Zalingei and Kourro, north of Jabel Marra.

What can the Government of the Sudan do?
Elements of the faction also carried out attacks on
patrols of the armed forces in the region of Rokoro that
left two soldiers injured. What can the Government's
armed forces do if the Abdul Wahid faction responds
to the ceasefire declaration by attacking our soldiers?
It is utterly unacceptable. Our armed forces are duty-
bound and must shoulder their responsibility to protect
civilians by extending State authority and restoring
security in the villages targeted by the Abdul Wahid
faction. The front lines of our armed forces - the
sixteenth infantry division - were able to restore
security and stability to East Jebel Marra.

With regard to the humanitarian situation in Darfur,
the report of the Secretary-General states that "with
the lull in armed confrontations, new displacements
were minimal during the reporting period" (ibid., para. 23). I should have liked Mr. Ladsous to highlight that
instead of putting forth his own reading of the facts.
During the reporting period, there was a very low level
of new displacement. The case reported in the region
of Mouli involved a tribal incident that began with the
discovery of the body of a herdsman on 9 January. The
local authorities responded swiftly on 10 January, but
unfortunately even the Prefect's entourage was attacked,
leaving a number of people dead and wounded. During
the attack, members of the rebel movement infiltrated
the ranks of the assailants.

As we have stated previously, tribal clashes in
Darfur are as old as Darfur itself. They have been
largely contained thanks to the ongoing efforts of the
Sudanese Government to strengthen the role of local
leadership in reconciliation and settlement. Resources
are at the heart of these clashes, and that has long
been the case in Darfur. The fact is such clashes can
be prevented only through development. Economic
recovery and reconstruction will enable the Sudanese
Government to complete its development projects in
order to promote stability in Darfur. That is why we
call on the international community to support the
Sudanese Government by lifting the coercive economic
sanctions that are hindering the completion of such
plans in Darfur and in building the infrastructure and
implementing the projects that are necessary to meet
the needs of the people of Darfur. The settlement of the
civil conflict in Darfur requires development, which
above all requires the lifting of sanctions and debt
forgiveness.
In raising the technical, administrative and
logistical issues concerning UNAMID in his briefing,
Mr. Ladsous overlooked the tripartite mechanism,
which includes representatives of the Sudanese
Government, the African Union and the United Nations
and is responsible for considering those issues. The
mechanism has made many recommendations over the
past four years and, as the subject of visas has been
addressed by those recommendations, we do not feel
the need to address it here. In conjunction with the
African Union, we have proposed that the mechanism
meet on 29 and 30 January. We are still awaiting
a response from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations with regard to that meeting. These facts
run counter to Mr. Ladsous' statement. We will also
make this statement available to all Council members.
However, in spite of the repeated calls of the Sudanese
Government to restart its activities, the mechanism has
stopped functioning.

In response to what the Under-Secretary-General
has just said, I would like to stress that during the most
recent period, the processing of the majority of visa
applications and customs clearances for the containers
has been accelerated. As of the most recent meeting on
that issue, which took place on 14 January, 179 out of a
total of 195 customs clearances had been issued for the
containers in question. As members know, the customs
procedures with regard to the containers in all States
are not the purview of a single ministry, but of several
different ministries and bodies. For our part, we opened
an auxiliary office in Port Sudan mandated with closely
monitoring all applications for customs procedures, but
at the request of UNAMID that office was closed. The
Government continues to call for its re-opening.

With regard to the issuance ofvisas, as shown in the
chart to be distributed, in October 2015 we received 151
visa applications. Of those, 141 visas were issued and
4 applications are still being considered. Thus, the visa
issuance rate in October was 93 per cent. In November,
we received 281 applications, of which 272 were
approved, which is an issuance rate of 96.79 per cent. In
December, we received 213 applications, of which 206
were approved. That is an issuance rate of96.7l per cent.
That is the reality with regard to the issuance of visas
during the reporting period. All of this demonstrates
the extent to which UNAMID is benefitting from the
cooperation of the Sudanese Government. We therefore
continue to assert that relaunching the joint mechanism
would enable us to resolve those problems together
instead of just continuing this sometimes pointless
debate.

In that connection, in accordance with paragraphs
26 and 27 of resolution 2228 (2015), which renewed
UNAMID's mandate last year, we reiterate the need for
the Joint Working Group responsible for UNAMID's
drawdown strategy to resume its meetings with a
view to implementing the provisions of that and other
pertinent resolutions in order to enable the Mission
to best discharge the tasks mandated to it. That is
especially important given that UNAMID is an African
Mission and, as an African country, it is very important
to the Sudan that the Mission be able to carry out its
tasks.

