Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Annadif for his very clear and objective
briefing. I would also like to welcome Foreign Minister
Drame to the Council. I look forward to hearing from
him in a few minutes' time.

Let me begin by joining others in offering my
sincere condolences on behalf of the United Kingdom
for the tragic deaths of those killed as a result of the
massacre in the Mopti regionjust a few days ago. I very
much agree with the Russian Ambassador when he said
that the perpetrators must be brought to justice. That
horrific attack highlights just how important it is for
the international community and the Government of
Mali to step up our collective efforts to help achieve
long-term peace and stability in the country.

The mandate renewal of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) offers an opportunity to make
progress towards that goal. I would like to highlight
three brief points in that regard.

First, this mandate renewal should be used to help
drive forward the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. That was very much
a focus of the Security Council's visit to Mali just a few
months ago. While I very much welcome the fact that we
have seen some progress since that visit - the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General mentioned
in particular the draft law establishing the northern
economic development zone and he also talked about
the progress on the training and reintegration of
opposition fighters - we regret that overall the pace
of implementation has slowed down in recent months,
in part owing to political developments. We must not
lose sight of the fact that there is still a lot of work to
do. The United Kingdom supports the call made by the
representative of France just now that those who impede
the implementation of the peace agreement should be
subject to sanctions by the Council.

This mandate renewal offers the chance to inject
new momentum into the process through the use of
ambitious benchmarks to be met by the Government
of Mali and signatory armed groups. From the United
Kingdom's perspective, those benchmarks should
include advancement on constitutional reform and
decentralization, security sector reform, the economic
development of northern Mali and, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Ambassador of South Africa mentioned, the meaningful
participation of women in the peace process.

Secondly, I agree with all previous speakers that
we have an opportunity now, with the mandate renewal,
to tackle the instability in central Mali that has caused
so many tragic deaths in recent months. Specifically,
there is a need for both MINUSMA and the Malian
Government to do more in the centre to restore State
authority and protect civilians. MINUSMA has a
unique role to play in the centre in using its good
offices to reduce inter-community tensions - tensions
that this most recent attack shows are currently all too
high. On the part of the Government, there really is
a need for a truly comprehensive political strategy to
deal with the situation in the centre in order to ensure
that its efforts are effective. From our perspective, a
comprehensive solution should include the disarming
of all armed actors, the restoration of peaceful relations
between communities and the revision of the integrated
security plan for the regions of the centre.

Thirdly, we recognize very much the challenging
circumstances in which MINUSMA is operating, and
the United Kingdom unequivocally condemns the
recent attacks against MINUSMA personnel on the
ground. To perform its mandate effectively in such
circumstances, MINUSMA will need to further adapt
to become a more flexible, agile and robust force, as
recommended in the Secretary-General's most recent
report (S/2019/454). The United Kingdom commends
the actions taken by the Mission leadership, including
the Force Commander, to do that already, and it
welcomes the increase in the tempo of operations in
recent months.

In conclusion, I think we should all recognize that
MINUSMA is cannot be a permanent solution in Mali,
but is rather a means to an end - a means to achieve
sustainable peace in Mali. We welcome the steps that
have been taken so far by the Government, other Malian
parties and MINUSMA to foster stability in Mali, but
we can see from the fact that large parts of the peace
agreement remain unimplemented and that security in
the centre is quickly deteriorating that more needs to
be done. This mandate renewal can catalyse progress
towards a more sustainable peace across Mali.

