The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Malaysia.

Ijoin other Security Council members in thanking
the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Nicholas Haysom, and Ambassador Tanin for their
briefings. My delegation would also like to take
this opportunity to express its appreciation to the
leadership and staff members of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
unstinting assistance to the Government and people of
Afghanistan.

Malaysia deplores and condemns the heinous
attack against the Afghan Parliament building earlier
today, responsibility for which has been claimed by the
Taliban. We offer our condolences and deepest sympathy
to the families and loved ones of those killed. Malaysia
would emphasize that the only way forward is through
peaceful political negotiations. Despite the attack, we
hope that Afghanistan will stay the course in finalizing
the formation of a National Unity Government based on
a power-sharing framework. From our own experience
of nation-building through power-sharing and social
transformation, we fully understand the importance of
mutual respect and inclusiveness in such matters.

Malaysia looks forward to having all parties
support the implementation of the agenda set by
President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah
Abdullah. It is therefore our hope that those efforts
will demonstrate the strong commitment of the Afghan
people and Government to an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned decade of transformation. Malaysia reiterates its
support for the Afghan Government's efforts to achieve
peace and reconciliation, and we are heartened by the
extensive engagement between President Ghani and his
local and regional interlocutors. We further welcome
the progress made in instituting electoral reforms and
urge the Government to remain steadfast in introducing
those and other reforms.

In our view, the sustained positive atmosphere in
the region has become a catalyst for a more open and
constructive discourse, and we call on all parties to
continue to support that Vital process. Key stakeholders
in the region should also intensify their efforts to
support and assist Afghanistan, including through more
substantive dialogues in such regional and multilateral
cooperation forums as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process.

While encouraged by the significant progress on
the political front, Malaysia notes that the security
situation remains precarious, as seen earlier today.
Malaysia joins other Council members in expressing
concern at the high number of civilian casualties in
the armed conflict, and we also strongly condemn the
deliberate targeting of civilians. It is deeply deplorable
that Afghan children continue to bear the brunt of the
Violent conflict in the country, either through being
caught in the crossfire or through being caught in
attacks with improvised explosive devices or contact
with explosive remnants of war. We call on all parties
undertaking ground engagements to comply with
international humanitarian law and commit to the
protection of civilians, including women and children.
In that regard, my delegation takes note of the Afghan
Government's progress report on its compliance with
the action plan it adopted pursuant to resolution 1612
(2005) on children and armed conflict.

We are also concerned by the large number of
foreign fighters present in Afghanistan, including those
associated with terrorist groups. My delegation further
notes that that presence has been a matter of great
concern for countries in the region as well, particularly
in Central Asia. While there may be an absence of hard
evidence to prove that certain terrorist and extremist
groups are operating in Afghanistan, that should not
prevent us from addressing the root causes of the
support for such groups.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
United Nations, the Security Council and the rest
of the international community should continue to
lend their support, encouragement and assistance to
Afghanistan through reconstruction and redevelopment
efforts designed to rebuild the country. As a friend and
partner of Afghanistan, Malaysia remains committed
to supporting the Afghan Government in its efforts to
achieve peace, security and stability.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of India.

