Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka (Uganda): Uganda
welcomes this opportunity to participate in the Security
Council's open debate on the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in his earlier report on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa. My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September, and on the initiative you have taken in
facilitating this open debate.

My delegation entirely shares the views expressed by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Kofi
Annan, and by the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), and we associate ourselves also with
the views expressed by the Permanent Representative of
Algeria on behalf of the current Chairman of the OAU.

As the guns fell silent on 10 July 1999, when six
heads of States parties to the conflict signed the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, which on 31 August 1999 was signed
also by the Congolese Rally for Democracy, the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo entered a new phase.
It was agreed that the former belligerents were now
peacemakers.

Allow me to reaffirm that Uganda's interests have
always been and still are in the need to ensure that there is
total security in all parts of Uganda, in the protection of the
lives and property of all Ugandans, and in the need to
ensure stability in the Great Lakes region. This is because,
as we have learned from bitter experience, instability in any
neighboring country adversely affects our own security and
economic development. It should be recalled that the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo had both
internal and external dimensions. All the signatories to the
Ceasefire Agreement recognized that a resolution of that
conflict would have to address all those dimensions.

Uganda's position on the crisis reflects its efforts to
pursue those interests. Uganda is and always has been
strongly committed to seeking regional solutions to the
problems of the Great Lakes region. I am therefore glad to
report that Uganda is satisfied with the Agreement signed
at Lusaka, because for the first time all the parties to the
conflict have agreed on the future of their subregion.
Having put their signatures on the Agreement, it is
incumbent upon all parties, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to resist the temptation to engage
in hostile and unnecessary propaganda.

I shall not repeat the five basic principles which
were agreed on as the basis for a durable peace.
Nevertheless, I need to point out that the signing of an
agreement is, as we know, merely the beginning of a long
process of peacemaking and peace-building.
Consequently, the political Committee, of which Uganda
is the Chair, as well as the Joint Military Commission,
both of which were established by the Agreement, agreed
to start their work. It is the view of the Uganda
Government, a view shared by all the Heads of the States
parties, that the peace process should not be held hostage
by the internal divisions and minor disagreements
between the RCD. Hence, the Committees, as I have said,
have started their work.
But until certain measures are implemented as a
matter of urgency, the peace Agreement remains fragile.
Financial and logistical support is urgently called for in
sufficient quantities to hold the peace together and to
prevent those who may wish to take up guns again from
doing so.

My delegation recognizes that the United Nations
has a key role to play in the implementation of this
Agreement. Uganda therefore welcomes the steps so far
taken by the Secretary-General in dispatching military and
civilian police to survey the situation. But, as I said
earlier, this is not enough, because the situation is still
fragile and demands much more than surveys. The
fundamental requirements for the implementation of the
Lusaka process are resources - financial and
logistical - to facilitate the deployment of peacekeepers
and the national dialogue which will lead to the process
of democratization in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Finally I would like to inform you, Sir, and the
Council that my Government is less than happy with
responses from the Security Council when it comes to
dealing with situations in Africa. We know the tragic
happenings in Rwanda. The contrasts between what went
on there and what happened in Kosovo and recently in
East Timor are too glaring. Many of us Africans see the
situation being worse than benign neglect.

This international body has the obligation to respond
to and treat all conflicts with equal urgency and concrete
actions of involvement. The Lusaka peace process
demands quick action. The Security Council must play its
role in safeguarding that peace, because delays in the
implementation of the essential requirements of the
Agreement can tempt the resumption of conflicts.

 

In conclusion, my delegation pays tribute to President
Chiluba of Zambia for his tireless efforts, which resulted in
the peace Agreement, which we are confident will pave the
way for peace in our region.

