Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): First, let
me take this opportunity to congratulate the President
and the Moroccan delegation on assuming the presidency
for the month of December, and also to warmly thank
Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri and his delegation
for India's excellent stewardship of the Council during
the course of the busy month of November. I should
also like to express particular appreciation to Special
Adviser Jamal Benomar for his briefing and for the
remarkable efforts and his tireless commitment since
his appointment to that position.

Much has been achieved in Yemen since the
signing of the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative on
23 November 2011. The international community's
focus, as demonstrated through the Secretary-
General's visit last month and the continued hard work
of Mr. Benomar, is paying dividends. The next crucial
steps will need to be to build on the reforms by the
Yemeni Government and to ensure a permanent lasting
change that fulfils people's basic rights to freedom and
democracy.

Yemen's immediate challenge is to begin
a transparent and inclusive National Dialogue
Conference. The United Kingdom welcomes President
Mansour's 13 November announcement of the imminent
start of the Conference and the allocation of seats to
the participants. The challenge now is threefold: first,
to ensure that the National Dialogue begins this year;
secondly, that it addresses all onemen's key challenges;
and thirdly, that it is representative of women, youth
and all political parties. Outcomes should benefit the
many, notjust the few. All those who want to play a part
in shaping Yemen's future must do so via the National
Dialogue Conference.

The appointment of a new electoral commission
and the subsequent preparations for the constitutional
referendum and 2014 elections are also central
to the transition process. Updating the voter list
must not be delayed. There is a genuine risk of the
Yemeni Government not being prepared in time for a
referendum next autumn, and that could cause delays to
full elections in early 2014. Such a scenario would have
significant implications for the political transition.

President Mansour has led a successful military
campaign in southern Yemen, regaining much of the
country lost to Al-Qaida. Despite those successes,
there has been a worrying increase in attacks targeting
military and political personnel. The United Kingdom
condemns such cowardly acts, which inevitably hurt
ordinary Yemenis. Those responsible must be sought
out and brought to justice.

We continue to see negative actions and hear
inflammatory statements from certain individuals,
whom Mr. Benomar called "spoilers", who wish to
derail the political transition and deny the Yemeni
people what is rightfully theirs: change, stability and a
prosperous future. The United Kingdom reminds those
intent on disrupting peaceful transition that the Security
Council will not hesitate to implement measures under
Article 41 to ensure that the transition remains on track,
as stated in resolution 2051 (2012). The Yemeni people
demand no less.

The 2013 United Nations humanitarian appeal
estimates that more than 12 million Yemenis - around
half the population - are now in acute need of
assistance. It is vital that the international community
enhance its support. The United Kingdom Government
recently launched a $56-million nutrition programme
and a $l3-million food security programme, which
will support 2 million Yemenis. In September, the
Yemeni Government received significant international
political and financial support in the shape of both the
Riyadh donors' conference and the Friends of Yemen
meeting held here in New York. This demonstrates
that the efforts made by President Mansour so far have
the strong support of the international community.
The United Kingdom Foreign Secretary, as Co-Chair,
said in conclusion at the Friends of Yemen ministerial
meeting in New York that the challenge now is to turn
those pledges into action, to ensure rapid and effective
implementation on the ground in Yemen so that the
pledges quickly start to make a difference to the Yemeni
people. That remains an urgent task.
In conclusion, let me echo what the Special Adviser
has just said about how far things have moved in Yemen
over the last year. We have progressed from a situation
of acute division, political stalemate, daily disturbances
and armed clashes to one in which a process of dialogue
and transition is now under way. There are formidable
challenges remaining, and the Special Adviser is right
to highlight them. They demand the Council's continued
close scrutiny. But they should not obscure the progress
that has been achieved. Yemen demonstrates the value
of the Security Council engaging actively in conflict
prevention and coming together in a united way in
support of the effective application of the Secretary-
General's good offices, notably through resolution
2051(2012), which lent strong support to the transition
process and made clear the Council's readiness to
consider further measures in response to actions aimed
at undermining the political transition.

Through the hard work, determination and
perseverance of President Mansour and his Government
of National Unity, backed by the United Nations, the
Friends of Yemen and the international community, a
more positive future for generations of Yemenis is now
within reach.

