Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would first like to make a brief opening
remark before reading out my statement.

We have noted that the invitees to today's meeting,
who were asked to give the Security Council an
assessment of what is happening in the Syrian city
of Aleppo, made their briefings, respectively, from
London, Geneva and Amman. Not a single of those
United Nations representatives spoke from Syria, which
proved an effective practice at the previous meeting (see S/PV.7817), where Ms. Elizabeth Hoff, representative
of the World Health Organization, provided the Council
with a great deal of information, as members will recall.

That is a very serious shortcoming, as United
Nations staff in Damascus were excluded from a
Security Council briefing. It is quite peculiar, in fact,
and reminds us of another such instance - when three
States members of the Council worked on a humanitarian
draft resolution without coordinating or consulting
with the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic. It is as
if here in the Chamber we were recreating surrealistic
scenes from the well-known novel by George Orwell
1984, which members will all be familiar with.

Once again, the representatives and the paymasters
of the Al-Nusra Front and affiliated terrorist groups
have rushed to convene an emergency meeting of the
Security Council in an attempt to rescue those terrorists
and provide them with moral and political support
against the backdrop of the victories by the Syrian
Arab Army and its allies as they counter terrorism in
Syria: the "moderate" terrorism and the "genetically
modified" terrorism.

Before I go into the details of my statement, I would
like to reaffirm to the representatives in the Council
of Abu Mohammad Al-Julani, who is half-brother to
Abu-Bakr Al-Baghdadi, head of the so-called Da'esh,
that their continued exploitation of Syrian blood and
the suffering of the Syrian people by portraying what is
happening in Syria as merely a humanitarian crisis will
not deter the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
from discharging its constitutional and legal obligation,
supported by our allies, to combat terrorism and save
Syrians from the scourge and practices of those groups,
in line with the principles of international law and
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, just like any other sovereign State Member
of the United Nations.

In that connection, I would like to read out for
those who exploit Syrian bloodshed an excerpt from a
letter written by Syrian children handed over yesterday
to the UNICEF Resident Representative in Damascus.
It appears that the representative of UNICEF, who is
joining us via video tele-conference, has not heard of
this letter, wherein children protest the terrorist attacks
that target schools in Aleppo with missiles:

"We want to go to our schools without fear of car
bombs. We want to play without being suddenly
shelled or bombarded. We want to live in safety,
happiness, joy and peace. The blood of our beloved
Syrian children who have been martyred in cities
throughout the country will not have been spilled
in vain - instead, it will serve as a beacon lighting
the way towards an imminent victory over the
forces of darkness and terrorism".

Again, that quotation is from a letter sent by the children
of Aleppo to UNICEF, which I would like to draw to the
attention of Mr. Cappelaere, as he is with us here today.

The representatives of the Al-Nusra Front inside
and outside the Security Council will not hear the
voices of those children. They will not hear the horrific
stories and testimonies of tens of thousands of our
people who were saved by the Syrian army and its allies
in Aleppo over the past few days, or about the practices
of the Al-Nusra Front and affiliated terrorist groups
during the past four years. These practices lead to
horrific suffering and tragedy, including selling them
humanitarian assistance and bread at prices beyond
their means. And it does not end with the recruitment
of their children, the enslavement of their women, or
their use as human shields. Those are all real stories
reported by the media 24/7 and have no connection to
the tales from One Thousand and One Nights that some
like to tell in the Council.

Incidentally, I would like to tell my colleague the
representative of the United States of America that
Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and all the other terrorist
groups that enslave women have issued a price list
for women to be sold in the slave market, with prices
determined by their age. It seems that, according to that
price scale, some of my female colleagues present in
the Chamber would, unfortunately, sell for only $40.
That is the worth of an enslaved woman - only $40.

The liberation of more than 80,000 inhabitants
in Aleppo, including tens of thousands of children,
was never part of the plans of the Ministries for
Foreign Affairs of France, the United States or the
United Kingdom, which have for years claimed that
they were defending those civilians. The call by their
Governments to impose sanctions on Russia and Syria,
after we had liberated our Syrian civilians, proves once
again that those Syrians were exploited by those who
sponsor terrorism, in order to protect the terrorists of
all stripes and to practice cheap political blackmail.
Today hundreds of civilians who had sought to move
from eastern to western Aleppo, in an attempt to flee
terrorist-held areas for those protected by the Syrian
army, were killed by the moderate or genetically
modified terrorists who are loved by the delegations of
the United Kingdom, France and the United States.

There is an elephant in the room that no one wishes
to acknowledge. As Mr. De Mistura and Mr. O'Brien
stated, non-State armed groups - they did not say
terrorists but used the expression "non-State armed
groups" - have prevented the civilians in eastern
Aleppo from leaving. This means that those terrorist
groups are using civilians as human shields.

The farce staged by some in the Council today
through misleading statements, in line with the positions
of their extortive Governments and their destructive
practices, will not eclipse the sunlight or the fact that
our people in certain neighbourhoods of Aleppo have
regained hope and the promise of life following their
liberation by the Syrian army and its allies, which have
provided them with all the necessary means to live
decently, including shelter, food and medicine, and they
thereby now enjoying safety and stability after having
suffered for more than four years.

The protagonists of this theatre of the absurd
who represent the Al-Nusra Front inside the Council
failed in denigrating the military achievement of the
liberation of civilians in Aleppo from terrorism. They
also failed in denigrating the image ofthe humanitarian
and relief efforts on behalf of those freed from the grip
of terrorism, as carried out by the Syrian Government
in cooperation with its allies as friends. In that regard,
I note that the Government of Syria today requested
that the Office of the Resident Representative of the
United Nations in Damascus - as Mr. De Mistura
and Mr. O'Brien are well aware - contribute to the
Government relief effort to alleviate the suffering of
tens of thousands of Syrians in Aleppo, and to use
the stocks contained in United Nations warehouses in
Aleppo and any other assistance that would help meet
the basic needs of our citizens. I would like to add that
the Resident Representative will actually go to Aleppo
because the Syrian Government has approved his visit
there, which is scheduled for tomorrow, Thursday. We
will then see what the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs can do.

I commend the efforts and achievements of the
friendly Russian delegation, which has supported Syria
not only in the war against terror, but in connection
with various aspects of humanitarian and relief work.
The latest instance was when President Vladimir
Putin instructed the Russian Ministries of Defence
and Emergency Situations to send mobile hospitals to
provide medical assistance to the residents of Aleppo
and surrounding areas. I emphasize that those are
real field hospitals, and not mere studios producing
fictitious stories of the so-called white-helmeted heroes
founded by British intelligence James Le Mesurier, who
is apparently of French ancestry, the same nationality
as the person who called for this meeting.

It is time for the curtain to fall on this theatre of the
absurd, which has led to the unprecedented spread of
terrorism and a state of panic in world public opinion,
as this terror has reached every part of the globe.
These States need to realize that terrorism cannot be
used as a tool to turn Aleppo into another Kandahar.
That will not happen, not even in their wildest
dreams - or nightmares.

Itis unfortunate thatthe realm of such trivialpolitical

practice is not limited to the Governments of the States
Members of the United Nations, but actually includes
some senior Secretariat officials who have described
the fate of the tens of thousands of civilians saved by
the Syrian army and its allies from the grip of terrorism
as being unknown and their safety undetermined. It is
as though they are hastening to support the terrorists
and sending one message after another: "Continue with
your moderate terrorism, and we will whitewash your
record in the Security Council".

It has become a dangerous fait accompli that some in
the Security Council have shirked their responsibilities
to combat terrorism and maintain international peace
and security, and have turned the Council into a theatre
for political extortion and polarization, as it tackles
the terrorist war against Syria, to the point where
those States have actually obstructed the inclusion of
terrorist groups in the Council's lists of such groups.
As the Council knows, the latest example of that was
the refusal by the United States, France and Britain to
include Jaysh-e-Mohammed and Ahrar Al-Sham on
those lists.
They have also shirked their responsibility for
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2253 (2015). They
look the other way when other countries support
terrorist groups by providing them with unlimited
media exposure and financial and logistical support, in
addition to takfiri/Wahhabi/jihadi fatwas and opening
up borders to foreign terrorist fighters and weapons. All
this is provided by the Al-Saud regime, the godfather of
global terrorism; by the regime of Erdogan - who is
under the illusion that he is the sultan ofhis time - which
is the real sponsor of the global "Muslim brotherhood"
organization; and by the Al-Thani regime in Qatar,
the main financier and sponsor of the Al-Nusra Front,
whose Minister for Foreign Affairs confirmed two
days ago, in a statement to Reuters, that its sheikhdom
would continue to provide support for, and arms to, the
terrorists in Syria even if the incoming United States
Administration were to cut off its support. I conclude,
obviously, with the regime of Hasaballah XIV. I will
give a prize to anyone who knows who that is.

This is also in keeping with Israel's destructive role,
as it provides support to terrorist organizations in the
area of separation and the environs ofthe city ofDara'a,
in particular the terrorist Al-Nusra Front. In that regard,
I would like to refer to the Israeli aggression that took
place last night, which was not mentioned by any of the
briefers today. There was an Israeli attack late last night
on Al-Sabboura in western rural Damascus. Israeli war
planes fired two missiles from Lebanese airspace - a
desperate attempt by the Israeli occupation to raise the
morale of takfiri terrorist organizations, which are
collapsing following heavy losses in many areas, in
particular in the western rural areas of Damascus.

In conclusion, I again call on the fainthearted in the
Security Council who continue to sympathize with the
genetically modified/moderate terrorists to take back
the barbaric garbage that they have exported to us over
the past five years. If they want them, they should care
for them by setting up self-governing areas in their own
cities in Europe, America and elsewhere. Take them
if you want them. Take the Al-Nusra Front. Take its
members. Give them entry visas and residency permits.
They would be good terrorists in their countries.

My Government remains committed to its policy
of balancing the priority of fighting terrorism, as
the main threat to security and stability throughout
Syria, on the one hand, and the pursuit of a Syrian-
led political solution based on intra-Syrian dialogue,
without any intervention or preconditions. Hence, the
Syrian Government is still waiting for an invitation
from Mr. De Mistura to resume the Syrian dialogue
that he suspended in May.

