Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over this open debate.
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General ad
interim Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing this morning.

We meet today for the first Middle East debate
of 2015. On 30 December, in its last vote of 2014
(see S/PV.7354), the Council was divided on a draft
parameters resolution (see S/2014/9l6) on the Middle
East peace process. As I said on that occasion in my
explanation of vote, while we agreed with much of the
text, which reflected long-standing United Kingdom
and European Union positions, we did not agree with
some elements of the text and were disappointed
that there were no proper negotiations of it. Despite
those divisions, the Council shares the same core
commitments to a negotiated settlement that would
lead to a safe and secure Israel living alongside a viable
and sovereign Palestinian State, based on 1967 borders,
with agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital
of both States, and ajust, fair and agreed settlement for
refugees.

Sadly, in 2014 the prospects for a two-State solution
moved backwards rather than forwards. We believe that
in 2015 the Security Council should play a meaningful
role in promoting a negotiated two-State solution. In
doing so, we must draw on the lessons of last year.

First, Israel and the Palestinian Authority must
commit to resuming talks to allow for the political
changes necessary to prevent a return to conflict. No one
can fault the energy and commitment of United States
mediation efforts in 2014, but courage, determination
and bold leadership are necessary on both the Israeli
and Palestinian sides to make the hard decisions and
compromises necessary to reach a peaceful, negotiated
settlement. The United Kingdom stands ready to support
the efforts of international partners - including the
United States, the European Union and those in the
region - to encourage and assist the parties.

Secondly, all parties need to avoid taking steps
that could further damage the prospects for resuming
meaningful talks. We are deeply concerned by Israel's
decision to freeze the transfer of tax revenues to the
Palestinian Authority. That is contrary to the 1994 Paris
Protocol and to Israel's obligations as an occupying
Power. It risks undermining the financial stability of
the Palestinian Authority and it could have serious
implications for the viability of a two-State solution.
We urge Israel to revoke that decision and to refrain
from taking any further punitive action, including
settlement announcements.

We note the Secretary-General's communication
that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court will enter into force for the Palestinians on
1 April. Our priority remains the achievement of a
two-State solution, and we continue to believe that the
best way to achieve that in reality and on the ground is
through negotiations.

Thirdly, we must not forget Gaza. We welcome
the positive steps taken by United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process Robert
Serry to facilitate the import and use of construction
materials to rebuild Gaza. But demand is not being
adequately met and more needs to be done to address the
humanitarian situation and kick-start Gaza's recovery.
Fourthly, we remain open to a first-ever Security
Council resolution on the parameters of a two-State
solution that would command full Council support. We
judge that it is possible, as long as sufficient time is
allowed for proper negotiation.

In Syria, we are approaching four years of brutal
conflict. Well over 200,000 people have now been
killed. The majority of deaths have resulted from the
indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas by the Syrian
regime. The repeated use of chlorine as a chemical
weapon in northern Syria and the consistent reports of
witnesses of the presence of helicopters at the times of
the attacks leave little doubt as to the Al-Assad regime's
culpability. In December 2014 alone, there were at least
nine separate reported uses of chemical weapons by
the regime. The Security Council needs to act on those
reports. The ongoing brutality of the Al-Assad regime
and its refusal to engage in a meaningful political
process continue to drive the conflict and strengthen
extremists such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant.

The United Kingdom welcomes the timely
adoption of resolution 2191 (2014), which will allow
humanitarian assistance to continue to be delivered
in hard to reach areas within Syria, avoiding the
deliberate delaying tactics that prevent crossed-line
humanitarian aid delivery from regime held territory.
Even last Wednesday - which, according to the Syrian
Observatory for Human Rights, was the first day for
more than three years when no one was reported killed
by military action - six people died as a result of
severe weather conditions and lack of humanitarian
relief. We will continue to support the development
of United Nations Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura's
proposals for a freeze in Aleppo to reduce the violence.

We welcome the recent election of Syrian National
Coalition President Khaled Khoja and encourage him to
maximize the opportunity presented by the Egyptian-
sponsored meetings later this month, to further unite
the Syrian opposition to speak with one voice against
the twin evils of the tyranny of the Al-Assad regime
and extremism.

New energy is needed on the political track. The
Moscow conference can be an element of that, but if
it is to be successful we will need a broader initiative
with United Nations backing and Security Council
engagement. We encourage Russia to use its influence
with the regime to help bring that about. This must be
the year in which a political process brings an end to
the Syrian conflict.
