Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to congratulate Brazil on assuming this month's
presidency of the Security Council, as well as the new
members on their election. I take this opportunity to
express our gratitude and firm commitment to
cooperating with all of them. We acknowledge the wise
decision to convene this debate on interdependence
between security and development for consideration by
Member States, both as a contribution to this topic and
as a gesture of transparency in the working methods of
the Security Council.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Ms. Cliffe of the World Bank for their statements.

The fast-paced transformation of communications
over the past few decades has created a new reality for
the coexistence and interrelationship of the people in
the world in which we live. Nothing is outside of
knowledge, and there are no limitations of distance or
ignorance when we can obtain, in mere seconds,
information on events taking place on the far side of
the planet. So graphic and instantaneous is the
transmission of information that there are no isolated
nations or peoples who might feel themselves
imprisoned by the confining geography of their borders
when those borders extend as far as, or should we say
as close to, the most distant regions of the world.

Our peoples today can compare and contrast the
realities of our nations in an instant solely by observing
their surroundings and beyond. The limitations of scant
development, compared to the comforts enjoyed by the
more fortunate countries, make national deficiencies,
injustices, shortages and gaps apparent with crude
intensity and an increased sense of the enormous gulf
of inequality that separates us.

Recognizing with crystal clarity what others have
achieved, and what underdevelopment denies, deepens
dissatisfaction and triggers a rebellion of spirit among
those who lack in their lives what others have in
overabundance. No one can feel resignation in the
presence of these terrible differences. I am speaking of
those who have been marginalized from the blessings
of development and have no access to health, education
or other opportunities for individual and collective
advancement. The sense of powerlessness to achieve a
decent standard of living - a right due to the vast
multitudes who, in different latitudes of the Earth,
subsist in the most precarious economic and social
conditions - is undeniably a latent source of conflict.

I ramble on about these concepts precisely
because I come from a corner of the world where such
conspicuous and painful conditions of vulnerability can
be found. We can testify to the threats posed to internal
peace, in the smallest context, or to world peace, in a
more universal perspective, by the continued
exacerbation of these distressing circumstances and
deep-rooted causes that breed discontent and create
flash points for conflict. However, just as I am not
indifferent to those evils, I can at the same time attest
to the great benefit that accrues to domestic peace from
the enthusiastic provision of assistance to those who
require a helping hand to escape the invisibility of their
pathetic realities.

Honduras has been hard hit by the appalling
violence of discord leading to conflict and by Mother
Nature's fatal and destructive blows. My country has
overcome difficult times with diligence and enormous
faith, assisted by the helping hands of good friends to
whom we are infinitely grateful. By closing the
distance between need and abundance, all resources
invested in development and in providing opportunities
to those who see their opportunities to advance and
succeed truncated are a contribution to international
peace and security.

The financing and cooperation that are required
in the continual struggle for well-being should not be
denied to the people of any nation. Indeed, we need
reform to ensure that all those resources that are
wasted, funds that are squandered in large amounts,
and money that is spent on superfluous things when
essentials are lacking are made available to
development, with an emphasis on the most vulnerable
and fragile sectors of our communities, in order to
prevent the deterioration of our ecosystems. That
would make the greatest contribution to peace in and
among nations and to global security.

With respect to the question underlying the topic
we are addressing, what can the delegations of this
world Organization do to contribute to that end? We
respectfully suggest that a taskforce be created among
us, with sufficient power to identify the existence and
provenance of resources, and to recommend their
reallocation once it has been concluded that they are
being poorly used. Impatience causes anxiety, just as
the possibility of change gives cause for hope. Our
peoples are eager for solutions that will improve their
fate and brighten their future. It is imperative to defuse
the outbreaks of impatience and convert them into
sources of hope.

