Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing. The Dominican Republic remains concerned about the humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. At the outset, we reiterate our regret at having been unable to achieve the complete renewal of the cross- border mechanism whereby millions of people receive food and health assistance. We reiterate that every humanitarian decision, in this and any other context, must be based solely on the needs of the population. Despite the urgent needs, most regrettably humanitarian action in the country continues to be politicized and apportioning blame seems to be the priority. That only serves to undermine the real capacity of the international community to fulfil its moral obligation to provide for and meet those needs in a constructive climate. It should be recalled that just as sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity are fundamental international principles, so too is the responsibility of States to protect their populations, not to cause suffering and to safeguard their livelihoods and well-being. In north-western Syria, the ongoing hostilities are creating an atmosphere of insecurity for the civilian population, forcing them to leave their homes, without possessions, in search of protection and access to basic services. Unfortunately, not everyone has that possibility. Many remain in tents or makeshift facilities in a situation of complete helplessness. What would we say if we suddenly found ourselves facing one of those displaced by violence? Would we tell them that what we are doing is necessary to ensure their protection? From any perspective, what is happening in north- west Syria is clearly a testament to the indifference and inability of all parties, directly and indirectly involved in this conflict, to take concrete measures to protect the civilian population. It is precisely for such situations that international humanitarian law exists. It exists to help parties to protect the life and dignity of the population. The flagrant violations of international humanitarian law and the conventions on children, the disabled and human rights have turned the humanitarian situation in Syria into turmoil, in which the most affected are women and children. Not only have they paid the highest price in this conflict, but also we are forcing them to lose faith in organizations such as the United Nations, which is called upon to bring about a world of peace and prosperity for all, based on the rule of law. Calls for restraint, respect for ceasefire agreements and compliance with the laws of war seem to be falling on deaf ears. Despite their admirable resilience, the Syrian people cannot continue to be subjected to the levels of violence that still prevail. That is why we reiterate that only a political solution based on resolution 2254 (2015) and the genuine political will of all sides will make it possible to change, once and for all, the trajectory of this horrific conflict, which we believe must begin with the following measures. First, there must be an immediate cessation of hostilities and an assessment of the real impact of the partial renewal of the cross-border mechanism and the new reality on the ground needs to be taken into account. Secondly, in the same context, it is essential to ensure safe, ongoing and unhindered humanitarian access for all of Syria, particularly for the almost 400,000 newly displaced persons. The fate of those people is in the hands of us all. Finally, the Dominican Republic reiterates its position that there is no justification for attacks on hospitals, schools and other civilian infrastructure and that no solution other than a political one can put an end to this conflict in order for Syria to follow the path of peace, prosperity and development.
