I am pleased to open this Security Council meeting on peacekeeping, with the participation of some Heads of military components of peacekeeping operations. I will be brief, as the purpose of this meeting is primarily to enable the Security Council to benefit from the experience and analysis of the Heads of military components regarding their efforts to implement the mandates entrusted to them. This briefing has become a yearly occasion, held in June, and even though the challenges related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have led us to postpone the traditional Heads of Military Components Conference, we welcome this continued opportunity for some of our Force Commanders to share their insights with the Security Council. As the world faces the challenges of COVID-19, so does peacekeeping. A few days ago, we marked the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers and paid tribute to the women and men who serve in peace operations across the globe. Over the past few months, these peacekeepers - civilian, police and military - have all shown their dedication and commitment as they continue to carry out their mandates in the best way possible given the constraints imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic. We also honoured the memory of those who made the ultimate sacrifice while serving under the Blue Flag. On that day, we were saddened by the passing, for the first time, of two of our colleagues from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) due to COVID-19. Now more than ever, we pay tribute to, and express our gratitude for, their sacrifice in the service of peace. Over the past few months, peacekeeping operations have shown their capacity to adapt to the new context imposed by this pandemic. Our response has been guided by four main objectives: first, protecting our personnel and their capacity to continue critical operations; secondly, containing and mitigating the spread of COVID-19; thirdly, supporting national authorities in their response; and, fourthly, protecting vulnerable communities, while delivering on mandate implementation. Council members will shortly hear about these different dimensions from the Force Commander of MINUSMA, Lieutenant General Dennis Gyllensporre; the Force Commander of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, Lieutenant General Shailesh Tinaikar; and the Deputy Force Commander of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, Brigadier General Maureen O'Brien. Each of these military components have taken appropriate measures and have adapted in their own way, taking into account the contexts in which they operate and the needs and priorities on the ground. However, they all have done that with the same commitment to preventing the spread of COVID-19 and to continuing to carry out their vital peace and security work, from supporting a political process to observing a ceasefire and from protecting civilians to supporting capacity-building and national authorities. In that spirit, the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative continues to guide us as the organizing framework for strengthening United Nations peacekeeping. In the light of the pandemic, we have reprioritized activities to ensure a focus on specific objectives on which we can, and should, deliver within the next few months. We are also pursuing the implementation of the force adaptation plans within MINUSMA and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as they are indispensable to our operational effectiveness and an integral part of A4P. I would like to thank the three Force Commanders attending this meeting for their service under the Blue Flag and, through them, all their colleagues, as well as the women and men who serve in our military components.
