The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her important briefing to the Security Council and
for the clear and detailed information provided in the
report, particularly the details on the new cases and
the relevant arrest warrants. As Vice-President of the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of
the ICC, I am particularly conscious of the delicate
task that she has to discharge. Under Ms. Bensouda's
determined guidance, the Office of the Prosecutor of
the ICC has made progress in many different areas, and
I would like to extend to her our strong appreciation
and full support.

The situation in Libya was unanimously referred
to the International Criminal Court by the Council
through resolution 1970 (2011). We are pleased to see
that the Prosecutor has made it one of the priorities
of her Office, with continuous attention to the crimes
that are committed in the country. We believe that the
activity of the Court can bring positive developments,
particularly if the Council remains united and
committed to supporting Libya and helps to ensure that
justice is done in a fair and impartial manner. There
must no be impunity for war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in Libya. Perpetrators must be
brought tojustice. All pending arrest warrants issued by
the Court must be executed. It is also in the interest of
those accused of crimes to surrender to the jurisdiction
of the Court and to receive a fair trial.

The principle of complementarity entails that the
Court is a court oflast resort. The ICC is ready to leave
cases to domestic authorities, but it is incumbent on
domestic authorities to comply with the provisions of
the Statute of the Court. There must be investigations
and persecutions. There must be a constant flow of
information with the Court. When the Court determines
that a case cannot be tried at the national level, domestic
authorities are under an obligation to comply with the
request of the Court.

In that respect, we welcome the positive and
constructive cooperation of the Libyan authorities
with the Office of the Prosecutor. At the same time,
we encourage all Libyans to cooperate with the Court
in all ongoing investigations. Italy will continue to
support the Office of the Prosecutor in its sensitive
work in all possible ways. There must be no place for
impunity, as accountability is crucial to reconciliation
and stabilization efforts.

We are pleased to learn that the report refers to
the good cooperation that the Office of the Prosecutor
has had with the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and with the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ghassan Salame. We also wish
to thank Ms. Bensouda for the information about the
investigation into the allegation of crimes against
migrants. Italy remains concerned about respect for
human rights in Libyan prisons and recalls existing
international obligations, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

We deplore the fact that insecurity in Libya has
been hampering the Court in carrying out some
investigations in the field. However, we are hopeful
that improvements can change the state of affairs and
create conditions conducive to allowing the Prosecutor
to visit Libyan territory. In that respect, let me reiterate
the need for a political solution to the crisis in Libya
under the framework of the Libyan Political Agreement.
Italy supports the efforts of the United Nations and the
action plan set out by Ghassan Salame to that end, and
continues to engage with the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord, led by Prime Minister
Serraj, to help it to address persistent challenges in
the country.

We note with extreme concern the increasing
level of Violence registered on the ground in the past
few weeks. We condemn in the strongest terms recent
episodes such as the bombing in Derna and the killing
of 36 men in Al-Abyar, near Benghazi. They are
particularly worrisome in a phase in which the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to give new impetus to the political process are gaining
traction. We therefore call on all Libyans to unite and to
work together in support of the political reconciliation
process, as laid out by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Salame in his action plan.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that we believe that
the Council should adopt the most structured approach
in dealing with international criminal justice issues. In
that regard, as the Council knows, we shall continue to
consult with Member States to find solutions in favour
of broader discussions on the role of international
criminal justice and accountability for international
crimes in the activities of the Council. Any solution
that would enable such a discussion would be a step
forward. Justice and accountability need to become an
integral part of the strategy and of the preventive action
of the Council.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.

