Mr. Feltman: Since we last met to discuss Ukraine
(S/PV.7l65), on Tuesday, 29 April, although a number
of areas in the country remain calm, we have seen a
further severe deterioration of the situation in parts of
eastern and southern Ukraine. Recent developments
in those areas threaten a further destabilization of the
country and the region, as well as the unity of Ukraine
itself.

In more than a dozen cities in Donetsk oblast and
Luhansk, an increasing number of buildings are being
held by armed groups. Of most immediate concern is
the situation in the eastern city of Sloviansk. That city
of 125,000 people in Donetsk oblast has been occupied
by armed insurgents since 12 April. According to
Ukraine's Ministry of Defence, during the ongoing
operations by the authorities two helicopters were
shot down overnight, with at least one pilot killed. A
number of other casualties have also been reported on
the ground on both sides. The total number cannot be
completely verified at this stage. The acting Minister
of the Interior has stated that a number of roadblocks
around the city have been removed, but from the media
we understand that tense standoffs continue in parts of
and around the city.

At the same time, the seven military monitors
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and accompanying Ukrainian military
staff being held by gunmen in Sloviansk remain in
detention, despite repeated calls for their release. To
that end, we understand that Russian President Putin
dispatched a special presidential envoy to assist in
the freeing of the hostages. I reiterate the Secretary-
General's call to those responsible for their abduction
to release them immediately, unconditionally and
unharmed.

The crisis has also escalated in the Donetsk oblast
and in Donetsk itself, where yesterday, on 1 May, self-
declared separatists seized the regional prosecutor's
office. There have also been reports that the Ukrainian
authorities have banned Russian passenger airplanes
from flying to Donetsk and Kharkiv. We have also read
reports of clashes during a pro-unity demonstration in
the southern city of Odessa.

I would like to share with the Council key elements
of the Secretary-General's statement that is being
issued at the same time that we are meeting:

"The Secretary-General reiterates his grave
concern over the deteriorating situation in regions
of east and south Ukraine. Escalating violence and
reported further loss oflife in the city of Sloviansk
today is a stark reminder of how dangerous
the situation has become. Expansion of militia
activities and ongoing seizures of public buildings
by unidentified armed groups undercut the letter
and spirit of the 17 April Geneva statement. He
therefore urges all sides to exercise maximum
restraint and appeals to those with grievances
to voice them peacefully, so as to avoid more
bloodshed. He calls for all parties to respect fully
Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

"The Secretary-General once again calls on
those responsible for the capture and detention
of OSCE military monitors and accompanying
Ukrainian staff to release them immediately,
unconditionally and unharmed.

"The Secretary-General stresses that a
diplomatic solution is the only way out of this crisis
and that all sides must redouble their efforts to
revive the spirit of compromise displayed during
the 17 April Geneva talks."

Finally, as I informed the Council in my last
briefing, given the deteriorating situation in the
country, the Secretary-General has asked me to go back
to Kyiv next week. I will also be going to Moscow. In
both cities, I will continue to reiterate the Secretary-
General's message of restraint and immediate return
to dialogue, including direct and constructive dialogue
between Moscow and Kyiv.

