Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): First of all, may I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Wapakhabulo, Third Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Uganda.

Since I am taking the floor for the first time in a
public meeting of the Council under your presidency,
Sir, I would like to join previous speakers in reiterating
to you my delegation's sincere congratulations and
expressing Cameroon's great satisfaction at seeing
China succeed us at the head of the Security Council.
China is a great country and a reliable friend with
which we have excellent and varied ties of friendship
and cooperation. I can pledge our full cooperation
during your term of office, which I hope will be
particularly fruitful. May I also express our gratitude to
all those delegations that have spoken such kind words
about Cameroon; I thank them for their encouragement
and appreciation of our presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October.

Two weeks ago, we were saying here, during a
public meeting on Central Africa, that our region has
enormous potential and immense soil and subsoil
wealth. We went on to point out that, because of that
wealth, it has unfortunately been the object of every
kind of greed, becoming thereby the African region
with the most conflicts.

One of the merits of the final report
(S/2002/1146) of Ambassador Mahmoud Kassem and
his team is that it points to one of the causes - if not
the principal cause - of the conflict that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has endured for
several years. In truth, one of the causes for the
Congo's instability since its independence is that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is sick - sick from
its mineral riches. It is their victim.

Beyond the responsibilities of certain parties, the
Panel's report unquestionably establishes that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has been plundered
and exploited like no other country, to the benefit of
the many-sided conflict whose theatre it remains. The
report - which was submitted for our consideration
and attests to the effectiveness of the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by various parties to conflicts
under way in the Great Lakes subregion - gives rise to
the most serious concern on the part of my delegation.
We express that concern both because of the context in
which the report is issued and because of its
conclusions, whose seriousness will affect peace-
building in the subregion.

With regard to the context, the international
community cannot fail to welcome the beginning of the
withdrawal of foreign troops from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is being
carried out in the interests of peace and to re-establish
the sovereignty of the Congolese Government over all
its territory. In that regard, Cameroon would like once
again to welcome the progress achieved in such an
important area. We remain confident in the attainment
of that objective, each of the parties having affirmed
their good faith and their commitment to bring it about.

On the domestic level, we are witnessing an
acceleration of the inter-Congolese dialogue, whose
conclusion would complete the Sun City process with
the international community's resolute support.

Those positive and promising developments, if
they take into useful account the conclusions of the
report of the Panel of Experts, should be swiftly
consolidated and should guarantee the durable
restoration of peace and security to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to the subregion.

In its positive and prescriptive dimension, the
report encourages negotiation by the subregional actors
of new economic trade and integration agreements,
based on a new consensus that respects the sovereignty
of all States. To that end, an international conference of
the Great Lakes countries - which has been called for
earnestly by the subregion's heads of State and which
Cameroon has advocated since 1996 - could usefully
serve as a political pillar for such an initiative and
could enable us to break the vicious circle of the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and of the continuation of
hostilities on the ground.

My delegation's view is that, beyond all the
sensibilities that might be aroused by the report
submitted to the Council by Ambassador Kassem, only
the reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, with its political, economic and social
infrastructures, is at stake. The international
community must therefore encourage and assist that
country in order to enable it to re-establish its authority
over all its territory and to fully enjoy the riches of its
soil and subsoil, in the interests of its own people. In
that context, the reorganization of the extraction and
commercialization sectors of the mining sector in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will be essential for
the realization of those objectives.

Moreover, the strengthening of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and of
its military and logistical components should enable it
to act to take better control over Congolese territory, in
particular the north-east of the country, the theatre of
recurrent hostilities. My country reaffirms its support
for and hopes that MONUC's strengthening will take
place quickly, in the spirit of the conclusions of the
Security Council's public meeting of 22 October 2002,
devoted to relations between the United Nations and
the States of the Economic Community of Central
African States.

My delegation appeals to the countries of transit
and destination of the natural wealth exploited illegally
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to finally take
adequate measures to control and even, if necessary, to
interdict such activities. In that context, the Kimberly
Process related to the trade in conflict diamonds could,
despite its drawbacks, be an excellent basis for work
and reference. My country supports that Process and
the Panel's recommendation to all States to cooperate
fully.

Finally, in respect for Congolese sovereignty,
Cameroon supports the recommendation of the Panel of
Experts that the Security Council create a monitoring
body charged with following up on activities related to
the exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

