Mr. Fedotov: I thank you, Sir, for inviting me to
this meeting of the Security Council to take part in this
important discussion on piracy off the coast of
Somalia. I hope that my statement will complement
Mr. Pascoe's very clear presentation of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/556).

In the past two years, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), has developed a
counter-piracy programme to assist regional countries
in prosecuting a significant number of pirates. With the
support of the international community, over
700 suspected and convicted pirates are now in
detention in 12 countries; more than half of these are in
Somalia itself.

Kenya, which has taken the lead in regional
prosecutions, is currently trying 69 suspected pirates
and has already convicted 50. Seychelles is a small
country, but it has undertaken piracy prosecutions far
out of proportion to its size, including the trial of
31 suspected pirates, 22 of whom have already been
convicted. Mauritius recently declared its intention to
help prosecute pirates, and Tanzania and the Maldives
have also expressed interest.

It is clear that the prosecution and imprisonment
of convicted pirates pose a heavy burden for countries
in the region. Initially, regional States were politically
cautious about accepting the transfer of suspected
pirates under their jurisdiction. While having publicly
announced that it was providing its six-month notice to
terminate the transfer agreement with the European
Union and other countries, Kenya, for example,
continues to accept the transfer of pirates for
prosecution on a case-by-case basis.

There are also a number of challenges relating to
the capacity of regional States. The main concerns in
this regard relate to prison conditions and access to
defence lawyers. UNODC is addressing these concerns
through its counter-piracy programme, both in Kenya
and in Seychelles.

The main impediment to regional States'
accepting the transfer of suspected pirates for
prosecution has been the burden of imprisoning
convicted pirates for the length of their sentences,
which generally range from 5 to 20 years, as their own
prisons are overloaded. The proposal supported by
Special Adviser Jack Lang for transferring convicted
pirates to Somali prisons and expediting trials within
the rule of law of Somalia will require additional
implementation efforts from UNODC.

As members of the Council know, UNODC
cooperates closely with the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia (CGPCS), serving as
secretariat for Working Group 2, on legal issues, and as
manager of the CGPCS Trust Fund. UNODC also
continues to cooperate in counter-piracy efforts with
the International Maritime Organization, INTERPOL,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
Office of Legal Affairs and, of course, the Department
of Political Affairs.

I would like to commend Special Adviser Lang
for his thorough frontline investigation into the legal
issues surrounding Somali piracy. He has met with me
and other UNODC staff on a number of occasions. Last
month, he and UNODC representatives went to visit
the courts in Mombasa, Kenya - the site of many of
the region's piracy trials - as well as Somalia itself, to
inspect the prison that UNODC is operating in
"Somaliland" and the prison in Garowe, "Puntland".

It is clear that the only viable long-term solution
to the Somali piracy problem is to restore law and
order in Somalia, including in its waters. It is also clear
that this solution is some years off and will require
concerted and coordinated international efforts. In the
interim, the UNODC counter-piracy programme,
established in 2009, has three major objectives,
namely, fair and efficient trials and imprisonment of
piracy suspects in regional countries; humane and
secure imprisonment in Somalia; and fair and efficient
trials in Somalia.

Thus far, the programme has proved effective in
supporting efforts to detain and prosecute piracy
suspects in compliance with the rule of law and respect
for their human rights. Trials are fair and efficient. For
example, the 11 pirates convicted in the Seychelles last
week were arrested in March. This seven-month time
frame compares favourably with piracy trials in North
America and Europe. At the same time, the programme
is building the capacity of regional States. With the
new initiatives funded by the Trust Fund under way,
the broader criminal justice systems of Somalia are
also being reinforced.

UNODC is committed to playing its part to foster
and strengthen development in Somalia. While the
difficulties in Somalia are enormous, we are
encouraged by the non-partisan cooperation of
Somalia's Transitional Federal Government and the
authorities of "Puntland" and "Somaliland" on counter-
piracy efforts through the Kampala process. The lean
but committed team of UNODC staff is working
diligently in those parts of Somalia where we are able
to operate, and will continue to do so.

There are many challenges before us, but I
believe that the ongoing efforts to address the detention
and prosecution of suspected Somali pirates are
showing some success. With the right support from the
international community, those efforts have the
potential to become even more effective and lead to a
long-term solution. We owe it to the people of Somalia.

