Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the European Union and its now
28 member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade
Association country Liechtenstein, member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

We thank the presidency for bringing this issue
back to the Council after the landmark resolution 1738
(2006). Let me also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his briefing and the journalists for their
impressive testimonies.

The year 2012 saw the highest number ofjournalists
killed while carrying out their vital task. The first
part of 2013 is very worrying in that regard as well.
That situation obliges the international community to
reflect on how to best protect journalists in conflict
and on how to better use the array of existing legal and
political means to that end. This debate should serve
as a reminder of the increasingly heavy price paid for
information.

We are deeply concerned about the worrying trend
of increased Violence against journalists, including
bloggers and journalistic sources, both in conflict and
non-conflict situations, including by non-State actors.
The violence includes torture, extrajudicial killings,
enforced disappearance and arbitrary detention,
harassment and the killing of journalists and media
workers. We are also alarmed by the restrictions to press
freedom and to the use of the Internet and the increasing
level of intimidation, violence and censorship that
journalists, including bloggers, face in many countries.
At the same time, we should also remember that female
journalists are more often subject to harassment and
sexual violence. We have repeatedly condemned these
trends, which must be urgently addressed.

A free, independent and vibrant press is a
cornerstone of any democratic society. The freedom
of opinion and expression is a fundamental right and
an inherent part of human dignity. It is also enshrined
in many international and regional human rights
instruments.

The freedom of expression also extends to the
Internet and any other media. The European Union is
firmly opposed to any unjustified or disproportional
restrictions of access to its use. The European Union
is developing guidelines on the freedom of expression
online and offline, including the protectionjournalists,
including bloggers, in order to react coherently and
efficiently to violations of the right to freedom of
expression.

The European Union is determined to continue
standing up for press freedom worldwide. We call
on all Governments to promote a safe and enabling
environment in which journalists can perform their
work independently, without undue interference and
without fear of censorship, persecution or prosecution.
We also call on States to ensure accountability by
investigating attacks against journalists, including
bloggers, bringing perpetrators tojustice, and providing
adequate remedies for victims.

We look forward to the report of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on good practices
regarding the protection of journalists, the prevention
of attacks and the fight against impunity for attacks
committed against journalists. Ending impunity would
be a very effective measure to guarantee the safety of
journalists in the long term.

We call upon all Governments to respect the
freedoms and rights of journalists and protect them
especially in dangerous professional missions in areas
of armed conflict, and call on all parties to armed
conflict to respect their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
including the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols. We further call on all parties to conflict to
allow, within the framework of applicable rules and
procedures, media access and coverage, as appropriate,
in situations of international and non-international
armed conflict.

In that context we wish to recall the presidential
statement adopted by the Security Council in February,
which clearly states that

"journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel engaged in dangerous professional
missions in areas of armed conflict shall be
considered as civilians and shall be respected and
protected as such" (S/PRST/2013/2).

We encourage the Secretary-General to continue
including the issue of protection of journalists in
armed conflict in his reports on the protection of
civilians. We also encourage the Security Council to
address the protection of journalists in situations of
armed conflict, including through public statements,
reporting requirements for peacekeeping missions or
the Secretariat, and the strengthening of mandates.

It is also important to underline the work of
the Human Rights Council, which last September
adopted resolution 21/12 on the safety of journalists,
as well as that of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and UNESCO
in protecting the freedom of expression and safety of
journalists. The United Nations Plan of Action on the
Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, led by
UNESCO and aiming at greater cooperation among
United Nations organizations, is a key document in this
debate.

We pay tribute to civil society organizations and
journalist networks for their work, highlighting and
exposing killings and detentions of and attacks on
journalists and press premises. The European Union
lends its support to civil society organizations to
increase the professional capacities of journalists,
provide urgent protection and promote freedom of
expression in law and in practice.

Let me finish by expressing the European Union's
tribute to and support for all those who fight for the
respect of freedom of expression and for free, pluralistic
press and other media. The creation of a free and safe
environment for j ournalists will undoubtedly strengthen
peace, democracy and development worldwide.

