Ms. Mohammed: On behalf of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, I wish to start by congratulating your delegation, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month and thank you for extending an invitation to a representative of the African Union (AU) to speak at today's timely and very important debate. You also have our support as we work to strengthen the partnership between China and Africa for the benefit of peace, security and stability on the continent. We congratulate your delegation on the successful conclusion of the negotiations of the presidential statement to be adopted later today. Today's meeting is indeed taking place at a time when terrorism and violent extremism are assuming unprecedented scales of expansion and intensity within and beyond the African continent. In addition to the situations in the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin and the Horn of Africa, terrorism is now spreading to other parts of the continent previously spared by the menace. Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo elaborated on that fact in great detail. We cannot ignore the fact that those regions are at war today - a real war in which dozens of soldiers and civilians die almost every week. Thousands of children have seen their schools closed either because they are destroyed or because teachers and pupils alike have been forced to flee. Populations have lost their homes and livelihoods, while basic infrastructure has been devastated, reversing development gains and threatening prospects of any kind of future for the people of those regions for decades to come. In the meantime, the tools employed by terrorist groups are becoming increasingly sophisticated. The double-edged sword of technology is a reality we have to grapple with as techniques become more sophisticated, as we have seen with the reality of drone terrorism. Terrorist groups have also perfected the art of recruitment, facilitated by the use of cyberplatforms and structural vulnerabilities, such as poverty, ethnic and religious fissures and competing political ideologies. Extremist and other criminal groups use social media and online recruitment platforms to spread radical propaganda to the general public in various languages. We must also recognize that the sophistication of terrorist groups does not stop at their radicalization and recruitment strategies. Over the years, they have morphed into well-organized shadow Governments, providing services and in some cases acting as the judge, jury and executioner. Terrorism is also fuelling intercommunal violence. We have seen in the past how terrorist groups have exploited tensions among communities in several countries. The complexity of terrorism and violent extremism on the African continent defies generalizations and one-size-fits-all policy responses. The AU approaches have therefore evolved in response to such complexities. As early as 1992, the AU took steps to address terrorism through the adoption of resolutions and declarations on strengthening cooperation among its member States. In the late 1990s, the continent recognized the need for a robust multidimensional approach and therefore adopted the 1999 Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, which provides, among other things, measures to counter terrorist financing, strengthen the criminal justice response to terrorism and foster inter-State police and judicial cooperation. In 2004, the Convention was supplemented by a Protocol, which addresses the convergence of terrorism and organized crime. That was done at a time when piracy and kidnap-for-ransom appeared as new means of securing funds for terrorist groups.The AU institutions have also continued to build the capacities of intelligence services, law enforcement agencies and other institutions to prevent and combat terrorism, in line with the African Union instruments and frameworks. Those institutions include the African Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism, the Committee of Intelligence and Security Services of Africa and, most recently, the AU Mechanism for Police Cooperation. Furthermore, the Nouakchott and Djibouti Processes for Enhancing Security Cooperation in the Sahel and East Africa regions, established under the auspices of the AU, have served as catalysts for cooperation among the intelligence services of the countries and regions concerned. In addition to that, AU peace support operations, such as the African Union Mission in Somalia and ad- hoc security coalitions, such as the Multinational Joint Task Force and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, have demonstrated to the rest of the world the commitment of Africa to eliminate terrorism. The international community has therefore understood the urgent need to provide those mechanisms with the predictable and sustainable support that is commensurate with the challenges at hand. Against that background, I would like to emphasize three points, based on our experience in Africa. First, as we manage this scourge, we have recognized more than ever that reinforcing our efforts to ensure the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism must be addressed in an integrated and comprehensive manner. There is a need to focus more on prevention, while integrating security and law-enforcement responses, as well as sustainable post-conflict stabilization and reconstruction. Secondly, more work is needed to understand the motivation, particularly for young people, to join the ranks of violent extremist groups. The dominant and stereotypical explanation has been that they are unemployed and marginalized individuals who have succumbed to the appeal of charismatic fanatical leaders who provide opportunities otherwise unavailable to them. But research conducted on the continent indicates that that is not always the case. In fact, there is often a combination of factors, some of which are neither religious negotiationsor ideological. That is not to say that ideology and religion do not play an important role in many instances. Nonetheless, there is a need for policy responses that are specifically designed to address the local realities and the multiplicity of factors, whether economic, ethnic, political or religious. Thirdly, concerning the international community as a whole, we need to pay more attention to the factors that lie beyond the immediate local context. From the conflict in the Middle East to the rise of Islamophobia and right-wing extremist groups in the West, these issues are craftily integrated into the narrative of violent extremist groups to portray a global injustice and instil fear and hatred. We should therefore be mindful of the fact that conditions that provide fertile ground for violent extremism have to be addressed both locally and globally. I would like to conclude by reiterating the AU's commitment to fully assume its share of responsibility in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism. However, we should also be mindful of the fact that the responsibility rests on all of us and that we need to act collectively to confront this scourge, which not only undermines international peace and security but also the very values and principles that have long characterized our diverse and democratic societies. All Member States must continuously seek to work together through approaches that do not cause harm, but rather reflect the principles that bind together our international community, with a sense of solidarity and responsibility for the immediate and long-term welfare of all societies across the globe.
