Mr. Ismail (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, on behalf of your brother President
Omer Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir, I have the pleasure to
express our sincere gratitude for the kind invitation to
participate in this important debate on the relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular the African Union (AU), in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
should like to inform the Council that an urgent
domestic matter has prevented President Al-Bashir
from taking part in this meeting. He has entrusted me
to deliver the following message.

"Allow me to express the appreciation of
the Government and the people of the Sudan for
the positive and historic initiative of South Africa
and you yourself, President Thabo Mbeki, to hold
this summit meeting. As members know, this is
the fifth time that the Security Council has met at
the summit level since the establishment of the
United Nations, in 1945. With its long and unique
experience and wise leadership, South Africa is
the country most worthy of putting forward such
an important initiative to promote concerted
efforts to settle disputes and build peace on
behalf of the international community. That
heritage is a source of pride for Africa as it
repeatedly leads the world's peace-loving States
to international achievements, such as the
elimination of apartheid in your country of South
Africa.

"Following the many political, economic
and social changes that have taken place on the
continent, Africa is now strongly playing an
important and historic role on the world stage.
Those changes have included the establishment of
the African Union and its various associated
institutions, including the Pan-African
Parliament, the Economic, Social and Cultural
Council, the Peace and Security Council, the
African Peer Review Mechanism and the New
Partnership for Africa's Development, among
others. This is unquestionably a reflection of
Africa's determination to reform the United
Nations, including the Security Council, in order
to make it more transparent and effective, to
30

promote democracy in international relations and
to respond to new facts and challenges on the
ground that did not exist when the United Nations
was established in the middle of the past century.
The Sudan is determined to cooperate with the
United Nations in the field of peacekeeping,
whether in the framework of the Naivasha
Agreement or under the Darfur Peace Agreement.
That places us in a special position to talk about
the item before the Council at today's meeting.

"Providing consistent, sustainable and
predictable financing and, resources is the
fundamental challenge facing the international
community and today's Security Council summit
meeting. We therefore express our full support for
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's proposal to
establish a joint African Union-United Nations
panel to consider the resources necessary to
support the African Union's peacekeeping
operations, including funding, logistics and
equipment on the ground. The panel should take
up the possibility not only of direct financing
through the United Nations scale of assessments,
but also of establishing a specific fund to that
end.

"In expressing our thanks to the Secretary-
General for the importance he has attached to
resolving African problems and for his relentless
efforts to develop cooperation with the African
Union, we would stress the need for priority
always to be given to the peaceful - and, more
specifically, the political - settlement of
disputes. Peacekeeping requires that there be a
peace to be kept. In that respect, we believe that
support for regional peacemaking capabilities
must be prioritized, because political settlements
are the mother of all solutions to all conflicts.

"Effective cooperation with regional
organizations, and the African Union more
particularly, requires a reordering of support
priorities and a building of capacities that take
the following elements into account.

"First, preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention must be promoted and strengthened.
As we know, those are very important elements
that include political, development, humanitarian
and social dimensions in which the role of the
United Nations and the Security Council
dovetails with those of regional and subregional
organizations, the States concerned, non-
governmental organizations and civil society
actors.

"However, any observer of the Security
Council's role in that regard will find that the
Council's response in taking preventive measures
to avert and mitigate the escalation of tensions is
far more subdued than the speed with which it
dispatches peacekeeping operations, although we
know that preventing disputes requires far fewer
resources than peacekeeping. We therefore
believe that cooperation with the African Union
requires, first and foremost, emphasis on
preventive diplomacy and the strengthening of
the appropriate African Union mechanisms,
particularly the regional early warning system,
the Panel of the Wise and the African standby
force.

"We believe that understanding the true root
causes of African disputes will speed the way to
their settlement, particularly since the continent's
conflicts are rooted in the lack of development,
poverty, a shortage of resources, and such natural
phenomenon as desertification, drought and
numerous climate change phenomena that have
sapped our development efforts. All such root
causes give rise to internal crises.

"Secondly, as to the building of capacities
in mediation and political settlement, we have
always believed that the United Nations should
take practical and concrete steps to exploit the
respective capacities of regional organizations,
particularly the AU, in mediation, negotiation and
peacemaking through political settlements in
order to begin resolving African problems in an
African context and enabling regional
organizations to achieve peace through financial,
moral and political support from the United
Nations, including the provision to the AU of all
available information on peacemaking.

"Thirdly, with respect to support for
regional peacekeeping capacities, I would stress
above all the experience of the AU Mission in the
Sudan. We believe this to be the ultimate example
of the primacy of regional organizations in
peacekeeping and their ability to achieve great
things despite a lack of resources and capacities.
They fully understand and, indeed, live in close
familiarity with the root causes of strife. They
also fully understand the values, culture and
heritage of local communities. Perhaps the
founders of the United Nations, in drafting
Chapter VIII of the Charter, grasped the
importance of all those dimensions to the
international and regional success of regional and
subregional peacekeeping efforts. They are the
best way to achieve international peace and
security.

"The Sudan was therefore most eager to
support the African mission, as reflected in the
Abuja Agreement. Since July 2004, when it was
first dispatched, primarily to monitor the
implementation of the Ndjamena ceasefire
agreement, the mission has experienced the
situation on the ground and fully understands it.

"The only way to fully resolve a dispute is
politically. It is now up to the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council to
convince the rebels to heed reason and not the
logic of guns. Effective and constructive
negotiations are essential to a permanent and
comprehensive settlement in Darfur.

"We wish to address the issue of impunity.
Pressure should be brought to bear on the rebel
groups living in the territories of our neighbours,
and they should be convinced of the need for the
option of peace. Amnesty ought not to be granted
to those who take advantage of the situation in
Darfur to smuggle children out of the country. We
should heed the statement made by the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to
the effect that the United Nations should not
invest resources in a situation that it does not
control. Let us avoid all double standards in
international relations. The Sudan has honoured
and continues to honour its commitments. Let
others do the same.

"Once again, in expressing our appreciation
for the wise leadership of South Africa in calling
for the convening of this historic meeting, we
also express the hope that its results will
encourage our peoples' aspirations to stability,
peace and security."
