Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I thank High
Representative Nakamitsu and the Head of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM),
Mr. Mulet, for their comprehensive briefings.

The issue of the use of chemical weapons in Syria
remains one of the most pressing issues on the agenda
of the Security Council, as well as for the entire
international community. The position of Kazakhstan
remains firm and consistent on that issue: we have
always opposed the use of all forms ofweapons of mass
destruction under any circumstances and by anyone.
My country has always supported the fight against such
atrocities, which, unfortunately, continue to take place
in the twenty-first century.

Kazakhstan is interested in the early resolution
of the Syrian conflict and believes that any kind of
confrontation on the chemical track impedes the
achievement of peace and stability in the country
and the region. All JIM. reports, including the most
recent one (S/2017/904, annex), indicate the following
important points. First, the use of chemical weapons
in Syria continues. It must be stopped and condemned
totally by the international community. The use of
sarin, sulfur mustard and other poisonous substances
has been irrefutably proven by the fact-finding mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and the JIM.

Secondly, the situation with regard to the
non-proliferation regime in Syria not only leaves much
to be desired but is also getting worse as chemical
weapons are becoming increasingly accessible and
uncontrollable. What is of grave concern is that all such
crimes might remain unpunished. The international
community must make every effort to prevent the
recurrence of such crimes.

Thirdly, all of the foregoing once against
demonstrates the inability of the international
community to take preventive measures and identify
all cases involving the use of chemical weapons. We
need to work on preserving and strengthening our
investigative potential through proper procedures
and sound methodologies. In that regard, we consider
it important and necessary to continue the work of
the Mechanism and support the timely extension of
its mandate.

Concerning the seventh report of the JIM,
Kazakhstan is continuing to study the content of the
report and this afternoon, we are only presenting
our initial observations. For both of the investigated
incidents, we have a number of issues on which we
would like to receive additional expanded explanations.
In particular regarding the incident in Umm Hawsh, it
would be desirable to obtain more extensive information
confirming the involvement of one group indicated in
the report in the use of chemical weapons.

With regard to the incident in Khan Shaykhun,
we positively note the statement in the report of many
circumstances in an attempt to fully reflect the events
that took place there. The report fully proves the use of
sarin and determines the exact date of the use and cases
ofpoisoning of local residents with sarin. The JIM. also
invested much work to identify the components of the
poison agent sarin.

At the same time, in our opinion, the conclusions
about the Syrian Air Force involvement in the discharge
of the aerial bomb with sarin in the Khan Shaykhun
territory are not thoroughly convincing. On this
occasion, we draw attention to the inconsistencies and
contradictions in paragraphs 14, 15, 26, 5, 30 and 31 of
the report. All unconfirmed facts in the report require
additional explanations and strong evidence-based data.
All that leads to the need to continue the investigation
in order to clarify the real picture.

On the other hand, we positively note that
the Mechanism does not conceal the number of
inconsistencies and shortcomings observed during the
investigation. That is with specific reference to the
situation in hospitals, where the time of registration of
victims was not consistent with the actual time of the
chemical attacks, as well as the cross-contamination
admitted during the sampling process, which indicates
discrepancies in the collection of evidence. There are
also other inconsistencies present in the report.

We are continuing to study the report, and at the
same time, we once again confirm the importance of
continuing such a serious and important investigation
of chemical incidents in Syria. We call for unity and
hope for a consensus decision of the Security Council
on the timely extension of the mandate of the JIM.

