The Secretary-General: I have just returned from
a visit to Kuwait, which generously hosted a conference
on the reconstruction of Iraq and helped mobilize
critical resources. The international community showed
its gratitude to the Iraqi people for their courageous
victory over Da'esh. The support is a vote of confidence
in the Government and the people of Iraq. Kuwait,
Mr. President, played a very important leadership role
in that very successful meeting.

Unfortunately, positive developments in Iraq are an
exception in the region. That context underscores the
need for a political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, which has lasted for far too long. I am here
to reiterate my full personal commitment, and the
commitment of the United Nations to supporting
the parties in their efforts to achieve a two-State
solution - a solution of two democratic States, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side in peace within secure
and recognized borders; and a solution that addresses
all final-status issues on the basis of relevant United
Nations resolutions, international law and mutual
agreements. There is no plan B.

Yet we must face today's sad reality. After decades
of support, the global consensus for a two-State solution
could be eroding. Obstacles on the ground have the
potential to create an irreversible one-State reality. It
is simply impossible to square the circle of a one-State
reality with the legitimate national, historic and
democratic aspirations of both Israelis and Palestinians.

At the same time, conditions for Palestinians in
Gaza, which has been under the control of Hamas for
a decade, are dire. Shortfalls in the funding of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) are a matter of
international concern. The human security, rights and
dignity of 5 million Palestine refugees are at stake.
So, too, is the stability of the region. I appeal to the
international community to step up its generous support.

This is a time for dialogue, for reconciliation, for
reason. At this moment of grave consequence, I appeal
for effective concerted action by all parties. It is more
important than ever.

Allow me now, Mr. President, to ask you to give
the floor to the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, to deliver
his monthly briefing to the Security Council on the
situation in the Middle East.

