Ms. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and Uruguay for organizing this
very important debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, with a special focus on medical care.

Portugal aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Protection of Civilians. I would like to add
some additional remarks in my national capacity.

Portugal welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/414), which contains relevant
information on the implementation of the resolutions
adopted by this Council on protection of civilians, in
particular resolution 2286 (2016). Since the adoption of
that resolution one year ago, the situation of civilians
in a number of conflict-affected countries, some
of those on the Council's agenda, has deteriorated.
Civilians continue to account for the vast majority
of casualties in situations of armed conflict, and are
continuously exposed to violence, being the primary
victims of violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

International law requires schools and hospitals to
be treated as sanctuaries, yet these facilities are often
among the most dangerous places to be in conflict-
affected countries. Facilities continue to be used
systematically for military purposes before our eyes
that. They are deliberately targeted, overexposing
civilians, especially children and young people, to
violence. It is obvious to us all how schools and hospitals
play a crucial role in conflict zones, as they are part of
the most critical infrastructure to mitigate the effects of
any armed conflict, particularly those involving mass
casualties. We cannot stress enough the need to protect
and promote the human right to health care in conflict,
and we will continue to draw the Council's attention
to that critical issue. I would also like to specifically
mention the importance of ensuring adequate health
care to those who are more vulnerable, including in the
area of mental health.

With regard to health-care providers - those
crucial humanitarian agents in conflict situations - we
have seen them attacked. We have seen ambulances
held up at checkpoints, hospitals bombed, medical
supplies looted and entire communities cut off from
critical services. Violence against health-care workers,
facilities and vehicles is a humanitarian issue with a
broad and multiplier, long-term effect.

The environment for humanitarian action faces
a number of challenges that are contributing to the
shrinking of the humanitarian space and jeopardizing
the protection of civilians, which is required
under international humanitarian law and human
rights obligations. Regrettably, in some instances
humanitarian access has been deliberately blocked,
often due to political considerations or alleged security-
related concerns. The duty to prevent and address acts
of violence, attacks and threats against medical care
in armed conflict must be honoured and respected.
We must collectively act to ensure that those in need
can enjoy medical care. In that regard, civil society
organizations also should be mentioned, as they play
an essential role in providing medical care to people
affected by conflicts throughout the world. Working in
close collaboration with them therefore often becomes
indispensable to enhance assistance to those in need.

The failure to stop violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights abuses, which may
amount to crimes against humanity and war crimes, also
highlights the importance of prioritizing prevention
and fighting impunity. It can be done only by ensuring
accountability and the systematic and impartial
investigations of reported violations of human rights
law and international humanitarian law, including
attacks against medical convoys and personnel. The
responsibility of ensuring the protection of human
rights and respect for international humanitarian
law lies primarily with Member States. However, if
national authorities fail to take the necessary measures
in that regard, the Security Council can accordingly
play a more active role. In that regard, the International
Criminal Court remains, in our opinion, a key venue
in the fight against impunity for the most serious
violations of international humanitarian law and plays a
complementary role to those of tribunals at the national
and international levels.

In recent decades, there has been undeniable
progress in integrating a component of the protection
of civilians into the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. However, United Nations
missions increasingly struggle to fulfil their mandates
and protect their own personnel and innocent civilians
on the ground. That trend must be reversed, and to
that end it is necessary that, among other tools, United
Nations missions be provided with modern and flexible
capabilities, including a human rights component,
which contributes to enhancing the performance of
peacekeeping operations.

In that regard, I wish to mention very briefly
the recent experience of members of the Portuguese
national force in their role as a quick reaction force
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
Acting without caveats, that force has recently been
involved in the protection of civilians in the area around
Bangassou, where it strengthened the Mission's decisive
efforts to secure and protect civilians seeking refuge
from the threat of armed groups at a local hospital and
mosque and the Saint Peter Clavel Cathedral. Portugal
reiterates its pledge to continue conducting training
programmes for national personnel and members of
the armed security forces assigned to international
peacekeeping missions.

In conclusion, we believe that only a coherent
and long-term approach based on addressing root
causes, increasing political diplomacy for prevention
and conflict resolution and bringing humanitarian
development and peacebuilding efforts together can
effectively strengthen compliance with international
humanitarian law, promote accountability for
perpetrators, improve humanitarian access to those in
need, strengthen the international response to global
massive displacements and build sustainable peace.
The dignity and value of a human being must be at the
core of a shift from perpetual reaction to early action.

