Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation for Arabic):
My delegation would like to express its delight, Sir, at
seeing you presiding at this important meeting of the
Security Council. My delegation would also like to
express its deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his efforts to contain the crisis and to achieve positive
results for all the parties concerned. We have followed his
efforts all along, from his mission to Baghdad to the
debate on the current Security Council draft resolution.

Today we stand at a historic juncture in terms of the
relationship between Iraq and the Security Council,
specifically, between Iraq, on the one hand, and the
United Nations Special Commission established under
Security Council resolution 687 (1991) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the other.
Until the day prior to 23 February 1998, the date of the
signing of the Memorandum of Understanding between
Iraq and the United Nations in Baghdad, the relationship
between the two parties oscillated between continuity and
breakdown. This had an adverse impact on UNSCOM's
mission, by which it is entrusted with the elimination of
weapons of mass destruction.

In point of fact, that oscillation in the relationship
resulted in mistrust, and it brought work to a standstill. In
turn, the situation has delayed the closing of files relating
to those weapons. The original time-table for the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction was less than
six months; yet here we are, well into the seventh year,
and the mandate has not been completed.

Under the circumstances, the Secretary-General
undertook a Visit to Baghdad and a Memorandum of
Understanding was signed in order to allow UNSCOM. to
inspect all sites, at all times, with special consideration
being given to eight presidential sites, while maintaining
the dignity and sovereignty of Iraq. On the other hand,
the Security Council adopted its resolution 1153 (1998) to
increase oil exports under the oil-for-food programme,
and humanitarian supplies would increase three-fold in
order to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people
resulting from the sanctions regime. This increase, which
coincided with the Secretary-General's visit to Baghdad,
not only gave impetus to his mission but also sent a
signal that the Council is keen on improving the living

 

conditions of the people of Iraq. My delegation hopes that
Iraq will respond to the resolution to increase oil for food
in a positive and expeditious manner. We look forward to
the report of the technical group of experts as set out in
paragraph 12 of of that resolution relating to determining
the capacity of Iraq to pump oil worth $5 billion dollars
every six months.

The litmus test now is to implement the provisions of
the Memorandum of Understanding on the ground, and to
create the appropriate conditions for its successful
implementation. Therefore, the Council should help the
Secretary-General, and we appreciate his efforts to speed up
the implementation process.

Against this backdrop is the draft resolution to be
adopted today. The Council members made an immense
effort by way of preparation and support for the Secretary-
General's visit to Baghdad. The Council also made an
intensive effort to achieve consensus, as reflected in the text
of this draft resolution. This represents a logical step
emanating from the Memorandum of Understanding signed
by the Secretary-General and the Deputy Prime Minister of
Iraq on 23 February 1998.

The elements of this draft resolution are coherent and
balanced in terms of order and phases of implementation.
First, as regards the reference to preserving the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Iraq, Kuwait and
the neighbouring States, we particularly appreciate the
Council's incorporation, as set forth in operative paragraph
5, of the Council's responsibility for securing peace and
security in the area.

Secondly, the Council endorses the Memorandum of
Understanding and looks forward to its early and full
implementation.

Thirdly, the Secretary-General is requested to finalize
the necessary procedures so that UNSCOM. and the IAEA
can carry out the mandate fully, within the presidential sites
or other sites, as indicated in the Memorandum of
Understanding. In this context, it is to be noted that the
State of Bahrain contributes to the smooth implementation
of these procedures by providing the operational
headquarters for UNSCOM.

Fourthly, Iraq is requested to provide to UNSCOM
and the IAEA full freedom of access to all sites without
any conditions or restrictions, in order to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 687 (1991).

Fifthly, the Council undertakes to consider the
duration of the prohibitions under resolution 687 (1991).
This is no less important than the other issues, such as the
issue of Kuwaiti prisoners of war and prisoners of other
nationalities and the question of property owned by the
State of Kuwait.

The Council has made enormous efforts in order to
maintain its unity, stature and authority during the crisis
with Iraq. Also, the Council has made a conscious effort
to steer away from military options that would have
brought devastating effects on Iraq and the entire region.
Therefore, a peaceful defusing of the crisis was not easy
at all. Indeed, we would like to convince ourselves that a
new page in dealing with Iraq has now been turned,
thanks to this Council. On the other hand, Iraq, for its
part, has to demonstrate good faith and cooperate with
UNSCOM. and the IAEA in both a serious and speedy
manner, with a view to eliminating its weapons of mass
destruction as a prelude to the lifting of sanctions and
moving towards its own development and reconstruction,
thus ensuring the well-being of the Iraqi people.

This moment is indeed a unique and historic one, as
the Council sought and succeeded in securing a peaceful
resolution of the current crisis. However, Iraq's behaviour
from now on will define the future course of action.
Hence, as the Council has endorsed the peaceful solution,
we call upon Iraq to respond favourably to United
Nations efforts, and we call upon the United Nations to
encourage Iraq to pursue that course so that peace will
prevail throughout the region and to stay away from the
options that would pose danger to the entire region.

The State of Bahrain agrees to the draft resolution
put to the Council, and we will vote in favour of it.

