Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, Mr. President, I would like to thank you
for proposing and convening this open debate on the
topic of "Peace-building: towards a comprehensive
approach". I also wish to express my gratitude to you
and to the delegation of Tunisia for having prepared a
very informative and comprehensive working paper for
this meeting. A number of United Nations
peacekeeping operations have already, to varying
degrees, included tasks of post-conflict peace-building.
Therefore, a review of this question by the Security
Council is both necessary and timely. I hope that this
meeting will help the United Nations in devoting equal
attention to and in properly handling both
peacekeeping and the promotion of development.

At the Security Council's open debate on the item
entitled "No exit without strategy", which was held last
November, you said, Sir, that

"peace and development are intimately linked.
Thus, a more sustained commitment of the
international community to reducing poverty
throughout the world and to promoting
sustainable development is both a step towards
conflict prevention and a contribution to peace-
building". (S/PV4223, p. 17)

I fully agree with that View. Peace and
development are the two themes of our time. On the
one hand, peace-building would be impossible without
achievements on the development front. On the other
hand, development in itself is part of any peace-
building effort. Development is a global issue with
universal relevance.

At present, armed conflicts most often occur in
poor and backward developing countries, notably in the
least developed countries. From what can be seen in
those countries, the root causes of armed conflict are
diverse. But the most fundamental one lies in extreme
poverty. Poverty leads to social instability, which in
turn poses a threat to peace and security at the national
and even the regional level. Therefore, a core issue of
concern on our agenda should be how to prevent armed
conflict and fundamentally ensure lasting peace. The
Secretary-General has indicated in past reports that
prevention is better than mere reaction. In our view,
preventive measures such as pre-conflict mediation and
good offices are essential, and can sometimes play an
important role.

However, in order to uproot the causes of
conflicts, we must help developing countries,
especially the least-developed countries, to seek
economic development, eradicate poverty, curb
diseases, improve the environment and fight against
social injustices. This is a more active way of
preventive peace-building, which, as compared to post-
conflict peace-building, will multiply the
accomplishment with halfthe effort.

A focused effort of post-conflict peace-building
helps to prevent the recurrence of conflicts and pave
the way for durable peace. The achievement of a
ceasefire or peace in a country or region through
United Nations peacekeeping operations does not
necessarily mean that the root causes of the conflict
will die out immediately thereafter. Moreover, due to
varying conditions on the ground, peace-building
efforts in different places should also vary in form. At
the same time, an extended process is required to
address and eliminate such root causes as poverty,
backwardness, social injustice and ethnic disputes.

The international community should have the
patience and resolve to help conflict-afflicted countries
and regions to tackle these problems. The speedy
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants and the promotion of the repatriation,
resettlement and economic recovery of refugees and
displaced persons constitute the short-term objectives
of peace-building. The long-term objectives, however,
are the eradication of poverty, the development of the
economy, good governance and a peaceful and
rewarding life for people in post-conflict countries and
regions. With regard to the short-term objectives, the
United Nations has done a great deal, adopting
numerous papers and reports. It has not, however, made
sufficient effort with respect to the long-term
objectives, which it should study further and
concerning which it should enhance its role.

An important question emerging from our debate
today concerns the kind of role the Security Council
should play in peace-building. In the working paper,
you, Sir, have provided some very good and
enlightening views on this question. Preceding
speakers have also presented very helpful suggestions.
We believe that peace-building involves many elements
and calls for the active participation of various United
Nations bodies and the international community as a
whole. The efforts of all involved should be well
coordinated, as well as clearly and reasonably defined,
and their cooperation should be sustained.

As the primary body entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council should provide political guidance and
coordination in this regard. In certain circumstances,
the Security Council should undertake to tailor tasks
for peace-building. However, during the planning,
establishment and implementing processes of a
peacekeeping operation, the Council should consider
how to turn peacekeeping into peace-building and its
deliberations should help to facilitate the smooth
development of peace-building efforts and seek to
create favourable conditions for such activity. Such
issues as economic and social reconstruction in the
peace-building process should be the main tasks of the
special agencies of the United Nations development
system, the international financial bodies or relevant
regional organizations. In order better to achieve our
goals, the Security Council should join other relevant
United Nations bodies by increasing its consultations
to develop an integrated problem-solving programme.

The work of peace-building involves the country
concerned, the United Nations, the international
community and other relevant players. However, there
is no doubt that the country concerned should be at the
core of all peace-building efforts. Both during the
preventive pre-conflict peace-building process and in
the post-conflict peace-building period, the United
Nations and the international community at large are
always external contributing factors. Their roles lie in
helping and supporting the Governments and peoples
of post-conflict countries in their reconstruction efforts.
The internal affairs of a country should eventually be
handled by the people of that country on their own.
Therefore, while participating in peace-building
efforts, the international community should focus on
helping peoples to achieve independence and self-
reliance so that their dependence on external assistance
will gradually decrease. The people of the country
concerned should be encouraged to play a leading role
during the peace-building process. The United Nations
and the international community should refrain from
stealing the show from the main actor.

The Chinese delegation holds that all peace-
building and peace-consolidating measures should
conform to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter and have due respect for the political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
countries concerned, as well as for the wills of their
Governments and peoples. To some extent, peace-
building is even more complex than peacekeeping. For
example, it is sometimes necessary to help a country
concerned to carry out political and economic
restructuring. Some of our work may deeply encroach
on various aspects of the social life of that country; in
certain circumstances, the United Nations may need to
carry out certain administrative functions on behalf of a
country's Government. In such a case in particular, the
United Nations and the international community should
fully respect the views ofthe country concerned and its
laws, religious beliefs, customs and traditions. Their
activities should conform to the wishes and choices of
the people and their actual needs.

In recent years, the United Nations has
undertaken peace-building activities in some regions
and some of its peacekeeping operations have, to
varying degrees, also included peace-building tasks.
However, due to different conditions on the ground and
to the differing focuses of the missions of
peacekeeping operations, it has not yet been possible to
find a generally applicable model for peace-building.
Therefore, the United Nations still needs to learn
judiciously from practices and experiences so as to find
better ways to carry out its peace-building efforts.

The United Nations has enjoyed very good
cooperation from a number of regional organizations in
the field of pre- and post-conflict peace-building. This
kind of cooperation should be carried forward. The
Fourth United Nations/Regional Organizations High-
level Meeting, which is to open tomorrow, will be
devoted to the issue of facing the challenge of long-
term peace-building. The Chinese delegation welcomes
this and looks forward to the Secretariat's briefing on
this meeting.

