Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
thank Mr. Alan Doss for presenting the latest report of
the Secretary-General. My delegation also welcomes
and appreciates the presence of Minister Aziz Pahad,
the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Republic of South
Africa, to brief the Council on President Mbeki's
mediation in Cote d'Ivoire on behalf of the African
Union (AU).

It is more than two years now since the eruption
of the conflict in Cote d'Ivoire, in September 2002.
One should appreciate the speed with which the
international community responded to the conflict. The
West African subregion, through its regional
organization - the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) - promptly deployed a
peacekeeping force with the full political backing of
the African Union. Concrete peace proposals were
negotiated that led to the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement,
which was revisited and reaffirmed in Accra.
The response of the United Nations to the Ivorian
crisis was equally swift, starting with its resolution
1464 (2003) of 4 February 2003, which firmly
supported the implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement. The Security Council has consistently
remained seized of the Ivorian crisis. The ceasefire
agreement of 3 May 2003 has remained shaky. That
was clearly demonstrated by the events of 28 February
2004 and by the November 2004 crisis, when the
situation took a dramatic turn for the worse. Neither
the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement nor the Accra III
Agreement has been fully implemented. It is against
that worrisome background that President Mbeki's
initiative must be seen and appreciated. It is the
responsibility of all who are interested in seeing an end
to the crisis to make sure that President Mbeki's
initiative succeeds. It is above all the responsibility of
the protagonists in the Ivorian crisis to guarantee the
success of President Mbeki's peace efforts.

As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2005/186) points out, the international community
cannot replace or substitute the political will of the
Ivorian leadership and people to move the peace
process forward, facilitated by the various peace
frameworks already on the table and with the support
of the Council. Indeed, Ivorian leaders bear full
responsibility for finding a way out of the current crisis
and making the hard decisions and visionary
compromises that are urgently required. They cannot
renege on agreements, they have to honour
commitments and they ought to respect the
Constitution. President Mbeki's initiative on behalf of
the African Union provides yet another opportunity for
reflection by the parties concerned, and lends
momentum to the parties to the conflict to go the extra
mile needed to pursue a peaceful settlement.

President Mbeki's initiative enjoys the support of
all political forces in Cote d'Ivoire. That is the way it
appears. It also enjoys the support of the Economic
Community of West African States, the African Union
and the United Nations. We are here to deliberate on
President Mbeki's initiative on how to restore mutual
trust among the parties and move the peace process
forward. More specifically, we are here to consider
how to break the impasse in the legislative programme;
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme; the redeployment of Government
administration across the country; and the conduct of
free and fair elections based on benchmarks previously
agreed.

President Mbeki's proposals are innovative and
will be useful in creating an atmosphere conducive to a
breakthrough. We should give him all the support and
cooperation he needs. We look forward to a successful
outcome to the meeting planned to take place in South
Africa early next month. One of the biggest challenges
with respect to supporting President Mbeki's initiative
is to come up with appropriate incentives to sustain the
current peaceful political atmosphere of compromise
and to move towards a situation in which all parties
have a shared stake in a new political dispensation. The
Security Council should work with President Mbeki to
identify and apply the appropriate mix of incentives
and other measures in the context of previous Security
Council resolutions.

In conclusion, it should be emphasized that the
political initiatives we are welcoming and commending
cannot move very far if the security situation in Cote
d'Ivoire does not improve. My delegation strongly
supports the Secretary-General's request that the
Council approve the additional military, civilian police
and civilian resources proposed in the third progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI). We also support
the recommendation that the mandate of UNOCI be
extended for another 12-month period, until 4 April
2006.

