Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I should preface my
remarks by congratulating you, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency for the month of February.
We also thank you for convening this open debate
and for your helpful and well-structured concept note
(S/2014/74, annex).

My delegation thanks the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, as well as the Director-
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their respective briefings.

While this year marks 15 years of pronounced
focus and engagement by the Security Council on the
protection of civilians, the international community
continues to witness the deplorable fact of increasing
civilian deaths. The Council's efforts, particularly in
mandating a number of United Nations peacekeeping
operations with the protection-of-civilians tasks,
have heightened international attention and led to the
development of an important normative framework
on this issue. Yet many challenges have to be tackled
to satisfactorily enhance the safeguarding of people
during conflicts.

With that background in mind, Indonesia
welcomes the adoption of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/3), which reiterates the commitments
regarding this issue and reaffirms many important
elements from our previous relevant presidential
statements.

We recognize that protecting civilians is one
of the most challenging tasks of United Nations
peacekeeping. As the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2013/689) notes, peacekeepers are mandated to carry
out increasingly complex missions in increasingly
dangerous environments. That necessitates that
all peacekeeping stakeholders - not least the
Council 4 ensure that there is full clarity on the concept
and operationalization of the protection of civilians and
the provision of requisite equipment and resources, with
robust and rapid support to and coordination with Blue
Helmets and United Nations civilian staff at all times.
We value the various significant steps on improving
the capabilities of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in that regard.

It is also important to be mindful in this
deliberation that the protection of civilians is the
primary responsibility of the host country. But human
life is most precious, and human dignity must be
safeguarded regardless. Indonesia strongly believes
that United Nations missions should conduct their tasks
without prejudice to the primary responsibility of the
host Government to protect civilians. In that context, I
would like to mention three points.

First, it is crucial to understand the local
dynamics - how the civilian populations try to protect
themselves - and to develop strategies that can
effectively address threats to civilians at the earliest
phase of mandate planning. Indonesia concurs with
the concept note that there is a lack of pre-mandate
planning and assessment on the protection of civilians.
It is therefore very important for the Secretariat and
the Security Council, in consultation with the host
Government and troop- and police-contributing
countries, to develop a sound pre-assessment of
the protection of civilians. There should be well-
functioning mechanisms based on realistic assessments
that can identify early threats before mandate planning,
as well as during the various stages of missions.

Secondly, the coherence of efforts on the
protection of civilians by the Security Council, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries,
host Governments and other relevant actors cannot be
emphasized enough. That collaboration and cooperation
can set up the necessary political dialogue to mitigate
hostilities on the ground between the parties in conflict
and harness the required equipment and resources,
yielding essential support and situational awareness for
the United Nations missions.

We stress the importance of regular evaluation
and reporting on the implementation of protection-of-
civilians mandates by United Nations peacekeeping
operations and an open dialogue between the
Secretariat and Member States, including in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, to undertake
a comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects.

Thirdly, Indonesia wishes to emphasize the
importance of ensuring that the implementation of
protection-of-civilians mandates does not exceed the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Indonesia recognizes the importance of monitoring,
evaluating and reporting by United Nations
peacekeeping operations on the implementation of
their protection-of-civilians mandates in that regard.
While the approach must be holistic, we reiterate that
protection mandates should be clear and achievable,
with explicit goals and guidelines for Blue Helmets.
Moreover, the senior mission leadership should maintain
close coordination and have a clear understanding of
the mechanisms available to work on the protection of
civilians.

In that context, we also underscore that the relevant
planning processes, guidance materials and training
modules, before and during deployment, should be
based on information gleaned from contemporary
missions and be up to the mark.

Indonesia concurs, in that regard, with the call made
in 2012 by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations on the importance of widely disseminating
information among peacekeeping personnel about
the Charter of the United Nations, international
humanitarian and human rights and refugee law,
including in training materials, in order to enable them
to better understand the interconnections between the
implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandate
and those fields of law and to act accordingly.

Furthermore, as peacekeeping has grown to
encompass the broader humanitarian approach, it is
worth underlining the importance of strengthening our
efforts to increase the number of female peacekeepers in
United Nations peacekeeping missions. Their role and
presence in United Nations peacekeeping missions have
been critical, including in supporting peacebuilding
and protecting civilians.

For its part, Indonesia is committed to enhancing
the capacities of its peacekeepers in the area of the
protection of civilians before deployment and will
continue to improve its training on that issue at our
peacekeeping training centre, the Indonesian Peace and
Security Centre.

Finally, we hope that the fifteenth anniversary of the
Council's initial engagement on this issue will further
the promotion of the culture of protection and strengthen
cooperation and synergy among the concerned entities
inside and outside the United Nations system.

