Mr. Keating: It is an honour to be here with President
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud of the Federal Republic
of Somalia. Allow me to begin by acknowledging
the unfailing cooperation and friendship that he has
extended to me and to recognize his leadership role at
this pivotal moment in Somalia's history.

The last time I addressed the Security Council (see S/PV.76l4) I had only been on the job for a few days.
I said then that success in 2016 would depend upon
seizing opportunities that political progress could bring
about. Over the past several weeks, the President and
leaders of Somalia have done just that, and progress,
though not irreversible, is being made.

Last week Somalia leaders from all Federal
member states and iterim regional administrations
reached agreement on the electoral model to be
used later this year. That significant achievement
paves the way for practical planning. I commend the
statesmanship shown by the National Leadership
Forum, and I welcome the Federal Government's
engagement of Puntland to address its concerns in the
agreement signed in Garowe on 3 April, which cleared
the way forward. The electoral process envisaged for
2016 will be significantly different to that of 2012. The
electoral college Will be 100 times larger. There will
be a genuine choice of candidates. Voting will take
place not just in Mogadishu, but in each of the capitals,
or seats of Government, of the existing and emerging
Federal member states. A two-tier structure made up of
Federal and state-level representatives will implement
the process. And 30 per cent of the seats in Parliament
are being reserved for women.

Much remains to be done in a very short period. For
example, the admirable commitment to reserve 30 per
cent of parliamentary seats for women necessitates the
identification of specific seats, in a balanced manner,
to be contested exclusively by women. Achieving that
commitment in practice will not be easy in a clan-
based model, but it could mark a major milestone
in making women's political empowerment and
leadership a reality. Once the Cabinet has formalized
the National Leadership Forum decision, it will go
to the Federal Parliament. We call upon Parliament
to expedite its endorsement of the model to allow for
timely implementation. And I welcome the continued
commitment by Somali leaders, in line with the
Council's expectations that there will be no extension
of constitutionally mandated term limits.

The 2016 electoral model will be unique, a one-off.
It is in every sense a midway point between the elections
of 2012, when just 135 electors selected 275 members of
Parliament, and 2020, when all Somalis will have a say.
Work is now under way to that end. Somali leaders have
agreed to adopt a political road map for the period 2016
to 2020, including civil voter registration, boundary
demarcation, the strengthening ofindependent electoral
bodies and the preparation of the relevant legislation,
including that relating to political parties.

There are many outstanding issues. The
state-formation process in Hiraan and Middle
Shabelle has encountered difficulties and delays.
The international community is eager to support an
inclusive agreement reached among clan leaders in both
regions. We hope that the formation of the next state
administration will take place soon and will set the
stage for agreeing on the status of the Federal capital.

The breakthrough in the electoral process
is generating broader momentum. The technical
review of Somalia's provisional Federal Constitution
has advanced. The first reading of constitutional
amendments in Parliament took place in February.
Regional consultations are now under way. Politically
contentious issues are scheduled to be discussed at
the next Leadership Forum meeting, to be held in
May. That discussion will immediately precede a 10-
day National Constitutional Conference, to be held in
Garoowe, Puntland.

That activity amounts to a historic opportunity for
all Somalis to contribute to shaping the political and
legal foundations of their country. Some major issues
may be addressed only after the electoral process, but
there already have been significant developments. The
rule of law and its centrepiece, the Federal Constitution,
will be the strongest guarantees of long-term stability
and democracy in Somalia.

The fact that progress has been taking place amid
great insecurity is another reason that such progress
could be reversible. Too many civilians and too many
soldiers are dying. Al-Shabaab remains a potent threat.
An Al-Shabaab incursion into the coastal area of
Puntland in mid-March highlighted the vulnerability of
the north. It also beamed a spotlight on the recruitment
practices and abuse of children by Al-Shabaab, which
is beyond appalling. The attack was contained thanks
to the swift actions of Puntland's forces and the support
of the Federal Government.

Although facing significant casualties, Al-Shabaab
continues to carry out repeated asymmetric and
conventional attacks. They will try to disrupt an
electoral process that they correctly view as threatening
their agenda. I pay tribute to the bravery of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and its troops
and to the courage of the Somali security forces and
the Somali people in confronting Al-Shabaab. They
need and deserve our continued support. The trilateral
partnership of the Federal Government, the African
Union and the United Nations remains a cornerstone
of the peacebuilding and State-building endeavour
in Somalia.

I am encouraged by the commitments made by
the AMISOM. troop-contributing countries when they
met in Djibouti in February. There is a recognition
that command-and-control arrangements and force
headquarters must be strengthened, including by placing
critical enablers under the Force Commander's tasking
authority. I hope that a new Force Commander will
be in place soon. I have just come from Addis Ababa,
where the first meeting of the African Union-United
Nations Joint Task Force on strengthening AMISOM
was held. It will advance our combined efforts to meet
the shortfall in AMISOM. funding, to strengthen its
capacity and to secure the electoral process.

The Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union and I have identified common
strategic objectives, in line with resolution 2245 (2015).
Compacts between me and the Head of the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS), as
well as between the Head of UNSOS and the Special
Representative, are being finalized for the delivery
of support to the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM) and to AMISOM, respectively.
We are committed to implementing the human rights
due diligence policy, to promoting respect for broader
human rights and to following up on allegations and
ensuring accountability. The capacity of UNSOS
itself is being strengthened, including through the
deployment of a team of United Kingdom military
experts beginning this month.

The Federal President is committed to strengthening
Somali security capabilities. I applaud him for that.
It is a complex and sensitive issue, but absolutely
fundamental to State-building and to consolidating
progress. I am therefore pleased that the Federal
Government has developed a national threat assessment
and national security policy. Those have been shared
with the regional authorities within the country.
Hopefully, recommendations will be agreed upon at
the next National Leadership Forum, to be held in May.
Detailed work will still have to be done on financially
sustainable plans for the military, police and justice and
corrections systems.

Political subscription to a national security
architecture must be complemented by police,
justice and corrections models that are appropriate
for Somalia's unique circumstances and its Federal
future. I am delighted to report that a new policing
model emerged last month from consultations among
the Federal Government and regional states and
administrations. It includes roles and responsibilities at
both the Federal and state levels and accountability to
civilian authorities.

I share the President's concerns about the
inconsistent payment of salaries to security-sector
personnel. Last month, international security partners
met with the President and the Minister of Finance to
discuss the coordination of salaries and stipends. Timely
and regular pay by electronic means and the transfer
to a unified biometric registration system is the way
forward. There is also scope for greater coherence on
the part of international partners to support the Somali
security sector on the basis of the security architecture
and plans currently under discussion.

Somalia's economy is dependant upon favourable
weather and the entrepreneurship of its people, including
in the diaspora. Building greater trust and identifying
the mutual benefits to be derived from stronger
relationships between the State and businesses could
yield enormous benefits, including the strengthening of
institutions that can deliver greater security, financial
accountability, a favourable macroeconomic and
regulatory environment and basic services, such as
energy, education and vocational training. Those are in
the interests both of businesses and of young Somalis,
most of whom lack job prospects.

Somalia continues to make progress in economic
management. An anti-money-laundering bill was
signed into law in February. Empty seats on the Central
Bank Board have been filled. While there is still a long
way to go, including tackling corruption and reducing
financial leakage, the current direction is encouraging.
Recognizing that situation, last week the International
Monetary Fund announced its intention to propose a
staff-monitored programme, intended to help Somalia to
establish the track record required to begin the process
of debt relief, and eventually eligibility for concessional
lending from international financial institutions.

The Federal Government is central to moving that
agenda forward. Success would yield benefits for all
parts of the country, helping to attract both public and
private investment in areas that will boost Somalia's
competitiveness and ability to meet the Sustainable
Development Goals. We are grateful to the Deputy
Secretary-General for calling upon Somalia's external
creditors to accelerate preparations for in-depth
discussions on eligibility, as outlined at the Spring
Meetings Somalia Roundtable of the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group, held in
Washington, DC, last week.

Somalia's security and prosperity depend upon
success in reversing dependency upon aid and in
addressing the root causes of fragility, conflict and
violent extremism. A comprehensive political strategy
is required that embraces economic investment in the
drivers of growth, job creation and education, including
for girls and women; and in the rule of law, respect
for human rights, and capable security and counter-
terrorism forces. It is a formidable agenda and requires
commitment both by Somalia's political and traditional
leaders, as well as concerted support from its neighbours
and international partners. It also requires addressing
short-term realities. One of those is drought, now
affecting Somaliland and Puntland. Droughts in 2011
triggered a famine that resulted in the deaths of some
260,000 people. That must not happen again.

On top of acute food insecurity, continuing
drought could have a negative impact on broader
security - strengthening Islamistjihadists currently on
the back foot in those areas - and increase displacement
and migrant flows. Timely and appropriate action now
will mitigate the possibility of another catastrophe. The
resources neededto tackle the problem are immeasurably
less than the costs Iater - whether measured in money
or, more important, lives. Somali authorities have
established national and regional drought committees
to raise funds and coordinate the response, but that is
not enough. Humanitarian organizations have received
only $145 million of the $885 million callled for in
the consolidated appeal for 2016. On 31 March, the
Humanitarian Coordinator for Somalia, Peter de Clercq,
launched a call for aid seeking $105 million to step up
drought response. Donors are responding, for which we
are grateful, but so much more is needed.

The challenges faced by Somalis are formidable.
The progress is real, but reversible. The state-formation
and electoral processes remain vulnerable to spoilers.
AMISOM. needs more support and cannot stay forever.
We must therefore do our best to make sure that the
progress is not reversed, to get the electoral process for
2016 completed and the elections in 2020 prepared; to
build the national capacity of the Somalis to take over
from AMISOM; and to generate the jobs and revenues
for a sustainable State.

Our - and my - efforts to do that depend in large
part upon the unity of the Council, for which I must
thank members. It also depends upon the coherence
of the broader international community, not only the
African Union but also the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the European Union and Somalia's
principal bilateral partners.

I look forward to the visit of the Security Council
next month and to joining the leaders of Somalia to
ensure a brighter future for all Somalis.

