Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): My delegation would like at the outset to join
in the condolences that have been expressed with
regard to the death of peacekeepers from the Republic
of Korea.

We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for the presentation of the special report of
the Secretary-General and for the additional
information he provided on the latest developments in
Timor-Leste.

We wish to express our concern over the
worsening security situation in that country. The
increase in the number and scope of violent incidents
represents an alarm signal, and information to the
effect that former combatants are forming armed
groups, creating bases and setting up clandestine arms
caches, with a view to undermining stability, is
deserving of immediate and very careful investigation.
If such information is confirmed, the military and
police components of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), together with the
Timor-Leste defence force and police force, will have
to take urgent and appropriate measures in order
effectively to neutralize the threats that have arisen. We
are concerned also that the increased activity on the
part of armed groups is possibly being caused by
politically motivated elements.

We agree with the report's conclusion that the
high level of unemployment, especially among young
people, and the continued and unsolved problem of
refugees are key destabilizing factors that are having a
negative effect not only on economic development but
also on the security situation.

In this connection, we call on the civilian
component of UNMISET to do its utmost to assist the
Timorese authorities in the implementation of an
enlightened social and economic policy aimed at
creating employment, eliminating poverty and restoring
the infrastructure.

Of major significance here is also the continuing
assistance of the donor community. We hope that,
through joint efforts, Indonesia and Timor-Leste, with
the support of the United Nations Mission, will in the
near future be able to resolve the problem of the
remaining 28,000 refugees on Indonesian territory.

We are prepared carefully to consider the views
contained in the report on the reconfiguration and
redeployment of UNMISET and on a review of the
timetable for downsizing its military component and
enhancing its police component. We believe, however,
that it could be useful to take another look at whether
we have the additional reserves to enhance the
effectiveness of the activities of all the component
parts of the Mission, with a View to ensuring security
and to providing training and assistance to the
Timorese law-enforcement structures.

