Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): At the outset, I would
like to state how pleased I am to see you, Mr.
President, presiding over the affairs of the Council for
this month.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered yesterday by Ambassador Dumisani
Shadrack Kumalo of South Africa on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. I also wish to express my
delegation's appreciation of the Council's positive
response in holding this emergency meeting on the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait.

Given the conflicting objectives being pursued
both within and outside the United Nations, the
uncertainties clouding the current international political
climate are daunting. We are at a crossroads of history.
As many who have spoken before me have already
indicated, this debate has one major objective: to
enable the more than 175 nations at the United Nations
that are not members of the Security Council to be
heard and to have their views carefully heeded.

The heavy burden of responsibility placed on the
Council cannot be underestimated. This is so because it
seems - we are all in agreement - that the Security
Council has the mandate and sole responsibility to
decide upon Iraq's disarmament regime, the return of
inspectors, the conduct of inspections and ensuring
Iraq's full compliance with all relevant resolutions.
Further, in the event of any non-compliance, refusal or
obstruction by Iraq, the Security Council alone has the
mandate to chart the next course of action. We believe
that through patient and thoughtful negotiations,
however tough, there will emerge a unified,
internationally acceptable policy toward Iraq. We also
believe that no one wants a war and that everyone
recognizes that if a military action were authorized by
the Council, it would be only as a justifiable last resort.

We always need to be reminded that if the
justification for the use of force is the existence of
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, then the logical
solution lies in the return of inspectors to Iraq to carry
out comprehensive and unrestricted inspections. If this
process is given a chance, Mr. Hans Blix and his
colleagues would soon embark upon their duties and
the Council could expect a report in due course on the
level of cooperation and on the degree of compliance
or non-compliance by Iraq. It is therefore up to Iraq to
live up to the promise it has reiterated many times in
the last few weeks that they assert their complete
readiness to receive the inspectors and agree to resolve
all issues that may block the road to joint cooperation.

The Council is, indeed, confronted with an
unprecedented situation requiring its immediate
consideration. The Council must be satisfied with the
accuracy and impartiality of information it receives,
and which is expected to form the basis of crucial
decisions. More than ever before, the integrity and
credibility of the Council is at stake, for the
international community believes that any decision or
action the Council finally embraces will be taken with
great care and conviction. The Council's choice must
be made with moderation, judiciousness and utmost
fairness. As the primary custodian for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security
Council understands only too well that the challenge
before it today is one affecting us all. Accordingly, the
international community places its faith in the hands,
heads and hearts of the members of the Council.

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait is an old
story which never seems to go away, while the people
of Iraq continue to experience abject poverty and
deplorable living conditions. It is unfortunate and
unacceptable for the fate of a whole nation to be
ensnared by an international political football that
continues to have dire humanitarian consequences.
While there has obviously been an interruption of
inspections since 1998, we continue to believe that
until that time, significant progress had been achieved
in disarming Iraq. The current state of negotiations
between the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and Iraq
offers a glimpse of hope which needs to be seized. Let
us not squander this opportunity to achieve the core
objectives contained in Security Council resolutions
686 (1991), 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999), while
ensuring full respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Iraq.

Iraq also needs to ensure compliance in good
faith and cooperation with the International Committee
of the Red Cross for finding a lasting resolution of the
Kuwaiti claims, particularly with respect to Kuwaitis
missing since 1991.

My country obviously aligns itself with the Arab
perspective of cautioning against the war option at a
time when the international community is mobilized to
combat terrorism, following the tragedy of September
11 and against the backdrop of the destruction and
bloodshed prevailing in the Palestinian territories.
These are issues that are crying for urgent attention and
lasting solutions. They deserve the concerted action of
the international community. No amount of
prevarication and neglect will therefore be a substitute
for dealing with the core problem in the Middle East:
the occupation of Arab lands by Israel.

President Bush's speech to the General Assembly
on 12 September galvanized the international
community because, as expected, it opened up the
diplomatic option in the current crisis. That was a wise
and very encouraging move, which accepted the
primacy of international collective security. In his
landmark speech on the same day, the Secretary-
General made a number of important observations on
the necessity and sagacity of working together to
uphold international law and to maintain international
order. Only by multilateral action, he said, can we
defeat terrorism and tyranny, give people a chance to
escape the ugly misery of poverty, ignorance and
disease, and ensure the benefits and opportunities of
open markets for all. Therefore, we could not agree
with him more when he says that this universal
Organization has a special place.

In conclusion, Sir, as the late United States
President, John F. Kennedy, stated:

"When written in Chinese, the word 'crisis' is

composed of two characters. One represents

danger, and the other represents opportunity".

In essence, we are here today to make a fateful choice
between these two conflicting alternatives.

