Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we want to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting regarding a country that
is experiencing a unique situation, as described by
Mr. Alan Doss, Principal Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Cote
d'Ivoire, whom we thank for presenting the Secretary-
General's fourth progress report (S/2005/186). We also
want to congratulate and thank Mr. Aziz Pahad, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, for his
statement and for his country's efforts to find a
solution for Cote d'Ivoire.

The overall situation of Cote d'Ivoire is far from
good. The situation is one of division. The recent
ceasefire violation, on 28 February, by 100 armed
elements that attacked the Forces nouvelles at
Logouale; Forces nouvelles ministers not participating
in the transitional Government; the lack of agreement
on the procedure for amending article 35 of the
Constitution, relating to the conditions for eligibility
for the presidency; the postponement of the beginning
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) of the Forces nouvelles; the "irregular"
recruitment of troops into the National Armed Forces
of Cote d'Ivoire; and the delay in implementing the
necessary reforms that will make it possible to hold the
elections planned for this October: all these accurately
describe what is happening in Cote d'Ivoire. That is
why we are greatly concerned about the future of the
peace process.

The international community, the United Nations,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) cannot substitute for
genuine political will on the part of the parties to
respect the letter and the spirit of the Linas-Marcoussis
and Accra III Agreements. Therefore, we urge the
parties to implement the measures necessary to prevent
any further escalation of tensions. As identified by the
African Union and by the Secretary-General in his
report, those measures include: creating a climate of
peace and promoting confidence between the parties;
implementing the legislative and constitutional reforms
stipulated in the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement;
ensuring the functioning and composition of the
transitional Government; beginning the process of
disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating all militias;
facilitating the restoration of national authority
throughout Cote d'Ivoire; respecting the deadline for
the holding of the elections; restructuring the country's
National Police and Gendarmerie; and providing
essential public services throughout the territory.

My delegation wishes to reaffirm its full support
for the mediation efforts that President Mbeki of South
Africa has carried out on behalf of the African Union,
and for the efforts of ECOWAS to try to reactivate the
peace process in Cote d'Ivoire. In that regard, we
consider it important that the Security Council receive
periodic updates on developments in the mediation
process and on the future steps planned as part of that
process.

In that context, we believe that the upcoming
meeting, to be held in Pretoria in early April, could be
an important step in the search for a political solution
for the country and for the region. Likewise, we should
begin to apply individual sanctions measures, provided
for in resolution 1572 (2004), against persons who
obstruct the implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
and Accra III Agreements, as well as those who
commit any other human rights offence or violation in
Cote d'Ivoire.

Finally, as is evident in the report of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) - which has been equal to the
circumstances and which is carrying out its mandate,
even in difficult conditions - must continue to receive
our support, particularly since it has often lacked the
resources necessary for its activities. For all of those
reasons, we recommend that the force continue with its
work, and we support the extension of UNOCI's
mandate for a l2-month period.

