Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
convening this important debate and for inviting my
delegation to participate. My delegation is also grateful
for the presentations of Under-Secretaries-General
Susana Malcorra and Alain Le Roy.
This debate takes place at a time when various
initiatives have been undertaken by Member States and
the Secretariat, for they realized that the United
Nations peacekeeping system is facing a difficult

09-3860]
situation and wanted to transform this situation into an
opportunity to improve things.

We particularly appreciate the fact that the main
theme of this debate is the interaction between those
who plan and mandate peace operations and those who
must implement those mandates. This is a matter of
crucial significance for troop-contributing countries
(TCCs).

Much has been said about the importance of
increasing the exchange of information and
consultations with TCCs at the time of formulating and
reviewing the mandates of peacekeeping operations.
That is a clear recommendation of the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809). However, those countries have had to
participate effectively in those processes.

It might be thought that this would simply mean
one more complication in the already difficult process
of reaching agreement on a Security Council
resolution. But lately, this has become a common
denominator in various forums where the future of
peacekeeping operations is under consideration. There
would thus appear to be a consensus about the need for
a more fluent, substantive and consistent exchange
among the main actors within the system.

In that respect, Uruguay believes that obtaining
first-hand information and experience and obtaining
the perspective of countries whose troops are deployed
in conflict zones could be extremely useful to the
Security Council when it seeks to understand a
situation and weigh the opportunities and threats on the
ground.

We should not underestimate the value of having
broad support for mandates approved by the Council,
in particular taking into account the nature of the new
tasks which have been incorporated into mandates.
These are more complex and require more robust rules
of engagement, as for example in the case of the
protection of civilians.

While we also recognize that the Council has
promoted that approach, seeking the widest possible
consensus among all Member States would not only
lead to greater legitimacy and less resistance to such
actions being undertaken, but would also create greater
commitment among all actors involved in
implementation.

For example, it should not be forgotten that the
large majority of those who must implement civilian

protection mandates in peacekeeping operations are
troop-contributing countries that are developing
countries with little opportunity to participate in or
influence how those mandates are to be carried out. In
another vein, and in agreement with what could be
interpreted from the Secretariat's summary of the New
Horizons document, the idea of creating a new agenda
for partnership seems to be heading in that direction.

Having said that, the next question is how we can
make that interaction more effective and more
in-depth. In the first place, Uruguay is aware that, as a
troop-contributing country, we must make the most of
each opportunity presented to us. For that reason we
place special emphasis on our participation in the most
substantive and constructive manner possible in each
of the initiatives in which we have been invited to
participate.

Secondly, my country believes that open, direct
and substantive dialogue that goes beyond existing
formal mechanisms, between those who plan and
mandate peacekeeping operations and those who must
implement them, would benefit all of us for the reasons
I have indicated and would help to build trust among
the parties. That dialogue should take place before
approving or renewing mandates.

Along those lines, we wish to recall the good
experience we had when we participated in a meeting
of the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, convened by Japan a few
weeks ago. There my delegation had an opportunity
both to state its views and to listen to other troop-
contributing countries. We were able to listen and to
explain our perspective and our main concerns about
two missions in which we are heavily involved: the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

On that issue, I wish to stress that the search for
greater interaction and more consultation should not be
limited to the relationship between Council members
and troop-contributing countries. It should be extended
to include the Secretariat, both at Headquarters and on
the ground. There is ample room for improvement in
that area. Undoubtedly, that issue has been influenced
by the clear and incomprehensible situation of the
underrepresentation of the nationals of TCCs in staff
positions on the ground and in senior Secretariat posts.
Allow me now to turn to a topic which I would
have preferred to avoid, but which under the
circumstances find myself obliged to address. Like
everybody else here, Uruguay is deeply committed to
the success of this system. For that reason, and despite
the complex circumstances in which peacekeeping
operations are carried out, it has continued to
systematically renew its commitment, which is
basically to contribute Blue Helmets. However, a small
developing country like ours, which assigns a very
high percentage of its military personnel to United
Nations peacekeeping, finds it very difficult to
maintain that level of participation when the delays in
the reimbursements are as long as those that we are
currently experiencing.

We understand that that state of affairs affects
many troop-contributing countries, which, in the vast
majority, are developing countries. That is why we
urge all Member States, in particular the main financial
contributors, to redouble their efforts in order to ensure
normal performance of the missions and to provide our
countries with the usual compensation for putting their
personnel and materiel at the service of the United
Nations.

We are aware that the global economic crisis,
which affects us all, makes it difficult to fulfil financial
commitments. However, we must not forget that United
Nations peacekeeping, apart from its legitimacy, is a
system with a high benefit-to-cost ratio, especially
when compared with the cost in human lives and the
high economic and social cost of conflicts. Despite the
fact that the budget for peacekeeping operations has
been rising and this year is close to $8 billion, that
amount, although considerable, represents only
0.55 per cent of the global military expenditure of
2008, which was $1.47 trillion according to the data of
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute.

Lastly, allow me to state that Uruguay reiterates
its commitment and its readiness to continue
participating in the discussions on peacekeeping. It
looks forward to the exchanges of views and the
constructive proposals that will surely arise out of our
discussion once the New Horizon document has been
submitted by the Secretariat.

