The Secretary-General: I commend Morocco
for its initiative in convening this open debate.
Peacebuilding is one of the main objectives of the
United Nations. It brings together actors from across the
United Nations system, my envoys and representatives,
whose negotiation and mediation efforts help to
achieve and sustain political settlements; political and
peacekeeping missions, which assist in implementing
peace and transition agreements and lay the foundations
for sustainable peace; and the agencies, funds and
programmes whose efforts deliver peace dividends,
support recovery and kick-start development.

In my 2009 report (S/2009/304) on peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict, I identified
the first two years after the end of conflict as the key
window of opportunity to begin building sustainable
peace. I also laid out an action agenda for an improved
response by the United Nations system during this
period.

The United Nations has made significant progress
in advancing that agenda. United Nations missions
and country teams are working more closely together.
The United Nations has also become more agile in
deploying senior leaders, specialized experts and
staff to the field. We have strengthened and expanded
our partnerships, including with the World Bank and
regional organizations. And through the civilian
capacity initiative, we are broadening and deepening
the pool of institution-building expertise in key capacity
gap areas.

The outcome of these various efforts has been a
more coherent, timely and effective response to the
immediate post-conflict priorities. Our progress in
supporting the participation of women in peacebuilding
has been more mixed. There have been notable
achievements in the areas of conflict resolution, gender-
responsive planning, financing and the rule of law.
However, there has been less progress in governance
and economic recovery. Much more remains to be
done to implement the seven-point action plan in my
2010 report on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2012/466).

Despite the strides we have made, major
peacebuilding challenges remain. Many countries
continue to experience instability years after the end
of armed conflict, with high levels of relapse into
violence. Ninety per cent of conflicts between 2000
and 2009 occurred in countries that had previously
experienced civil war. The reasons for relapse vary by
country, but there is a common thread - a deficit of
trust in the wake of conflict between different political
parties and social groups, between State and society,
and between the State and its international partners.
Experience has revealed three elements that are critical
to preventing relapse and producing more resilient
States and societies: inclusivity, institution-building,
and sustained international support.
Inclusive approaches to peacebuilding begin with
political settlements and convincing all parties to
a conflict that their core objectives can be resolved
through dialogue and negotiation, rather than through
recourse to violence. Inclusive processes anchored in
the rule of law also lower corruption and make public
administration more transparent and predictable, and
social service delivery more effective.

Our support to Yemen's transition shows how the
United Nations is pursuing an inclusive approach. My
Special Adviser has engaged with a range of opposition
groups, youth, women and civil society organizations,
paving the way for their participation in the national
dialogue conference and laying the foundations for
subsequent stages of the transition.

Functioning institutions are essential for
establishing popular confidence in the State and
preventing violent conflict. For the international
community, a key challenge is balancing long-term
support for institution-building with the need to
demonstrate early and tangible outcomes that benefit
people. There is a vital need for an early focus on
restoring core administrative and financial management
systems, and on delivering social services.

Strengthening institutions means strengthening
the rule of law. Member States have recognized, in the
Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels (resolution 67/1), adopted by the
General Assembly in September, the importance of rule
of law institutions that are accessible and responsive to
the needs and rights of all individuals, and that promote
trust, social cohesion and economic prosperity. Efforts
in this area should include ensuring full and equal
access to informal institutions, as well as strengthening
the interface between formal and informal institutions.

Good governance and the rule of law, as well as
effective, transparent, accountable and democratic
institutions, are critical for sustainable development.
Member States recognized that at this year's United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, and
the current discussions on the post-2015 development
agenda offer an opportunity to take this recognition
forward.

Building institutions and other peacebuilding
tasks can take a generation. This highlights the need
for sustained international political and financial
support. It also underscores the importance of mutual
accountability over the long term, which creates
a more balanced partnership between donors and
recipient Governments. This approach is reflected
in the Peacebuilding Commission's instruments of
engagement and has been endorsed by the Group of
Seven Plus and its development partners.

Transition compacts can provide a basis for
improved trust and deeper partnerships between
countries emerging from conflict and the wider
international community. I encourage Member States
to support their development and use. For development
partners, this entails a greater willingness to use
national oversight and financial systems, and to assume
risk. Pooled funds, such as the Peacebuilding Fund, can
help to reduce such risk.

Post-conflict countries, development partners
and the United Nations all have their part to play in
translating these insights into practice. I stand ready to
report further on this pursuit so that, together, we can
get peacebuilding right.

