Mr. Essonghe (Gabon) (spoke in French): The
importance of the subject that brings us here today -
already discussed in some depth by previous speakers -
is undeniable if we are to judge by the large number of
delegations participating in this debate. I wish therefore
to commend you, Mr. President, for having placed this
item, "The role of the Security Council in the prevention
of armed conflict", on the Council's programme of work.

That initiative is all the more timely as it enables the
Council to discuss a subject that is crucial as we come to
the close of the century and that has in recent years given
rise to repeated criticism in times of conflict in various
parts of the world, and particularly in Africa, with respect
to the Council's interpretation of its primary Charter
responsibility for the maintenance of peace.

 

That responsibility, of course, stems from the
farsightedness of the authors of the San Francisco Charter,
who were determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war and who thus mandated the Organization
with the purposes set out in Article 1. The first of these
reads as follows:

"To maintain international peace and security,
and to that end: to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace,
and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of peace, and to bring about by peaceful
means, and in conformity with the principles of justice
and international law, adjustment or settlement of
international disputes or situations which might lead to
a breach of the peace".

If I refer frequently to the Charter, that is because it
contains the guidelines for United Nations action to
promote and maintain peace and security in the world, and
conflict prevention constitutes the best assurance of
avoiding a given situation's or tension's deteriorating into
an armed conflict that would be difficult and costly to
resolve.

We remain convinced that a good early warning
system or mechanism would make it possible to detect
advance signs of a threat to the peace and would offer a
better opportunity for conducting preventive diplomatic
action aimed at encouraging the parties to a dispute to turn
to a negotiated solution rather than to an armed
confrontation that might be difficult to control.

The use of peaceful means, in other words, dialogue
or legal settlement, is strongly encouraged and enshrined in
the United Nations Charter, which stipulates in its Article
33,

"The parties to any dispute, the continuance
of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security, shall, first of all,
seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial
settlement, resort to regional agencies or
arrangements or other peaceful means of their
own choice."
"The Security Council shall, when it deems
necessary, call upon the parties to settle their
dispute by such means."

The Charter of the United Nations is therefore clear,
not only in that it gives a mandate to the Council in the
field of prevention of armed conflict, but also in that it
indicates the steps to be taken to that end.

As the organ invested with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Council therefore has the power to help stop a dispute
before it turns into an armed conflict. However, the
difficulty in this task involves, in our View, two areas: the
swiftness of preventive action and the firmness of a real
commitment. As for the swiftness of intervention, it
seems absolutely imperative that diplomatic action be
initiated as soon as the signs of tension are detected. The
success of the Council in preventive action therefore
depends on how promptly missions of good offices or of
mediation are established. Any delay in doing this will
create an opportunity for a crisis to deteriorate into an
armed conflict.

As for the Council's involvement in crisis settlement
or the deployment of peacemaking or peacekeeping
missions, criticism has focused on the relative degree of
procrastination and slowness observed, depending on
whether the situation in question is in Africa or in other
regions. Several conflicts, in fact, might have been
avoided if at the initial stage the Council had not dragged
its feet. Today, if the preventive deployment in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is cited as an example
of preventive action by the Council, it is because a firm
resolve was expressed and the influential members of the
Council were eager to see the conflict resolved before it
led to a regrettable situation.

This does not mean that the Council has not tried to
erase the image of applying a double standard in terms of
speed which it has done with more or less success. In
fact, the Council has been able to show its growing
interest in the field of prevention of armed conflict during
the recent open debates and ministerial meetings on such
subjects as the progress report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the recommendations contained in
his April 1998 report on the causes of conflicts in Africa,
post-conflict peace-building, small arms and the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. The statements made during
those meetings clearly showed how great are the concerns
of the international community over the rising tension in
the world.

In this enormous task of conflict prevention, not only
does the Council not hold a monopoly, but it would not
be right for the Council to confront the task alone. The

 

Member States of the Organization, the specialized agencies
of the United Nations system, civil society, the development
partners - all these should be called upon to contribute to
calming tensions that can erupt into armed conflict.

This is all the more true since Article 1 of the Charter
of the United Nations, to which I referred earlier, speaks of
"collective measures". We understand this to mean the
combining of efforts among national administrations,
individuals, regional or subregional organizations and so
forth.

In this spirit of solidarity and coordination, the United
Nations not only should strengthen and improve its own
early warning mechanisms, it should also contribute further
to the establishment and functioning of similar systems
within regional organizations or arrangements. It is
regrettable that some of these already existing systems are
facing the thorny problem of obtaining sufficient financing
for appropriate operations.

If there is another field that relates directly to
prevention, it is certainly that of post-conflict peace-
building. The tasks of demobilization and disarmament
should receive special attention in order to reduce, if not
eliminate, the risks of resumption of combat because of the
presence of weapons, and above all of small arms. The
question of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, which are those most often used in conflicts, and
especially internal conflicts, remains a major concern that
must be faced by any post-conflict peace-building operation
or any peacekeeping operation in the framework of a
broadened mandate. This question was abundantly discussed
in the debate on this subject held by the Council at the
ministerial level last September.

However, it is important, and indeed vital, that the
countries that produce and sell arms transcend their
unbridled desire to make a profit at any cost. They must
support the collective effort to eliminate and prevent armed
conflict. Nations do not develop by force of arms, but
rather by the financing of vital projects. It is in this context
that we invite those States to contribute to the strengthening
of arms embargoes. In this respect, we are gratified by the
recent decisions taken by certain Governments and certain
companies to break all links with rebel movements that sow
insecurity in Africa.

It cannot be repeated often enough that preventing
armed conflicts, most of which today are internal conflicts,
means first and foremost eliminating the underlying causes,
which are first of all economic, institutional and social. On
these latter aspects, we should recognize that great
advances have been made in the past decade in the
regions most affected by armed conflict, most of which
are developing regions.

In conclusion, while we recognize the importance of
collective mobilization to prevent armed conflict, the
parties in conflict must first show a sense of
responsibility, seeking a negotiated solution to their
dispute instead of opting for extreme courses of action.

There should also be greater recourse to traditional
means of dispute settlement, following the example of the
founding fathers of the Organization of African Unity,
who established committees of sages on the lines of
African village councils.

Furthermore, those who have influence on the parties
to a dispute should also be involved in preventing armed
conflicts.

