Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation welcomes the
participation at today's Council meeting of Mr. Boris
Tadie, President of the Republic of Serbia. We are
grateful for his assessments, which we share. We also
thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his introduction
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/5) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), which our delegation has carefully
analysed.

The position of the Russian Federation on
Kosovo remains consistent. We are convinced that
resolution 1244 (1999) remains in full force and is
binding upon all as the international legal basis for a
settlement in Kosovo. The Russian Federation fully
supports the work of UNMIK in discharging its
mandate and the provisions of the November 2008
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/692). That
document sets forth the hierarchy of the United
Nations Mission vis-a-vis other international presences
in the district. As a result, no one is entitled to prevent
UNMIK from doing its job, including with regard to
issues pertaining to ensuring the rights and security of
national minorities and achieving the democratic
standards for the province established by the
international community. It is on those same
foundations that the mutual relations between UNMIK
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) in Kosovo must be built, as both presences
must be status-neutral in nature.

The Security Council and UNMIK are
irreplaceable in ensuring international oversight of the
situation in the district, including in terms of security,
which continues to be very fragile. Further
destabilization of an already fragile situation in the
province is capable of exacerbating internal clashes in
the Kosovo Albanian community, as we saw recently
with the growth of party ambitions. We believe that
international presences must be vigilant in preventing
the development of a negative scenario.

We agree with the alarming assessment of
Serbian President Tadie with regard to the plans
contained in the so-called final decision for northern
Kosovo. We believe that, in today's difficult
circumstances, we must firmly avert any attempt to
advance all ill-conceived concepts for Kosovo that
might provoke a rise in tension, blatantly contravene
resolution 1244 (1999) and lead directly to a
destabilization of the situation.

We call on UNMIK to carry out its
responsibilities with regard to Kosovo's external
representation in regional and international
mechanisms and forums. There should be no changes
or more flexible approaches in that regard. The modus
operandi has not changed; resolution 1244 (1999)
remains in effect.

We see no particular improvement in the dialogue
between UNMIK and Pristina, to which the report of
the Secretary-General refers. Protocol meetings
between Pristina leaders and the leadership of UNMIK
should deceive no one. Pristina continues to ignore the
United Nations Mission and to hinder its interaction
with Belgrade.

We are carefully following the situation in the
province in the fundamental area of inter-ethnic
relations, which continue to be at an impasse. It is clear
that progress in overcoming the deep divisions between
the Serbian and Albanian communities has been
insignificant. In that context, we would draw the
Council's attention to the fact that the majority of
Serbs in the district were once again ignored in the
municipal elections conducted by Kosovo Albanian
authorities on 15 November and 13 December 2009.
The higher voter turnout in the southern areas of
Kosovo is proof less of their recognition of the Kosovo
Albanian authorities than of their despair under
increasing isolation. Moreover, we cannot but be
alarmed by reports of the many irregularities during the
voting, as recognized in the Secretary-General's report
on UNMIK.

We must also refer to what we view as the paltry
effectiveness of the dialogue between Belgrade and the
international civilian presences on the six technical
points, which are important for ensuring acceptable
conditions for the viability of Serbs in the district.

The very important issue of the return of Serb
refugee is still at an impasse, as is the question of the
property of Serbian refugees in Kosovo. As we have
seen from experience, without that the return of
refugees will be impossible.

Unfortunately, there has been no progress in other
areas as well. The only discernable achievement in this
respect was the signing in September 2009 of a
protocol on police cooperation between Belgrade and
EULEX, which included a reference to resolution 1244
(1999). Incidentally, as we understand it, that was
beyond the scope of the six-point talks.

We remain concerned about the unsatisfactory
state of affairs in the important area as the protection
of Serbian religious and cultural heritage. The report of
the Secretary-General refers to many instances of

vandalism against Serbian shrines. We expect UNMIK
to achieve real progress in ensuring reliable ways of
protecting Serbian cultural heritage in Kosovo. We
believe that credible preconditions for the planned
cessation of continuous patrols by the Kosovo Force at
Serbian religious sites, along with a transfer of
functions to the predominantly Albanian Kosovo
Police, have not yet been established.

Our position on the unilateral declaration of
independence on Kosovo is well known. Russia
reiterates its willingness to pursue political efforts to
ensure that the issue of Kosovo is addressed in a
legally correct and fair manner, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). To that end, we have
participated actively in the International Court of
Justice's consideration of the declaration's conformity
with international law.

