Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): Mr. President, I commend
you for having convened today's discussion.

Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
I would like to focus on several aspects of this
debate that are of particular interest to my country.

First, with respect to the crucial role of women
in peacebuilding, Ireland concurs with the general
recommendation of all three reviews that women's
participation in peacebuilding is vital, both in
decision-making related to peace and security, such
as peace negotiations, and in the vital socioeconomic
sphere, encompassing both human rights and
development. The Security Council has acted as a
major linchpin of this debate through its adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) 16 years ago, followed by six
subsequent resolutions. However, more must be done
by us all to ensure that the gains made in the normative
framework on women and peace and security extend
from the Council Chamber to field experience and
practice.

The global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which Ireland helped to support,
is the first major step towards catalysing movement
in that area. Frank discussion is now needed on how
its recommendations, along with the gender-related
aspects of the other reviews, should be implemented.
Ireland advocates the inclusion in the Council resolution
on peacebuilding architecture of a clear deadline to
meet the 15 per cent gender marker for financing for
peacebuilding. We also see the participation of women
in mediation processes as fundamental. That stems from
our own experience in brokering and sustaining peace
on the island of Ireland. Furthermore, we see a vital
need for innovative tools and mechanisms with which
to implement resolution 1325 (2000). One example of
such tools is the Global Acceleration Instrument, a
flexible funding mechanism and platform to spur the
resolution's implementation, which will be launched
tomorrow at an event co-hosted by Ireland.

Secondly, conflict prevention is at the very core of
the mandate of the United Nations. The Organization
was established not merely to end the Second World
War in its entirety, but also to prevent a recurrence.
Calls for a greater focus on conflict prevention
permeate the three reviews. The report (see S/2015/490)
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture recommends that the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) act as a bridge
between those sitting in the Security Council Chamber
and those on the ground who witness the stirrings of
conflict. The report also calls for the PBC to be afforded
more flexibility, stressing the need for it to move away
from the strictures of its formal agenda in order to
respond to emerging crises in any country or region
at any time. Ireland encourages the co-facilitators to
explore with the Security Council the possible role of
the PBC in identifying early warning signs of conflict.
We also ask that the resolution mandate the changes
needed to adapt the working methods of the PBC to the
unpredictability, geographic diversity and challenges
presented by today's wars and conflict.

Thirdly, with regard to mandate design, Ireland's
long history of support to United Nations peace
operations has afforded us an opportunity to learn from
both successes and mistakes. We strongly concur with
the general finding of the reviews that mandates and
missions do not lend themselves to a one-size-fits-all
approach. Every conflict has unique characteristics.
Any United Nations mission to support countries
in conflict should reflect that. Ireland supports the
suggestion to establish a role for the PBC to advise the
Security Council on the mandates of peacekeeping and
technical assistance operations. The resolution should
be coherent with the follow-up processes linked to the
other reviews, in particular the peace operations review.

The publication of the reports of those three
reviews represents only one step in what will be a
very long process. We look forward to the high-level
thematic debate to be convened by the President of the
General Assembly in May. As the process evolves, we
will need to address some very difficult questions. How
will we go about breaking down the existing silos so as
to ensure a holistic approach to peacebuilding with the
principles of resolution 1325 (2000) at its heart? How
can we implement the Sustainable Development Goals
in a way that addresses the root causes of conflict?
Are we willing to make the tough decisions regarding
predictable financing in order to enhance the innovation
and implementation of peacebuilding mechanisms?
And how can we ensure that every step taken in New
York is one more step towards resolving the challenges
faced on the ground?

I thank you again, Mr. President, for convening
this dialogue. Let us not forget that, in reviewing the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture in all its
dimensions, our fundamental goal is the prevention of
war and conflict and the creation of a safer world for
all.

