Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Israel's
insistence on the use of excessive force against the
Palestinian people in its perpetration of numerous acts,
which have reached the level of organized State crime
and extrajudicial killings, represents a violation of the
fundamental rights of the civilians living under its
occupation.

Israeli helicopters in Gaza yesterday assassinated
the martyr Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, the spiritual leader of
the Islamic resistance movement Hamas, along with at
least nine of his followers. Fifteen people were also
injured, five of them very gravely.

The State of Qatar denounces this heinous crime
because it is convinced that Israel's repression of and
violence against the Palestinian people runs counter to
all the teachings of the revealed religions and all
humanitarian values. This represents a great challenge
and a violation of all international agreements,
internationally binding resolutions and the principles of
international law. Such acts are, in reality, an attempt
on the part of Israel to draw the whole region into a
cycle of violence and counter-violence and thereby
eliminate any chance of achieving peace.

The continual assassination attempts carried out
by the Government of Israel confirm the fact that Israel
is not, in fact, seeking peace. There is no doubt that a
clear-cut plan exists for the escalation of the situation,
which would lead to negative consequences.

We would like to reaffirm in this connection that
Israel, the occupying Power, is responsible for this
continuous cycle of violence. Its forces continue to
launch attacks against Palestinian civilians in the Gaza
Strip and in the occupied Palestinian territories. Over
the past few months, a large number of Palestinian
civilians, including women and children, have been
killed at the hands of the occupation forces, and
hundreds of others have been injured. Hundreds of
houses have been destroyed as well as large expanses
of agricultural land. Restrictions have been imposed on
the free movement of persons and commodities. Israel,
in short, has continued with its settlement activities and
has established a separation wall in the occupied
Palestinian territories, which includes even parts of
Holy Jerusalem.

The assassination of a Palestinian icon cannot
actually lead to the elimination of Palestinian rights. It
will only increase the Palestinian people's insistence on
their rights and on forcing Israel to implement the
provisions of international law.

The State of Qatar has faith in peaceful solutions.
It believes that violence and counter-violence are not
likely to lead to any peaceful solution but to an
escalation of aggression, thereby giving rise to an
extremely explosive and dangerous situation in the
entire region, fuelled by violence and hatred. Of
course, civilians would be the victims of this situation.
This would also destroy any chance for peace and
increase extremism and terrorism in the region, instead
of supporting the peace process and negotiations as the
only means of establishing a just and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East based on international
legitimacy - a peace that would guarantee the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and ensure
stability, security and peaceful coexistence for the
peoples of the region.

We call upon all peace-loving forces to mobilize
in order to address the dangerous situation in the area
and to try to provide international protection for the
Palestinian people and their leadership. We would like
to reaffirm in this connection that the State of Qatar
rejects the killing of innocent civilians of whatever
religion, anywhere and at any time.

In this connection, we call on the international
community to play a major and effective role and to
avoid the use of any double standard, as has happened
in other parts of the world, in order to put an end to the
ongoing massacre in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We call on them to ensure that all rights are
restored to the Palestinian people.

However, we must express our sorrow, because
we cannot catch any glimpse of hope that would make
us believe that the international community will in fact
play such a role. In that connection, we call on the
Security Council, given that it is the highest authority
in the United Nations system, to ensure the
safeguarding of international peace and security in
accordance with the principles and provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, the principle of the
supremacy of law, and the need to respect human rights
and to ensure peaceful coexistence and the renunciation
of policies of force, domination, violence, extremism
and terrorism and any terrorist practices, including
State terrorism. We stress the need for the peaceful
settlement of international disputes in order to ensure
security for all.

We reiterate our call on the United States, which
is a sponsor of peace, to continue to work towards
positive results that would guarantee the establishment
of peace.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
condolences to the Palestinian leadership and people

and to the Arab and the Islamic nations, as well as to
the family of the martyr Sheikh Ahmed Yassin and to
the families of the other martyrs who have fallen
victim to this aggression.

Let me reiterate that the State of Qatar fully
supports the Palestinian people in their just struggle to
regain their legitimate rights and to achieve national
independence, including the right to self-determination
and the establishment of an independent State on their
national territory, with Holy Jerusalem as its capital.

