Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for having invited my delegation
to the Council table and for allowing me to take the
floor. I also congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of June and to
wish you successful deliberations.

Allow me to recognize Mr. Modibo Toure, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his prompt engagement in the current issues facing my
country upon his arrival and for all of the diligent efforts
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau in addressing the latest developments
in Guinea-Bissau.

The work of the Peacebuilding Commission
configuration, through the personal engagement
of Ambassador Antonio Patriota of Brazil, on
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau is very important
and deeply appreciated. I also would like to thank
Ambassador Maria Pires, Permanent Representative
of Timor-Leste and Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), for her
statement. I wish also to thank the Ambassador of
Senegal for his important statement on Guinea-Bissau.

Guinea-Bissau is once again facing political and
institutional crises, as we just heard from the briefing
delivered by Mr. Modibo Toure, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, whom I wish to thank. I also
request him, on behalf of the people of Guinea-Bissau,
to remain closely engaged together with the States
members of our subregion, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), especially our closest
neighbours, Senegal and the Republic of Guinea, which
have been working hard to help Guinea-Bissau find a
solution leading to sustainable peace.

Allow me to thank also Mr. Ovidio Pequeno, Head
of the African Union Liaison Office in Guinea-Bissau,
for his briefing and for the active role that he is playing
in my country.

The recent Summit of Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS, held in Dakar, and the
decision taken on the visit by the Presidents of the
Republic of Guinea, Senegal and Sierra Leone to
Bissau is very commendable. All of the people of
Guinea-Bissau look forward to this mission, which will
be crucial in showing the engagement of ECOWAS in
the process of bringing peace, security and stability not
only to Guinea-Bissau but to our subregion as a whole.

Allow me also to commend Senegal, through
its Permanent Representative, Ambassador Fode
Seck, for the engagement of President Macky Sall to
Guinea-Bissau, especially during his chairmanship of
ECOWAS.
After the very comprehensive briefing on the
current situation in Guinea-Bissau, all I have to add
is that the country is practically paralysed, people are
suffering, and everyone is apprehensively awaiting the
Supreme Court ruling and the visit of the three Heads
of State from the region. We are aware that the political
and institutional crises that have isolated our country
for the past year require political will on the part of
the main actors in our country. However, the continued
strong support of the international community as a
whole, in a coordinated and single-minded manner,
might help us to achieve a solid solution to the persistent
impasse.

Very well-coordinated diplomatic efforts, such as
the meeting of the Guinea-Bissau International Contact
Group, in which the entire international community and
our partners can participate, would be a step towards
joining other voices to that of the people of Guinea-
Bissau at this moment.

The financial support of the European Union,
which allowed for the extension of the mandate of the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau for one more year,
is very much appreciated.

As stated by the Heads of State of ECOWAS, the
persistent crisis in Guinea-Bissau is undermining the
implementation of the financial commitments made
by our development partners in March 2015. For this
we need coordinated support to bring stability to the
country, which desperately needs to get back to normal
functioning so that it can regain the trust of our partners
and make the very encouraging results of the Brussels
round-table conference on Guinea-Bissau a reality.

The people cherish the hope that these steps will
help the country to finally concentrate on development
as well as to continue with the needed security-sector
reform, which should include a dignified pension for
retired armed forces professionals. As the Council is
aware, so far the armed forces have stayed out of the
present crisis, and we want them to continue with this
republican position and non-interference in the political
disputes of the country.

Before concluding, I would like to thank all present
for their support during these dark times and wish to
appeal to them not to abandon Guinea-Bissau and to
remain even more engaged with the country in helping
to consolidate and make stronger its institutions by
working much more closely with the national authorities
and all political stakeholders in terms of guidance,
through an open and frank dialogue, so as to bring back
peace and security.

