Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I am largely in agreement with the statements of the
Ambassadors of Egypt and New Zealand.

I thank Mr. O'Brien. After listening to his
briefing on behalf of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, we note once
again that the hell that is the war in Syria has no limits.
The glimmer of hope we saw late last year is on the
brink ofbeing extinguished. There is a pressing need to
restore a cessation of hostilities throughout the country.
We thank the United States and the Russian Federation
for their efforts to revitalize resolution 2268 (2016).
We trust that they will bear fruit in the coming days
and that this meeting will have a positive effect on the
tragedy befalling the Syrian people.

Only five months ago, we were taking the first
steps to isolate the terrorist groups in Syria and thereby
normalize the lives of its civilians. Humanitarian
access was improving. Up to 1 million people have
received assistance in 2016. Nevertheless, today we
are witnessing an escalation in fighting that could
jeopardize all the gains we have achieved. Often,
attacks are carried out without the slightest regard for
the basic tenets of international humanitarian law.

It is unconscionable that there have been 40 attacks
on hospitals and clinics in Syria so far this year,
according to the World Health Organization. The latest
was on the Omar bin Abdulaziz hopsital in Aleppo.
No less tragic is the fact that the Syrian regime is
removing medical supplies from the convoys, despite
pressure from the international community and the
Russian Federation. I cannot say it often enough - this
is unacceptable.

We continue to receive reports of barrel-bomb
attacks in urban zones. As the Deputy Ambassador of
Uruguay so aptly said, the abduction and subsequent
decapitation of a child in Aleppo, as captured in a
video that was circulated on social media last week, is
absolutely inhuman. The child was only 11 years old,
and the most savage brutality imaginable ended his life.

Finally, I want to mention a worker from the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East - a Palestinian by the
name of Yaser Mahmoud Shuaeeb - who lost his
life on 17 July, also in Aleppo, as he was driving a
humanitarian convoy. I reiterate the pressing need for a
cessation of hostilities. Meanwhile, we urge all parties
to the conflict to respect international law, which
mandates the protection of civilians. Specifically, we
wish to highlight two essential actions that must be
implemented immediately.

First, we call for humanitarian pauses in the
fighting, with a view to facilitating humanitarian
access, including food distribution, and simultaneously
allowing for the most urgent medical evacuations.
With regard to Aleppo, I welcome Stephen O'Brien's
proposal to establish weekly 48-hour pauses in the
fighting. I also fully align myself with the three
proposals made by the French Ambassador. Secondly,
we call for a clarification of the state of the access
route to east Aleppo, the so-called Ca. According to
the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/631), the lives of
between 200,000 and 300,000 people depend on that
route, which has been unusable since 17 July.

