Mr. Mladenov: Every month, I brief the Council
on the situation in the Middle East and the Palestinian
question. Every month, we speak of how continuing
settlement construction and the demolition of Palestinian
structures in the occupied West Bank undermine the very
foundations of the prospect of a sovereign Palestinian
State. We condemn terror, violence and incitement that
eat away at the trust between Israelis and Palestinians,
and we call for unity and reconciliation. Every month,
we appeal to political leaders on both sides to find their
way back to the table for negotiations, to reverse the
negative trends on the ground and to restore hope that
it is through peaceful negotiations, not violence, that
both Israelis and Palestinians will be able to live side
by side, masters of their own fate.

Day after day, however, we see the situation
on the ground slipping in a different direction. We
see it sliding into a one-State reality of perpetual
occupation and violence that does not serve peace;
we see the international consensus on how to resolve
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict being challenged. Yet
we all understand that without a negotiated resolution
based on the final-status issues - as they have been
defined by Israelis and Palestinians themselves - there
can be no sustainable peace that realizes the national,
historic and religious aspirations of both peoples. It
is our shared responsibility to restore that prospect,
to facilitate negotiations, to help the weaker party, to
insulate the process from radicals and extremists and
to show results.

Before I turn to the most urgent questions related
to the situation in Gaza, I would like to begin with
developments in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, where violence is on the rise and the
Israeli authorities have continued the demolition
and confiscation of Palestinian-owned structures.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), 39 structures were
demolished or seized in the West Bank, including five
in East Jerusalem, displacing approximately 33 people
and affecting the livelihoods of over 100 others. Thirty-
four of the targeted structures were in Area C, including
five installed in solidarity with Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu
Al-Helu, the Bedouin community at imminent risk
of demolition and displacement. On 23 September,
the Israeli authorities requested the residents of Khan
Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu to self-demolish their homes
by 1 October or face demolition by the authorities, in
line with the 5 September final ruling of the Israeli
High Court. On 8 October, the authorities extended
the validity of land requisition orders for roadwork to
enable the demolition. The community was given one
week to object to the order.

Khan Al-Ahmar is among the 18 communities
located in or adjacent to the controversial E-l area,
where plans for new settlement construction would
create a continuous built-up area between the Ma'ale
Adumim and East Jerusalem, undermining the
contiguity of a future Palestinian State. The United
Nations Humanitarian Coordinator, along with the
European Union, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, the
United Kingdom, the League of Arab States and others,
have called on Israel not to go ahead with its plan to
demolish the village. I once again join that call for a
cessation of demolitions and other measures that run
contrary to Israel's obligations under international law.

All structures lacking permits from the Israeli
authorities in Area C and East Jerusalem, which
are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain, are
potentially subject to demolition. While the rate of
demolitions has declined since the beginning of 2017,
over 13,000 demolition orders are pending against
structures in Area C, three-quarters of which are on
private Palestinian land.

Meanwhile, on 14 October the Israeli Government
reportedly approved the allocation of $6 million for
advancing the construction of 31 housing units in the
Jewish settlement in Hebron, which would be the first
new construction there in 16 years. I reiterate the long-
standing United Nations position that all settlement
activities are illegal under international law and an
obstacle to peace.

Violent incidents also continued in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Among those, on 7 October an
Israeli man and woman were shot dead by a Palestinian
man in the Barkan Industrial Area in the West Bank.
The assailant fled the scene and the Israeli security
forces are currently carrying out a widespread search
operation in the area. On 12 October, a Palestinian
woman was killed near a checkpoint south of Nablus;
she had been injured by stones allegedly thrown by
Israeli assailants. I extend my condolences to the
bereaved families. Such incidents must be condemned
in the strongest of terms, and I call on everyone to stand
up to violence and condemn terror.

Settler-related violence is also a continuing concern.
There were 23 attacks by Israeli settlers on Palestinians,
resulting in 1 death, 12 injuries and property damage.
To date in 2018, according to OCHA, over 1,600
Palestinian-owned trees have been vandalized across
the West Bank. As the annual olive harvest begins,
concerns are particularly high. I call on the authorities
to ensure smooth access of Palestinian farmers to their
land and that sufficient measures be taken to protect
farmers and their property from attacks.

In recent weeks, protests at the Gaza fence have
expanded to include night demonstrations. Hamas
and other militants continued to send incendiary kites
and balloons across the border, causing fires on the
Israeli side. The Israeli Defence Forces have responded
with riot dispersal means and live fire. Thirty-three
Palestinians, including nine children, have been killed
by Israeli security forces during demonstrations and
other incidents. Soldiers were meanwhile injured.

Intense clashes took place at the Gaza fence during
Friday protests on 12 October, in which an estimated
20,000 Palestinians participated. Seven people were
killed and over 150 injured by live fire on that day alone.
Incendiary kites launched from Gaza started fires, an
improvised explosive device (IED) detonated at the
fence and a group of protesters breached the fence and
entered Israeli territory on that day. In addition, overall
during the reporting period, Palestinian militants fired
two rockets that landed in Israel. Israel responded
by launching 45 missiles and shells at sites in the
Gaza Strip.

In the early hours of 17 October, Palestinian
militants fired a rocket from central Gaza towards
Israel that hit and significantly damaged a residential
house in the Israeli city of Beersheba. The city, some
40 kilometres from Gaza and well beyond the ring of
communities in the immediate vicinity of the Strip, can
be reached only by medium-range rockets. After the
9 August Grad rocket that landed in the outskirts of
Beersheba, that was the second projectile to reach such
a distance since the 2014 conflict. Three Israelis were
reportedly injured. A second rocket landed in the sea
south-west of Tel Aviv. The Israeli air force responded
with a series of air strikes, firing at several locations,
most of them identified as military sites around Gaza.
One Palestinian militant was killed and at least two
were injured in a strike on a group that was in the
process of launching rockets.
On 11 October, the Israeli Defence Forces
announced that they had destroyed another tunnel
extending from near the city of Khan Yunis in Gaza,
some 200 meters inside Israeli territory.

In response to violence at the fence, for the third
time since March, on 7 October Israel reduced the
permissible fishing area off the Gaza coast from nine
to six nautical miles. Again on 17 October, following
the rocket attack on Beersheba, Israel further reduced
the fishing zone to three nautical miles and closed all
crossings between Israel and Gaza.

I brief the Council today as we enter a pivotal phase
in Egyptian-led efforts to overcome intra-Palestinian
divisions. I would like to convey two very clear
messages to the Council.

The first is that the situation in Gaza is imploding.
That is not hyperbole; it is not alarmism. It is a reality.
The World Bank recently warned that the Gaza economy
is in free fall, with an official unemployment rate of
53 per cent and over 70 per cent among Palestinian
youth. Every second person in Gaza now lives below
the poverty line. All key indicators - humanitarian,

economic, security and political - continue to
deteriorate. We remain on the brink of another
potentially devastating conflict - a conflict that

nobody claims to want, but a conflict that needs much
more than just words to be prevented.

As I have outlined in detail in recent months,
the United Nations and its partners have engaged, in
response to requests from several Security Council
members, in an extraordinary effort to stabilize the
situation in Gaza and prevent an escalation. We have
done so in full coordination with Egypt and in full
transparency with both Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. The effort has aimed at avoiding war and
facilitating a return to the informal understandings
reached in 2014 to maintain calm. That will not only
alleviate the suffering of 2 million Palestinians, but
will give political leaders time to achieve progress in
reconciliation. Since the beginning of this process,
the United Nations has firmly held that we need to
make every effort to return Gaza to the control of the
legitimate Palestinian Government.

But let me assure the Council that, barring
substantial steps to reverse the current course, this
precarious sense of calm is doomed to give way
under the mounting pressure. It is already beginning
to fray. Recent days have seen tensions and violent
confrontations rising again. That should be of great
concern to all ofus. The gravity ofthe situation compels
us to take decisive action.

The latest rockets that were fired from Gaza
towards Beersheba are a dangerous escalation of the
situation. Unfortunately, they also fit a pattern of
provocations that seek to bring Israel and Gaza into
another deadly conflict. It is our responsibility to do
everything possible to avoid that outcome. I am afraid
that there is no more time for words. Now is the time
for action, and we must see very clear actions on all
sides that de-escalate the situation. Otherwise, the
consequences will be terrible for everyone.

My second key message is cautiously more
optimistic. There is a growing consensus and
determination among key international and regional
partners on moving forward to defuse the powder keg
that is Gaza. On 27 September, a ministerial meeting
on the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) was held
on the margins ofthe high-level general debate. Member
States contributed generously to the Agency, raising
some $122 million. This very impressive collective
international effort has prevented an immediate
shutdown of key UNRWA services, including in Gaza.
Nevertheless, a significant funding gap remains.

Also on 27 September, the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC) agreed on the
implementation of an urgent set of humanitarian
projects in Gaza. Those interventions are aimed at
addressing the immediate energy, water, sanitation,
health care and economic needs of the population. The
goals are concrete, realistic and achievable. There is no
discussion of projects such as airports, seaports or sea
channels. I take this opportunity to express my sincere
gratitude and appreciation to the Government of the
State of Qatar for its swift and generous response to
the AHLC call by providing some $60 million for fuel
to increase the supply of electricity in the Gaza Strip.

Relieving the humanitarian pressure on the ground
will reduce the threat of escalation and give space for
Egyptian-led efforts to return the legitimate Palestinian
Government to Gaza. The Middle East Quartet has
also endorsed that approach. Disengaging from
Gaza, plunging it into another conflict or tightening
the closures furthers the divide, with devastating
humanitarian and political consequences for the
Palestinian national cause.
I appeal to all Council members and to all friends
of Israel and Palestine to join the United Nations in
calling on all sides to step back from the brink. All
parties must maintain their continued commitment
to the 2014 ceasefire arrangements. Hamas and other
militant groups must immediately and effectively stop
all provocations and attacks, including rockets and
mortars, IEDs, attempts to breach the fence, incendiary
balloons and kites and tunnel construction, and rein
in all violence at the border. Israel must restore the
delivery of critical supplies to Gaza and improve the
movement and access of goods and people, and Israeli
security forces must exercise maximum restraint in
the use of live ammunition. The Palestinian Authority
must not disengage from Gaza and must continue its
engagement with the international community to help
alleviate the suffering of its people in Gaza. Any effort
by any party to block the provision of critical assistance
designed to relieve humanitarian suffering must not
be tolerated.

These steps are only temporary and aim at avoiding
war. We must never forget that, at its heart, Gaza is
not a humanitarian problem. It is a political problem.
Humanitarian efforts are taking place in coordination
with and in support of Egyptian efforts to bring Gaza
back under the full control of the legitimate Palestinian
Government. The Government's return to Gaza and
the lifting of the suffocating movement and access
restrictions are necessary for addressing not only the
humanitarian and economic needs of the population
in a sustainable manner, but also the very important
political challenges ahead.

In addition to the unification of all Palestinians under
one single, legitimate Palestinian National Authority,
the bigger picture must also be addressed - an end
to the occupation and the realization of a two-State
solution based on relevant United Nations resolutions,
with Gaza as an integral part. Make no mistake - the
consequences of failure would be severe, just as the
benefits of success would be profound.

Briefly turning to Lebanon, the country has
entered its fifth month without a Government. Prime
Minister-designate Hariri continues consultations
for an agreement on a national unity Government.
I hope that the political stakeholders will soon
overcome their differences and provide Lebanon with
a new Government that can deliver on its commitments
vis-a-vis its citizens and the international community.

While the situation in southern Lebanon and along
the Blue Line remained calm, the rhetoric between
Israel and Lebanon underpins a risk of miscalculation.
It is essential that the parties refrain from provocative
actions and renew their commitment to resolution 1701
(2006) in word and deed. Furthermore, I call on the
Lebanese authorities to complete the investigation into
the 4 August attack on a patrol of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.

Turning to the situation on the Golan, military
conflict on the Bravo side ceased in late July, with the
Syrian Government regaining control of parts of the
area of separation that had previously been under the
control of various non-State armed opposition groups.
In recent weeks, low levels of military activity have
been observed in the areas of separation and limitation
on the Bravo side. The United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) has assessed that this is due
to controlled detonations of explosive ordnance as part
of the clearance by Syrian security forces. I personally
visited UNDOF facilities in the Israeli-occupied Golan
on 4 October and was encouraged with the progress
made in implementing the phased UNDOF plan for
the continued return of forces to the Bravo side. I
welcome the reopening on 15 October of the Quneitra
crossing, which was facilitated by the parties to the
1974 Separation of Forces Agreement.

In closing, let me reiterate that we must break out of
the endless cycle of emergency responses and stop-gap
measures. The Palestinian people 4 whether they live
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, in Gaza, or
as refugees in the region - deserve sustainable and just
solutions, just as the people of Israel deserve peace and
security. Both deserve to have their national dignity
and identity respected and to build a better future for
themselves and their families. Palestinians deserve
to be masters of their own fate, to be governed by
democratically elected institutions, to have a State of
their own that lives in peace and security with the State
oflsrael - Without the walls of occupation, without the
fear of reprisal or displacement, and certainly without
the fear that the entirety of their lives will be spent
struggling with no end in sight.

