Mr. Tassoulas (Greece): Greece expresses its
appreciation and support to the Security Council
initiatives and resolutions for a more coordinated and
thus more active and efficient international response to
the phenomenon of piracy off the Horn of Africa.
Greece is extremely concerned by the proliferation of
acts of piracy in this area, which has affected the safety
of international navigation. Crews are at stake and the
costs are piling up with higher insurance fees and fuel
payments and millions of dollars in ransom demands. It
is in this spirit that Greece supports this initiative.

With resolutions 1816 (2008), 1838 (2008) and
1846 (2008), the Security Council expressed in clear
terms the political will of the international community
to combat the scourge of piracy. My country
participates in this international endeavour to monitor
navigation in the affected area, to provide protection to
the shipping and safe delivery of humanitarian aid, and
to deter piracy off the Somali coast. We participate in
Operation Atalanta, the first naval operation of the
European Union, with one frigate and its operational
helicopter. This Operation is scheduled to last one year.
Greece has been appointed to the position of Force
Commander and Staff for the first four months, which
began one week ago on 8 December. We have also
participated with one more frigate in Operation Allied
Provider.

With the Security Council resolution just adopted
and the encouragement of the formation of an
international cooperation mechanism, we consider that
the international community is endowed with the
necessary mechanisms for coordination and
cooperation on all aspects of combating piracy off
Somalia, in accordance with international law. Greece,
as a major maritime Power, is ready to participate in
this initiative. In our view, it is also essential that
States adopt the necessary domestic legislation
attributing jurisdiction to their judicial authorities and
courts enabling them to prosecute and try individuals
engaged in acts of piracy.

We express our appreciation to the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia for its spirit of
cooperation and partnership in this international
endeavour. In return, the international community
should help Somalia achieve stability. Greece believes
that peace and stability in this country should be
promoted through a three-fold approach. First, there
must be effective cooperation among all parties
involved through the Djibouti process and full
implementation of United Nations resolutions.
Secondly, existing structures and available means of
the African Union should be enhanced and upgraded, in
order to strengthen its capacity to respond
autonomously and in conformity with international law
to crises like those we face in Somalia. Thirdly, and
last but not least, we must spare no effort in ensuring
the delivery of humanitarian aid to the population of
Somalia, gravely affected by endless conflict, political
instability, displacement and drought.

