Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on the
outstanding manner in which you have been guiding
our work this month. I should like also to thank you, on
behalf of the delegation of Chile, for having convened
this meeting to consider the report of the Secretary-
General dated 3 March on the situation in Timor-Leste.
We would like also to extend our gratitude to Mr. Jean-
Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his presentation this
morning.

We wish also to offer our condolences to the
Government of the Republic of Korea regarding the sad
and tragic accident that took place on 6 March in which
five of its nationals - members of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) - lost
their lives.

Last November an open meeting of the Security
Council was held to discuss the progress made during
Timor-Leste's first six months as an independent
country, and we welcomed those achievements,
although we identified the challenges that lay ahead.
However, we saw the situation begin to change
radically as of 4 December 2002. The very serious civil
unrest and subsequent violence have changed the
security outlook in that country.

That is why we have considered with particular
attention the references made to these events in the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General. The
events that took place in the town of Atsabe in January,
in which five pro-independence workers were killed,
and the attack on a bus in the Bobonaro district, in
which two people were killed and five injured, are
certainly alarming.

We also share the concern about the possible
resurgence of militia activity and armed groups, which
are establishing bases within Timor-Leste with the
intention of undermining stability in that country. We
also recognize that the situation of the more than
28,000 refugees remaining in Indonesia is an added
factor for instability. In that context, we are interested
in the resettlement initiatives that the Indonesian
Government has described.

We also understand the importance of delineating
and demarcating the border and to that end we urge the
Joint Border Commission between the Governments of
Timor-Leste and Indonesia to accelerate the
implementation of their work plan.
We share the view that an effective national
police force that is reliable and well-regarded by the
population is indispensable. We therefore appreciate
the work done by UNMISET that has allowed the
Timor-Leste national police to station 2,530 personnel
in six of the 13 districts of the country. We understand,
however, that this is an ongoing process and that the
national police is in no position to contend with the
more serious threats to security that are now arising.

That is why we believe that the proposed changes
are very valid. These include the addition of an
international police unit for one year; the ongoing
intensive training of the police force; emphasis on
human rights and the rule of law in the context of the
development and certification process; and an
enhanced monitoring and advisory presence in districts
where responsibilities have already been assigned.

In the military sector, taking into account the
current limitations of the Timor-Leste defence force -
its extremely small personnel, its lack of presence in
the Western sectors of the territory and the need to
improve its mobility by air and land, inter alia - we
believe that the two-phase adjustments to the military
strategy and configuration, as proposed by UNMISET,
are relevant.

That is why we consider it very important, on the

basis of the Secretary-General's report, to consider and
discuss these issues in-depth in the Council,
particularly in light of the experience of members with
troops in the area, so that we may agree on consensus-
based mechanisms to address the current security
situation in Timor-Leste. We agree with the proposal
that the plans under development should be kept under
constant review and that the Council should be advised
in a timely fashion about any improvement or
worsening of security conditions, including
recommendations to allow us to adopt measures
adequate to the situation.

Our concern over the situation in the country
cannot prevent us from acknowledging the efforts that
have been made by President Gusmao since assuming
the reins of Government in May. We value his
leadership and initiatives on foreign policy, as well as
his support for and work within the United Nations
system since his country's accession to membership in
September. We were also glad to learn of the signing of
economic agreements between Timor-Leste and
Australia to exploit Timor-Leste's available natural
resources.
In that context, we wish to avail ourselves of
Mr. Guehenno's presence to ask him about work
undertaken in the past few months in the various areas
of the national development plan. We know that
progress has been made on the scheduled tasks.

