Mr. Djani (Indonesia): As the last speaker before
you take the floor, Mr. President, I can safely assume
that all of us share the same views, namely, that, first of
all, the situation is grave - it is dire - and that Yemen
is in crisis and needs urgent action. In connection with
that, there is a need for the Security Council to keep
track of progress and monitor the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement.

I appreciate the briefings that were given by
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock, which
give us a clear understanding of what is happening
on the ground. I also appreciate the fact that the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2451 (2018).
As many have stated, the unanimous adoption of the
resolution underlines the Council's unity on this issue.
I think we should capitalize on this unity and move
the ball forward. We should ensure that the Stockholm
Agreement is followed up with further concrete action
from the Council. What is most important is that the
Council took immediate action to address the plight of
the Yemeni people.

As many have said, the people of Yemen have
suffered for far too long from famine, disease and
economic recession exacerbated by the armed conflict,
as we heard from Mr. Lowcockjust now. In this context,
my delegation wishes to support whatever action the
Secretary-General would like to take to ensure that we
address the situation appropriately.

I would like to highlight several other points.
First, we welcome the appointment of Major General
Patrick Cammaert as the Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee. We are happy to learn
that Major General Cammaert and the advance team
are already playing an active role in meeting and
engaging with both parties to implement the Stockholm
Agreement. It is important that the Committee finalize
the modalities for the redeployment of forces, including
time frames, and identify a suitable and secure
location and units for deployment. Consequently,
the two-phased redeployment of forces envisioned
in the Stockholm Agreement could be implemented
immediately, thus providing critical access for the
delivery of humanitarian necessities.

Secondly, Indonesia welcomes the proposal
to establish a United Nations mission to support
the implementation of the agreement on the city
of Al-Hudaydah and ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa. The mission will play an important
role in monitoring the redeployment of forces from
both parties to implement the ceasefire in the city of
Al-Hudaydah and the ports. With this mission, we
hope that humanitarian assistance can be delivered
in a timely manner to the people of Yemen, which is
in dire need of such assistance. The mission will also
contribute to sustaining the political process launched
by the Special Envoy last year.

This is the heart of the Stockholm Agreement, and
Indonesia stands ready to support any efforts aimed
at alleviating Yemen's grave humanitarian crisis. We
believe that a medical air bridge should be opened
and that deliveries made unabated. We think that any
efforts aimed at meeting the humanitarian needs of
the people should be ensured. We would also like to
emphasize that the safety and security of United Nations
personnel is of paramount importance. Accordingly, it
is very important to put in place safety measures and
infrastructure prior to the establishment of the mission.
It is crucial to have a full assessment of the situation on
the ground.

Thirdly, my delegation also regrets that the
humanitarian situation in Yemen remains grave. We are
hopeful that the current political solution under way will
bring immediate relief and gradual improvement to the
humanitarian situation. We hope that it will be possible
for commercial activities and economic development
to proceed unhindered, which would help to alleviate
the suffering of the people. Concerted efforts by United
Nations entities must continue to be geared towards
humanitarian relief for the people of Yemen.

In conclusion, it is our fervent hope that the positive
momentum will be maintained and continued through
the engagement of all parties in inclusive dialogue
involving all relevant stakeholders, in particular to
implement measures that build confidence for all. All
parties need confidence, and we should ensure that the
Stockholm Agreement is duly implemented and that
progress is achieved in Al-Hudaydah. The peace that
is attained needs to be replicated and multiplied across
all of Yemen.

I would reiterate what Mr. Griffiths mentioned in
his briefing. Al-Hudaydah should not be the last stop:
we should ensure that there is success there so that it
can be reproduced in other parts of the country. Like
others, Indonesia naturally stands ready to support the
Secretary-General's proposal to provide United Nations
support and any efforts aimed at ensuring peace and
stability for the sake of the people of Yemen. That
should be the top priority of the Security Council.

