At the outset, I join other colleagues in expressing our gratitude to all humanitarian personnel working on the ground in Syria. I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Ms. Susannah Sirkin for their briefings. First of all, we remain deeply concerned at the overall humanitarian situation in Syria, which has been compounded by the current impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the mounting economic hardship. These extra layers are further impairing the well-being of the Syrian people as well as the vulnerable health-care system in Syria - the result of nearly a decade of conflict. Much needs to be done to deal with the severity of the current humanitarian situation in Syria. Recent reports of the Secretary-General have pointed out worrisome facts and figures, including that more than 11 million people are in need of assistance; that 9.3 million face food insecurity, an acute shortage of basic goods and food prices that doubled to a record level in one single year; and that there are millions of displaced persons with limited access to basic requirements. Secondly, regarding the humanitarian response in Syria, we welcome the efforts of the international community to provide assistance, including those related to COVID-19 preparedness and response capacity. It is encouraging to see that the ceasefire agreement in the north-west continues to generally hold, which meaningfully facilitates greater assistance efforts. However, instability and the risk of escalation continue unabated, putting civilian lives in danger. We take note of the fact that World Health Organization overland deliveries were able to reach the north-east region, along with air deliveries from other sources. However, a serious shortage of medical supplies is still reported, especially given that there are confirmed COVID-19 cases in that area. Against that backdrop, we call on the Syrian Government, which bears primary responsibility for settling the humanitarian situation in the country, to continue to step up its cooperation with the United Nations and other relevant parties to improve the humanitarian response, especially in the north-east. We reiterate our call on the international community to further increase humanitarian support for Syria in order to overcome this difficult moment. It is important that the international community stay entirely united in supporting people in need. In that connection, while commending the great efforts made by United Nations agencies, contractors and other parties, we also note that the Secretary- General's report (S/2020/576) also recognizes that aid is distributed and implemented primarily by national actors and that access has been granted to United Nations agencies in a number of Syrian governorates. To facilitate this important work, we reiterate our support for the call made by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for a ceasefire throughout Syria and urge all parties to heed that call and suspend all ongoing hostilities so as to create optimal conditions for sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access to various parts of Syria. It is also important to ensure that Syria's COVID-19 response capability is not affected by any type of sanctions, as the Secretary-General has urged. The prerequisite for a sustainable resolution of all humanitarian issues in Syria is a comprehensive political solution to the conflict in that country. We would like to stress the importance of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process that is in line with resolution 2254 (2015), in accordance with the fundamental principles of international law and the United Nations Charter, including full respect for the principles of sovereign equality, territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
