Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Mr. President, your country's excellent
stewardship of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict attests to your leadership and deep
interest in the fate of children and armed conflict. The
organization of this debate confirms Germany's
commitment to this important issue.

We thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement on this issue early in the debate. We also
express our gratitude to Ms. Coomaraswamy for the
skill with which she is discharging her duty to provide
greater protection for children affected by conflict, and
for the highly useful information she has shared with
us. Finally, we welcome the presence of the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake, and reiterate
our support for the significant contribution of his
institution to the defence of the cause of children in
general, and those affected by conflict in particular.

Today's debate is taking place in the overall
context of the Security Council's action to protect
civilian populations in armed conflict. As noted in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2011/250), thousands of
children continue to fall victim to serious violations of
international law in conflict zones. Gabon firmly
condemns such violations, particularly the recruitment
and use of child soldiers, murder, kidnapping, rape and
other forms of sexual violence, the denial of access to
humanitarian assistance, and attacks on schools and
hospitals. These serious crimes committed by
Government or armed non-State forces violate the
provisions of international law and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, including
resolution 1612 (2005).

We should like to make two observations - the
first with respect to the progress achieved in the
Council's normative action to protect children, and the
second concerning the challenges we continue to face
in protecting children in the field.

Turning first to the normative framework, we
applaud the considerable headway achieved since the
adoption of resolutions 1379 (2001), 1539 (2004) and,
most particularly, 1612 (2005), establishing the

monitoring and reporting mechanism. Since the
adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), the Security
Council has been able to refer to lists, annexed to the
reports of the Secretary-General, of parties to armed
conflict who commit the murder and maiming of
children, rape and other forms of sexual violence.
Together, these measures constitute an effective
architecture for raising the awareness of all parties to
conflict on the gravity of the crimes they may commit.
Such measures are also deterrent in terms of the
sanctions which their perpetrators run the risk of
incurring.

This progress has also strengthened the activities
of peace missions and facilitated the work of the
principal actors on the ground. In that regard, we stress
the key role played by advisers in the protection
component of peace missions. We point to the success
achieved in Chad, the Sudan, the Central African
Republic and, most especially, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo thanks to the joint activities of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and UNICEF
that contributed to the liberation of many child
soldiers.

The progress we have made should not make us
lose sight of the various challenges remaining ahead in
ensuring the more effective protection of children in
situations of armed conflict. In that regard, I would
raise two specific issues.

First, it is deplorable that certain Governments
remain strongly resistant to the possibility of engaging
in constructive dialogue with the United Nations with a
view to signing an action plan geared to ending
violence against children in armed conflict. It is also
regrettable to note that increasing numbers of parties to
conflict are targeting public institutions, such as
schools and hospitals that shelter children, teachers and
medical staff. Gabon therefore supports your initiative,
Sir, of considering the inclusion of attacks on children
in schools and hospitals on the list of criteria for listing
persons accused of serious violations against children
in the annexes of the Secretary-General's reports.

In conclusion, we express our desire to see the
Security Council's action to protect children in armed
conflict subject to ongoing evaluation and
strengthening in order to make our struggle against the
impunity of offenders more effective, especially with
regard to the heinous crimes perpetrated against
children. Gabon will continue to support the
international community's fight against the use of
children in armed conflict and all forms of abuse,
violence and deprivation to which they are subject.

