Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): At the
outset, Madam President, I wish to thank you and the
delegation of Lithuania for convening today's debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, an issue of
immense importance to the State of Palestine.

We also commend the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
for the comprehensive briefings delivered today and for
their tireless efforts to promote the protection and well-
being of civilians in armed conflict.

While significant efforts have been made to prevent
and respond to Violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law in conflict situations, the
Secretary-General noted in his latest report that "[t]
he current state of the protection of civilians leaves
little room for optimism" (S/2013/689, para.8) which
was compellingly confirmed by the briefers in today's
debate.

The failure of States and parties to respect and
ensure respect of their legal obligations remains
widespread, and civilians continue to bear the burden of
war and violence and to suffer its brutal consequences
in a tragic manner.

One clear and persistent example of the failure to
respect, and to ensure respect for, the law is the case of
the Palestinian civilian population living under Israel's
occupation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. For more than four decades,
any and all of the legal safeguards for the protection
to which civilians are entitled under international
humanitarian law have been deliberately ignored
by Israel, the occupying Power, leaving Palestinian
civilians devoid of protection of not only their physical
bodies and lives, but also their well-being and human
dignity. It is a situation that has inflicted upon them
massive suffering, trauma and hardship, for generation
after generation.

The protection provisions of international law,
including the Geneva Conventions - in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention, which includes provisions
explicitly aimed at ensuring the safety of civilians in
armedconflict,includingspecificprovisionsforcivilians
under foreign occupation - the Additional Protocols to
the Conventions, the international covenants on human
Rights, the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court and the relevant United Nations resolutions are
all clear and are applicable to the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Nevertheless, not
a day has gone by in which our situation has not been
characterized as extremely volatile and in which grave
transgressions of international humanitarian law and
the protection provisions have been committed by the
occupying Power. That includes the period covered
by the Secretary-General's report, which witnessed a
significant increase in Palestinian civilian causalities,
including among women, children and the elderly.

Besides the complete absence of protection for
those Palestinians who have been killed, including
by air strikes and explosive weapons in densely
populated areas, as in the Israeli military aggressions
against Gaza in 2008, in 2009 and in November 2012,
Palestinians also continue to be victims of appalling
human rights violations and crimes, suffering
physical and psychological harm, dispossession,
forced displacement, imprisonment and detention,
torture, exploitation, hunger, poverty, disease and
the destruction of their communities. Even the right
to peaceful protest has been lethally violated by the
occupying forces. International law clearly forbids such
brutality against civilians, and such actions, wilfully
perpetrated, constitute war crimes. The Palestinian
civilian population also remains vulnerable to rampant
settler terror and violence, which has intensified in the
recent period.

Moreover, in the Gaza Strip, the devastating impact
of the illegal Israeli blockade and the repercussions of
the destruction and displacement inflicted by sequential
acts Israeli military aggression have continued to
impact every human right and to disrupt every aspect
of civilian life, deepening the humanitarian crisis. The
blockade constitutes collective punishment of the entire
Palestinian civilian population in Gaza, in grave breach
of the Fourth Geneva Convention. The Palestinians
living in Gaza not only need protection for their lives,
but also protection from such deliberately destructive
policies, which are disfiguring an entire society.

The international community's failure to hold
Israel accountable for its violations and crimes has,
regrettably, reinforced that lawlessness, permitting it to
continue using military force and collective punishment
against the defenceless Palestinian people under its
occupation and, in essence, absolving it from its legal
obligations as an occupying Power. As the Secretary-
General states in his report,

"The prevalence of impunity in many States
experiencing, or that have experienced, conflict
allows war crimes and serious human rights
violations to thrive, undermines the fabric of
societies and prevents the development of lasting
solutions, which contributes to instability." (ibia', para. 60)

Israel's impunity in the context of its foreign
occupation of another people and their land has
prevailed for nearly five decades due to the inaction and
selectivity of the international community, including
the Security Council. It is high time for that to be
rectified.

The Security Council has the duty to determine
and undertake appropriate measures to protect civilian
populationx, and that unequivocally includes the
protection of the Palestinian people. To continue doing
nothing in the face of such crimes is unacceptable and
will only allow for the cycle of impunity to persist.

I would be remiss ifI did not convey, yet again,
the grave concerns of the State of Palestine about the
critical humanitarian situation of Palestine refugees in
Syria, who also continue to suffer death and injury, the
destruction of their homes and shelters, dispossession
and massive displacement. The plight of the thousands
of refugees trapped the Yarmouk camp in particular is
inhumane. Urgent international attention is required to
alleviate their plight and that of all civilians suffering
in the conflict. The siege and starvation of innocent
civilians as a combat method is a grave breach of
international humanitarian law and cannot be permitted
orjustified under any circumstance. We urgently appeal
for sustained, adequate and safe humanitarian access to
Yarmouk and to all civilians in need, in line with the
relevant provisions of international humanitarian law,
including the unimpeded delivery of emergency food
and medical assistance.

Furthermore in that regard, we reiterate our
appeals for the exertion of all possible efforts to ensure
the protection of the Palestine refugees and all civilians
in Syria in accordance with international humanitarian
law, until a political solution can be found to end the
tragic conflict.

