The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

We welcome the presence of President Mbeki and
thank him for his briefing. We also welcome
Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Gambari and Mr. Bassole. We are
grateful for their briefings, since they all symbolize the
work of the international community. Their actions
with respect to the situation in the Sudan are invaluable
contributions to the work of this Council in the search
for peace and justice in that country.

As has been noted, the Sudan is facing a defining
moment for its future. As we move towards the
completion of the transitional period established by the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), the
challenges to consolidating peace and stability
throughout the country remain extensive. Six months
before the holding of the national referendum, the
situation is a major challenge not only to the country,
but also to the international community, which is
responsible for ensuring the well-being of the Sudanese
people. Hence, a timely and coordinated response is
expected from the United Nations and its partners in
order to avert any possible return to the armed conflict
faced by thousands of Sudanese for more than two
decades.

Today, we are analysing the different options for
cooperation with the Sudan. Although points of view
may differ with respect to identifying priorities, the
common denominator remains ensuring a better future
for the Sudanese people through peace, dialogue and
mutual respect among the parties.

The parties have made some significant progress
since the implementation of the CPA began.
Nonetheless, important elements of the Agreement
remain unfulfilled due largely to a lack of trust among
the signatories. That is the first obstacle that we must
overcome in the coming months if we want to prepare
the conditions for holding a successful referendum. We
agree that the priority of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) in the coming months must be the
preparation for the referendum. The logistical and
security support that the Mission can offer the parties
is critical to ensuring comprehensive and peaceful
participation. The lessons learned from the recent
election process, especially with respect to voter
registration and the transportation of equipment, will
allow the Mission to better respond to the difficulties
on the ground.

Nonetheless, and mindful of the resources at the
disposal of UNMIS, we must not forget that all efforts
must be accompanied by the protection of civilians and
the facilitation of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, since both are complementary to the
success of the election process and the outcome of the
voting. The parties must have a clear vision of the
framework to govern relations among them following
the referendum. The international community must do
all in its power to facilitate dialogue among the parties
and to offer its assistance when requested in order to
achieve a satisfactory agreement prior to the ballot.

As the implementation of the provisions of the
agreement moves forward, the United Nations will
have the opportunity to collaborate in other very
important areas, among them the drafting of
contingency plans and capacity-building for the
Government of Southern Sudan so that it can offer the
basic services that its population requires. The drafting
of comprehensive contingency plans at the national
level must be a priority of the Organization in the
coming months. Whatever the end result of the
referendum, the international community must stand
ready to respond rapidly and effectively to any
scenario.

For years, the tragic situation in Darfur has
engaged the conscience of millions around the world,
including in my country, where broad sectors of society
have called on the Security Council to ensure the
protection of the civilian population and to resolutely
promote a lasting solution to the conflict.

Today, that call takes on particular significance as
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons
in that region of the Sudan will find themselves
affected by the strategic decisions that the Organization
will take following this debate; hence the need to adopt
a broad-based approach to the situation in the Sudan
and in Darfur. What happens in Darfur must be linked
to the broader context of what is happening in the rest
of the Sudan.

That holistic vision must be accompanied by a
reorganization of the various efforts of the actors on
the ground. The international community must
maintain close cooperation in order to address the
difficult challenges facing the Sudan. The United
Nations must maintain a single channel of
communication with the African Union High-Level
Panel and the various regional initiatives for the good
of the political process in that country.

Furthermore, regarding Darfur, instances of
progress the ground must serve as the true measures of
progress in the political process. In that way, in the
coming months, the international community should
ensure a cessation of hostilities and the return of all
parties to the negotiating table. The Security Council
should do its utmost so that all rebel factions join the
mediation process under way. The rebel leaders must
see that the international community is not prepared to
indefinitely support their aspirations to the cost of the
civilian population.

Whatever the situation following the
referendums, the Sudan will begin a fragile transition
period, which will require the support of the countries
of the region and the international community. From
that standpoint, the United Nations will continue to
have an important role in helping the population. By
remaining in the Sudan, the Organization will be in a
position to continue not only to meet its obligation to
maintain international peace and security, but also to
work to improve the situation of thousands of people
who still face devastating violence and poverty.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council and shall invite Mr. Mbeki to make a few
concluding remarks. I give him the floor.

