Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2352 (2017), which renews the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) for another six months. As the
only troop-contributing country to this unique mission,
it should come as no surprise that we attach a lot of
importance to UNISFA. That is why we actively and
constructively engaged in the negotiations of the
resolution. We worked with the penholder and other
members on this important file even before joining the
Security Council. We know that there has always been
unanimous support for this mission since its inception.
No doubt, the negotiations on the resolution were not
easy. In the end, however, it is good that all of us were
able to maintain Council unity on this important matter.
Let me take this opportunity to express our thanks and
appreciation to the penholder and to all the members of
the Council for demonstrating the necessary flexibility
and compromise in a bid to achieve consensus.

With regard to the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM), which was the
most important sticking point in the negotiations,
all of us know the reason for the lack of meaningful
progress; there is no point in dwelling on it here.
The most important issue is that both parties should
demonstrate full commitment to the implementation of
their arrangements and take the necessary steps to that
effect, as called for in the resolution just adopted. On
that, the penholder has a very strong point.

In that regard, we welcome the outcome of the
extraordinary meeting of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism held in Addis Ababa yesterday
under the auspices of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, which underscored the need for
both parties to urgently take practical steps to activate
the JBVMM. and facilitate its work. The meeting also
outlined a clear road map on steps that need to be taken
over the coming weeks and months. That is indeed the
essence of what we discussed over the past couple of
days. We sincerely hope that things will move in the
right direction so that there can be tangible progress
by the time we meet again, in six months, to consider
this file.

It is also imperative that the parties urgently
begin to establish the Abyei Area administration
and constitute the Abyei police, in accordance with
the commitments under the 20 June 2011 agreement,
without which UNISFA will be forced to continue
to operate in a governance vacuum, which creates
difficulties for the mission in carrying out its mandate
and shouldering additional burdens in undertaking
civilian responsibilities. Therefore, the parties should
also endeavour to unlock some of the issues hindering
the establishment of a civilian administration and police
services, with a view to making progress towards the
full implementation of the 2011 agreement.

In the absence of any progress, the continued
presence of the mission, which is so critical for peace
and stability in the Abyei Area, will be in serious
jeopardy. The strong message to emerge today from the
Council on this issue is indeed very good. We trust that
both parties heed the call.

