Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to express my thanks to Ambassador
Mayoral, Ambassador Loj and Ambassador Burian for
their briefings on the activities of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004). Those Committees play an
important role in our efforts to combat terrorism.

There is a need for cooperation between the Al-
Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee and Member
States - hence the visit organized by the Committee to
my country, during which the Chairman was able to
hear Doha's views about the Committee's work and the
need to continue to implement its activities, which are

S/l'V.5446

 

of the utmost importance to Qatar. The Committee also
examined the various legislative and legal measures
that are in place in Qatar aimed at combating terrorism
in a firm and realistic manner through the rule of law,
the promotion of democracy and full respect for human
rights, as well as domestic legislation to combat
terrorism.

Sanctions remain an important tool for the
Security Council, but we understand that there is a
need to move from comprehensive sanctions to
targeted sanctions. However, such sanctions must be
imposed with a view to achieving a clear objective.
They must be implemented objectively, effectively and
in a balanced number. Some believe that the imposition
of sanctions is a political tool of the Security Council.
However, we must be clear in stating that the
imposition of sanctions is also a legal tool; the Security
Council must take into consideration both the legal
aspect and human rights, which must not be violated.

More than 50 States have pointed out the need for
the Committee to ensure legality and transparency
when listing or delisting names. At the moment, many
cases are being put forward by individuals on the
Committee's list and by domestic courts alleging that
the United Nations is violating human rights in listing
names. In this regard, my delegation would like to
stress once again the need for checks and balances
when including the names of individuals and entities
on the list. Our methods must be effective and
accountable. Implementation must be monitored and
sanctions must be transparent. The listing and delisting
of individuals and entities must be fair and transparent.
Sanctions must also be implemented in an accountable
manner.

Radicalism must be combated in a number of
ways, most importantly by creating societies that are
free from and extremism and hatred of others. We
should recall that resolution 1624 (2005) stresses the
continuing need for international efforts to promote
dialogue and wider horizons for cooperation between
societies in order to prevent hatred of others. We also
recall the international appeal for a dialogue among
civilizations and for coexistence among peoples, as
well as the need to prevent extremism. We call on the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) once again to
take up that issue very firmly and to call on States not
to distort religion.

The most important aspect of the fight against
terrorism is the defence of human rights. States must
ensure that any measures they take to combat terrorism
conform with their obligations under international law
in that regard. In the fight against terrorism, specific
rights cannot be restricted under any circumstances or
at any time. We believe that the United Nations should
have a comprehensive strategy to ensure respect for
human rights in the fight against terrorism.

My delegation shares the positive view of the
progress being made in the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We believe that the Committee must continue
to consider the reports submitted by States. My
delegation welcomes the fact that many States have
submitted national reports. We call upon non-reporting
States to do so now, and we call upon the Committee to
provide the technical assistance requested by States to
make further progress against the threat of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs). The Committee must
proceed cautiously in ensuring the non-proliferation of
WMDs by State or non-State actors. At the same time,
non-proliferation measures cannot be selective.

Finally, I call upon all three Committees to
coordinate and cooperate closely with a view to
achieving the greatest possible effectiveness in the
fight against terrorism.

