Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Austria fully associates
itself with the statement made by the Ambassador of
Portugal on behalf of the European Union and would
like to focus on two points.

My first point concerns cluster munitions. The
humanitarian needs of civilians in armed conflict, as
we all know, are manifold - shelter, food and medical
supplies, just to name the most urgent ones. As if this
immediate plight of conflict-stricken civilians were not
enough, their suffering is too often prolonged by the
horrendous effects of cluster munitions, which kill and
maim civilians, particularly children, deprive
communities of their livelihoods and prevent the return
of refugees.

Austria is committed to the protection of civilians
by striving for a ban on cluster munitions that cause
such unacceptable harm to civilians. We also strive for
the destruction of the stocks and for a prohibition of
the transfer of such munitions. Our goal is to enable
the swift and efficient clearance of affected areas and
to assist the victims of these weapons. We are also
convinced that any new instrument on cluster
munitions needs to contain clear and robust provisions
on assistance to victims of this weapon.

Last week we all heard the clear and
unambiguous appeal of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to the Meeting of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons (CCW) to conclude a legally binding
instrument. This instrument would prohibit the use,
development, production, stockpiling and transfer of
cluster munitions that cause unacceptable harm to
civilians. Austria welcomes the appeal of the
Secretary-General.

Our resolve to ban this category of heinous
weapons is reflected in Austria's national and
international initiatives. Austria has already adopted a
moratorium regarding cluster munitions, in February.

Austria is a firm supporter of the Oslo process
and is committed to concluding a legally binding
instrument by 2008. Such an instrument would, as I
have already mentioned, prohibit the use, production,
transfer and stockpiling of cluster munitions that cause
unacceptable harm to civilians. It would also establish
a framework for cooperation and assistance that
ensures adequate provision of care and rehabilitation to
survivors and their communities, as well as clearance
of contaminated areas, risk education and destruction
of stockpiles of prohibited cluster munitions.

We have been disappointed by the outcome of the
recent Meeting of States Parties to the CCW
Convention, which did not contain a clear and
comprehensive mandate for the creation of such a legal
instrument. That is why, as has already been
mentioned, the upcoming Vienna conference on cluster
munitions, from 5 to 7 December, will be vital in
bringing us a step closer to our common goal of such a
legal instrument by 2008. The Vienna conference will
focus on the fundamental humanitarian objectives of a
legally binding instrument. It will also provide for the
participation of parliamentarians and civil society
representatives.

My second point concerns anti-personnel mines.
This is another issue where the protection of civilians
during and after armed conflicts needs sustained
support from the international community. The tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the Mine Ban
Convention - the Ottawa Convention - serves as an
opportunity to look at what we have achieved so far. It
should even more reignite our fervour to contribute to
the full implementation and universalization of that
Convention.

In this spirit Austria will continue its work for the

mine-ban process, particularly in the field of victim

assistance, mine-risk education and support for the

clearance of mine-affected areas in order to help and

protect civilians from the tragic consequences of armed
conflict.

