Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Representative Ghassan Salame' for his briefing, which
once again demonstrates his ongoing commitment to
peace in Libya. I would also like to thank Ms. Rida Al
Tubuly for her briefing and to welcome the presence
among us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya.

We meet again today to discuss the situation in
Libya, even though the situation on the ground has not
really changed since our last exchange. Low-intensity
fighting continues on the ground, air attacks are on
the rise, civilians and migrants are suffering and
international humanitarian law is blatantly violated.
Moreover, the sanctions regime is being infringed, not
only by the belligerents but also - and I deeply regret
this - by several States Member of the United Nations.
In that regard, I encourage everyone to cooperate
with the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1973 (2011) for the purpose of reporting to
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) and to the Council. In that connection, I would
like to point out that, in order to effectively carry out the
mandate entrusted to them by the Council, the experts
enjoy immunity and cannot be prosecuted.

The military spiral must stop. No one can deny
that it leads to nothing. We must bear in mind that the
conflict continues to claim casualties among the civilian
population, including vulnerable segments of it, as a
result of indiscriminate attacks on populated areas. No
supremacy in the air can lead to lasting peace in Libya.
Therefore, the arms embargo must be respected by all,
the delivery of arms must stop and the recruitment
of combatants, including foreign mercenaries and
elements engaging in terrorist and criminal activities
that are listed by the Council, must stop.

At the same time, a political dialogue must resume
without conditions in order to bring Libya out of the
crisis. My country therefore supports Germany's efforts
to bring the Berlin process to a successful conclusion,
in close cooperation with the Special Representative.
I also welcome the efforts made to support an
inclusive political dialogue among the various Libyan
stakeholders. I call on all those parties to engage in
these efforts in a spirit of compromise and goodwill for
the benefit of peace and stability in Libya.

In the long term, it will also be necessary for the
distribution of Libya's wealth to benefit all citizens.

I would also like to reiterate my country's
commitment to ensuring that crimes committed in
Libya do not go unpunished, be it before national
courts or before the International Criminal Court. I
recall that it is the responsibility of the belligerents to
protect civilians, including the most vulnerable, such as
migrants and children.

In conclusion, allow me to commend once again all
staff of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and Special Representative Salame for their courage
and determination.

