The President: I thank the representative of
Namibia for his kind words addressed to me. I will pass
them on to my colleague and friend, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs. We have been working hard together
over the past two years to try to make our policies in
foreign affairs and development cooperation coherent
and support each other, including in the positions we
have been taking in this Council. So I am glad that the
representative of Namibia made these kind comments
about that.

The last speaker on my list who is also a member
of the Security Council happens to be me in my
national capacity. After that, there are four other
speakers still on the list, but I really would like to say
now that if there is anyone who wants to come back to
any of the issues raised by others, I would welcome
that. I would particularly like to invite Callisto Madavo
of the World Bank and the representative of Guinea-
Bissau, maybe at the end of our meeting, to say a few
words in reaction to many of the things that have been
said. I wanted to warn members about that, but before
we move there I now want to make a little statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Development
Cooperation of the Netherlands.

A great deal has been said; let me just try to focus
on four points that I wanted to make. The debate today
has been about the wider issues, but the current
situation in Guinea-Bissau is a very chilling illustration
of the first point that I wanted to make, that is, the
importance of being very careful not to divide conflicts
up into different stages: pre-conflict, conflict and post-
conflict. That type of compartmentalization does not fit
with reality. One of the first things I did when I became
a minister was to attend a round table organized by the
Brookings Institution at the request of the World Bank,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and some other entities within

the United Nations system in early 1999. There, we
concluded that

"A response to the needs of post-conflict
societies organized along two artificially
compartmentalized lines, namely the emergency-
humanitarian and the long-term developmental,
does not do justice to the fluidity, uncertainty and
complexity that characterize war-torn societies".

We have to keep that very much in mind. That
kind of compartmentalization would force us, in the
case of Guinea-Bissau, to answer hypothetical
questions such as these. Was it in June 1998 that the
conflict started? Was it in November 1998 that it
ended, with the signing of the Abuja treaty? Should we
consider the second round of elections the beginning of
a post-conflict situation, or is it still too early to speak
of a post-conflict situation? Last week, we suddenly
saw those troubling events, and we all had a great deal
of concern that this young democracy might suffer a
serious relapse. We are happy to see that the situation,
thank God, is calm, that the elected President's
Government is back in charge and that General Mane
and the military have had to accept the primacy of the
civilian authorities. Rebuilding efforts can and must
now continue, and we urge all to reconcile themselves
in a forward-looking spirit.

It is exactly that fluid situation, illustrated by
what we saw last week, that means we should not think
in terms of pre-conflict, conflict and post-conflict, but
should have a more holistic view about what I like to
call peace-building. Because that is what it is all about,
before, during and after a conflict, no matter where you
draw the lines. We have to work at peace-building, and
one cannot do that during every stage.

What we need is a more integrated, more
coherent and better coordinated approach in Guinea-
Bissau, and also in other countries in that twilight zone
between conflict and post-conflict peace-building.
Peace-building must be part of an integrated approach
that includes poverty reduction, the improvement of
governance and policies, democratization and the
development of an active civil society to
counterbalance government.

Some would say that peace-building is a form of
development cooperation and thus should not be on the
Security Council's agenda. Well, as I am sure members
know, we completely disagree with such a narrow
interpretation of what we should be doing here in the
Security Council. For us, the Netherlands, one of the
overarching objectives of our membership has been to
promote a more integrated, a more coordinated, a more
holistic approach, particularly regarding conflicts in
Africa. I really hope that today's meeting has been
another step in that direction. We really believe that it
remains relevant for the Council, in the light of its
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, to discuss these issues of peace-
building too, even if they can be called development
cooperation. Consolidating an often fragile peace;
security policy; and development cooperation: it all
comes together, and we have to integrate all the various
dimensions.

I was glad to hear how many members - Mali,
Argentina and others - stressed that it is essential for
the international community to get its act together. We
have to make a better effort to attain that holistic,
system-wide approach. Together, we can do so much
more than any of us can do individually. The total
could be so much more than the sum of its parts. All of
us - all the various actors - should be much more
synergetic. We have to avoid mission creep in the
system; we have to avoid overlaps; we have to fill
those gaps that we have been talking about; we have to
rise above the institutional egos that we too often see in
the international system.

Strong coordination among these actors in peace-
building is essential: the United Nations on the
political side; other United Nations agencies, such as
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
together with the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), on the development side; as
well as bilateral donors. I was really glad to hear how
many members - so many that I did not even keep a
list - made the point that it is important to get all
those actors to work together. In Guinea-Bissau, I
think, it could have, and should have, led to a faster
response better tailored to the demands of the
situation - if we had got our act together earlier on.

The second point I want to make is that, just as
there is no clear line between conflict and post-conflict,
there is no very clear distinction between humanitarian
and regular aid. We have to fill the gap. I am very
concerned about how international interest often fades
away once a conflict disappears from the television
screens. If it is not on CNN, we forget about it, and we
donors stop our financing. Humanitarian aid dries up,
and we depart the country and leave the country to its
fate. There you have the big black hole that many
countries face post-conflict. Donors then adopt a wait-
and-see attitude once the most urgent phase of the
conflict is over. In Guinea-Bissau we saw that donor
funding dropped very sharply, and it is very important
to realize that that kind of declining donor funding in
fact destabilizes countries, and can actually push
countries back into conflict. We have to act a little
more responsibly as donors and as the international
community.

Humanitarian aid should be complemented early
on by peace-building and rehabilitation activities. At
the post-conflict stage, of course, humanitarian aid has
to be phased out, but not cold turkey. There too, there
must be no exit without strategy, a strategy aiming at
more sustainable forms of development. I really want
to repeat this plea: countries emerging from conflict
should not be left alone, because that truly creates the
perfect breeding ground for a new escalation of
conflict.

The good news is that we are talking about this,
and recognizing and acknowledging that there is a gap
problem between humanitarian and structural aid. The
World Bank-UNHCR initiative by the Brookings
Institution attests to that; we acknowledged, or at least
paid lip-service to the fact, that relief, return,
reintegration, reconciliation, recovery, rehabilitation
and reconstruction, while they may be separate
concepts, are all linked in the real world. They are one
thing. I am very glad that we have acknowledged this,
but we have to do a better job of translating it into our
actions as an international community.
In that context, I am, again, really pleased that
Callisto Madavo was here. I am also really pleased to
have heard so many members - including Jamaica,
Ukraine, Malaysia and Namibia - welcome the World
Bank's presence here. I think it was very important to
have it represented, because I think we all welcome the
increased involvement of the international financial
institutions in peace-building and in post-conflict
activities. The representative of the European Union
has already stated - and how can I but agree - that,
in post-conflict situations the international financial
institutions have to be politically sensitive in checking
their conditionalities, if this is relevant in a given post-
conflict situation. I would add that they should go the
extra mile to foster inclusion in the way they work and
to foster institutional capacity-building.
In fact, if I may, I would commend the World
Bank, for a change, for having done that in the case of
Guinea-Bissau. Because ofjet-lag, I woke up at 4 a.m.,
and I said to myself, "Well, why not read the poverty
reduction strategy paper, the IMF paper and so forth?"
So I read all those documents from 19th Street NW,
Washington. And, for a change, they did a very good
job. I think I would want to make the point that, in
checking on political sensitivity and on the relevance
of conditionalities in the context of post-conflict
situations, they did a very good job, so let us say so.

My third point is that we should have no illusions
about our role as outsiders. I want to underline that also
to the delegation of Guinea-Bissau. They bear the brunt
of the work. Of course, in every society there is a fight
for the biggest piece of the pie. We have that in our
countries, too. The question is where that fight takes
place, the theatre where the parties fight. Is it the
parliament building or a battlefield? That is the issue.

There is a particular problem in poor countries, in
that the pic is not that big. What is worse is that in
many poor countries the pie is not growing. Why is it
so easy where I come from for us to continue to be
democratic? It is easy enough in the Netherlands: the
pie is growing fast. It is much easier to have inclusive
development if the pie grows. So if we want to be
serious about conflict resolution, having the pie grow is
very important. Again, that is where development
cooperation kicks in, and why we development
Ministers should be in this Chamber once in a while.

But, again, it is up those in Guinea-Bissau and the
countries concerned themselves. What I am always so
energized about is how often, even during conflict, one
sees a peace process start at the grass-roots level in
many countries before a formal settlement is reached.
One sees religious and women's groups, civil society
and people who are simply weary of the fighting and
needless bloodshed. They can play a very crucial role
in peace-building, pursuing peace from the grassroots
level, building from the bottom up. It is very important
for us to recognize that popular involvement and
support it in order to spur that momentum and keep it

going.

Such an inclusive model cannot be imposed from
the outside. A peaceful solution to a conflict is possible
only if the internal parties have the will to achieve
stability. We outsiders, including the United Nations
and regional organizations, can intervene and
contribute successfully only if that will exists in
countries. I am really pleased with the recent
developments in Guinea-Bissau that have proved that
to be true. We saw a legitimate transfer of power after
last year's elections. Although considerable progress
has been made since democracy was restored, the
domestic political process still faces a number of
serious military, economic and social bottlenecks.

I think that your country, Mr. Vice-Prime
Minister, deserves a lot of support. We need to
commend you, as Mr. Madavo did, for the way in
which, for instance, you have tried to make policy-
making inclusive and have invited civil society to
participate in the process set out in the poverty
reduction strategy paper, the process that led to your
poverty reduction strategy.

The last point I want to make is a very obvious
one that has been made by many others, including
Malaysia, Namibia, Bangladesh, Canada and the World
Bank. I refer to the huge importance of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), even if in
Guinea-Bissau it is called DRR. I am convinced that if
one looks at a past success story in Africa -
Mozambique, say - to see what made it such a
success, one discovers that the answer is that timely,
adequate and generous financing was on the table for
DDR. That was extremely important to make peace
stick in that case. We should learn that lesson.

I have been pleased to follow Security Council
debates, including that of 23 March 2000. I would like
to quote from the presidential statement made
following that debate:

"adequate and timely funding for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration is critical to the
successful implementation of a peace process".
(S/PRS T/2000/1 0)

Ijust want to say here that I would like to honour
the Netherlands membership of the Council by walking
the walk, putting my money where my mouth is, and
pledging as the Netherlands Minister for Development
Cooperation that, as far as I am concerned, post-
conflict peace-building will never be allowed to fail in
Africa because of lack of financial resources for
DDR - be it in Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone or
Burundi. I want to pledge here that, for our part, we
will kick in the money needed for DDR, for I believe
that it is the best investment in peace. I know that it
can be a risky investment. There is no guarantee of
success, as money alone does not do the trick. But I
sometimes feel, as the Development Minister, that it is
much more risky not to take any risks.

As I did, for instance, for Ethiopia and Eritrea, I
would like to ask the multilateral organizations - the
World Bank and UNDP- to be there in time to
develop DDR programmes. Nothing can be done with
my pledge unless there is an account number, unless
the multilateral organizations do their homework and
unless these programmes are in place in time before the
momentum wanes. Of course, in addition there is
also the issue of local ownership; for otherwise
initiatives will be doomed to fail anyway. And those
who bear public responsibility - the Governments -
will have to re-establish their credibility; and the
balance between government and the military has to be
restored.

I very much welcome the steps that have been
taken to achieve rapid DDR in Guinea-Bissau.
Activities really got started just two months ago, but a
lot of progress has been made. I call on all parties in
Guinea-Bissau to keep up the momentum, and I join
everyone here who has said today that there is some
room to improve burden-sharing in the financing of
DDR. Let me underline that.

Fighting poverty and increasing participation are
crucial to the sustainable building of peace. This is all
about people. We should all join forces to offer a
perspective to the young women and men of Africa,
making sure that young men do not perceive taking up
arms as their only possible future. The less people have
to lose, the greater the risk of conflict. Effective
development cooperation therefore helps to ensure that
people have the hope that their children will have a
better future than they have; that people, in effect, have
something to hold on to that they do not want to lose. I
think that is what we are here together for, what we
must try to achieve in the future.

I now change hats again to resume my functions
as President of the Council, pausing to apologize to the
interpreters.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Gambia. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

