Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to express our appreciation for your initiative, Mr.
President, in having organized this ministerial-level
meeting of the Security Council on civilian aspects of
conflict management and peace-building. It is a very
topical and relevant theme, given the increasing
complexity of United Nations peacekeeping missions,
particularly when their mandate is simply to help a
State to regenerate itself as an entity and when it
covers a broad range of activities involving civilian
stakeholders, as well as a military component.

Activities requiring a major civilian component
include the setting up of a dialogue among former
belligerent parties through transitional institutions;
supervising and facilitating the implementation of
peace agreements or political accords; the promotion of
national reconciliation; combating impunity; and the
rehabilitation and reintegration of former combatants,
which are often the poor relations of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation
programmes.

A number of reforms are also necessary for the
establishment of lasting democratic national
institutions and for the creation of conditions to
promote their development. This means preparing for
and holding credible, transparent elections conducive
to the establishment of a democratic political system
based on the rule of law and respect for fundamental
freedoms. It also means helping to restore the major
macroeconomic sectors and reviving normal economic
activities.

Preparing for and holding elections require the
concomitant establishment of physical conditions for
the voting process and an enabling environment so that
people can give expression to their wishes - and that
includes providing security guarantees. Hence, there is
a need for close coordination between the military and
civilian components of peacekeeping operations. In
general, we are all in agreement today that an
environment made safe by the military and the civilian
police is absolutely essential for civilian reconstruction
and rehabilitation activities undertaken by civilians.
Security is therefore a condition for peace and
development.

The success of peacekeeping operations depends
not only on the parties to a conflict, but also on a
careful calibration of the human resources made
available to a United Nations mission, particularly the
military and civil police component, and the civilian
component itself, with a View to carrying out the tasks
set out in the mandate.

We believe that the question of the political
supervision of peacekeeping operations has been
resolved very effectively by means of the Secretary-
General's Special Representatives. We unreservedly
support that approach, because it is consistent with the
interface between civilian authorities and military
institutions. We should reaffirm the prerogatives of the
Special Representative, as head of the mission, in his
supervisory capacity over the utilization on the ground
of the resources and forces at his disposal.

Our goals should be to define the conditions
necessary for establishing a bridge between security,
recovery and development and to maximize the
synergy of the United Nations, regional organizations,
national Governments and civil society, according to a
division of labour based on complementarity and
comparative advantage.

In the light of those comments, we believe that
there is a need to plan, organize, mobilize and finance
civilian capacities at a level greater than at any time in
the past, and to clearly define the objectives of the
civilian components of missions, giving them precise
mandates that include, right from the outset, various
options for a viable and credible exit strategy.

Thus the rebuilding of a State should henceforth
be viewed as the main goal of conflict management and
peace-building, and be placed on an equal footing with
the restoration of security conditions. Clearly, restoring
security is not enough to ensure that the peace will be
lasting. Haiti is a graphic example in that respect.

In the past, a number of studies and proposals
have dealt with this issue in the context of the United
Nations. According to a recent study, when the post-
conflict reconciliation phase fails, 40 per cent of
countries emerging from conflict relapse into violence.
In the case of Africa, those figures are even higher -
as high as 60 per cent. Preventing such a relapse should
be the abiding concern of all stakeholders.

The mandates of operations must be defined very
carefully. They must be precise and must include a
complete range of civilian activities essential for the
effectiveness of peacekeeping. It is important that
stakeholders be given greater latitude on the ground,
but they also need sufficient elements to facilitate
planned financing. The civilian aspects of crisis
management must be given the same priority as that
accorded to the military aspect so that civilian
achievements can provide proper support for the
military element in the long term.

That situation also represents a challenge to
individual States that provide troops and civilian
personnel and that are required to deploy agents that
have the necessary expertise and competence in crisis
management. That also applies to regional and even
subregional organizations, which are assuming greater
responsibilities in the area of post-conflict
management.

Exchange of training programmes and experience
among various countries and institutions that
participate in peacekeeping operations should make it
possible to strengthen and consolidate know-how and
to develop a network of people with the best possible
qualifications that is extensive enough to meet existing
needs in good time.

Once they are on the ground, civilian personnel
must constantly endeavour to carry out their activities
in close coordination, acting strictly within the
parameters of their role so as not to put themselves at
risk unnecessarily or cause difficulties that could
jeopardize the results of their efforts. Civilian
personnel must be trained to manage stress. They need
to work in a team and must be able to work under
difficult conditions. They must also have a degree of
knowledge of the local cultural realities so that they
can adapt to them.

From the standpoint of the duration of operations,
it should be stressed that the activities of the civilian
component must be designed and conducted in such a
way as to ensure that they can hand over to their
counterparts in the countries concerned. They must
gradually evolve and allow an increased role for local
people as they take over essential functions, and help
them to develop the necessary capacity for a gradual
transfer of responsibility to local stakeholders. That is
the only way in which it will be possible in the long
term to create conditions for the United Nations to
disengage and leave behind solid democratic
institutions and a national economy that can become
part of the global economy.

In conclusion, I would like stress the very
important question of the necessary financing needed
for peacekeeping operations. They should avoid
complicated procedures. Funding must be made
available, and it should be disbursed within a
reasonable time period so that the work can be carried
out in effective manner.

