In accordance with paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have the honour of briefing the Security Council on the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, covering the period from 26 March to 8 June 2020. Following the appointment of the five experts to serve on the Panel of Experts on the Sudan until 12 March 2021, the Secretariat organized a virtual induction for the Panel that took place between 8 and 14 April 2020. The induction sessions included planning the work for the new mandate and holding virtual bilateral meetings with Member States, including the Sudan and United Nations agencies. Following the induction, in a letter dated 21 May addressed to me in my capacity as Chair of the Committee, the Panel outlined its priorities within its mandate, outlined in the relevant Security Council resolutions. In accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2508 (2020), the Panel submitted its first quarterly report, covering the period 13 March to 1 June 2020, to the Committee. Due to the restrictions warranted by the coronavirus-disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the Panel was unable to travel. Instead, it collected and verified information remotely. For the benefit of the Council, so that it can provide the best support to the Sudan in relation to the most recent developments on the ground, I would like to highlight the following important elements from the Panel's reporting, without prejudice to the national positions of individual Committee members on these issues. The Panel reported that, despite many hampering factors, including COVID-19, the peace talks in Juba continued, with 20 June 2020 set as the last date of negotiations. The clashes between the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction (SLA/AW) and the Government of the Sudan forces in Jebel Marra have lessened since late 2019, owing to the reciprocal ceasefire. However, the SLA/AW continued to recruit and train new fighters thanks to its exploitation of the Torroye gold mine in south-eastern Jebel Marra. Further destabilizing events concerned a sanctioned individual, Musa Hilal, and Arab communities. The Panel stated that the supporters of Musa Hilal have been mobilizing to obtain his release from prison. In addition, the Panel reported on the possible formation of a new armed group by communities that fear that they may lose the land that they seized during the Darfur conflict. In terms of regional context, almost all Darfurian armed groups maintained a presence in Libya, which remains an important source of financing. With regard to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Panel expressed its concern that certain factors, such as having more than 1.8 million people in internally displaced persons (IDP) camps and porous borders with neighbouring countries, may have a serious impact on the spread of the disease. Common social-distancing measures against COVID-19 have been difficult to implement in IDP camps owing to the difficult living conditions there, in particular overpopulation and the scarcity of water. Finally, I would like to reiterate that all the aforementioned elements were brought to the attention of Council members for the purpose of pointing out areas where challenges may arise, so that the Council is aware as it deliberates on how to best support the Sudan during its transition. I would also like to take this opportunity to emphasize that the sanctions regime was established for the sole purpose of helping to bring peace to Darfur. It is not intended to punish the Sudan, but to support the achievement of sustainable peace. The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) is committed to working together with the Sudan and all relevant stakeholders to make this a reality.
