Mr. Ozerdem: I am honoured to be here with
everyone today and grateful for the opportunity to
address the Security Council. Allow me to express my
sincere thanks to the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, Her Excellency Ms. Karen Pierce, for
her invitation for me to speak in this open debate on the
issue of reconciliation.
Reconciliation is one of the main factors in
gaining and sustaining peace. Allow me to spend a few
moments sharing with the Council why reconciliation
is so important for achieving lasting peace.

One of the tragic ironies of wars is that is that,
when they come to an end, to achieve lasting peace,
people on all sides must learn to live together. Victims,
perpetrators and others in war-affected communities
begin the formidable task of reconciling with one
another, politically and interpersonally, reframing and
rehumanizing their opposite numbers, rebuilding trust
and accountability and coming to terms with legacies
of the past.

Therefore, reconciliation is a process of restoring
broken relationships, and has to engage deep-seated
wounds of conflict. Reconciliation is also about
learning to live non-violently with radical differences.
However, post-conflict societies consist of large and
disparate groups of actors with different experiences
of the conflict and with different cultural codes and
values. It is therefore unsurprising that the concept of
reconciliation means different things to different people.

For parents whose children were taken in a raid,
it might mean discovering what happened to them and
seeing the perpetrators brought to justice. For newly
installed national leaders, the emphasis might be on
expedience, burying the past in order to focus on the
urgent challenges of the present. For ex-combatants,
reconciliation might be their ticket to forgiveness or a
fresh start.

That is why reconciliation needs to be a tailor-
made process, agile enough to adapt to changing
socioeconomic and political post-conflict dynamics.
In other words, from a minimalist perspective,
reconciliation could be about achieving the objective
of coexistence, whereas a maximalist approach
emphasizes the importance of forgiveness, dealing with
the past and rebuilding trust.

We should also remember that successful
reconciliation is both an outcome and a process. As an
outcome, it consists of mutual trust, recognition and
acceptance, as well as sensitivity and consideration for
the other party's needs and interests. As a process, it
would need to incorporate wide-ranging changes, both
structural and psychological.

What have we learned from our reconciliation
experiences over the years? First of all, reconciliation
should be a transformational experience - not
about learning how to forgive and forget, but how to
remember and change. The rebuilding of Stari Most, the
famous footbridge in Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
could have been a great opportunity for such a
transformational experience. Instead, the international
community built an almost identical copy of the bridge,
which was indeed a great success, but without giving
Serbs, Croats and Bosniaks an opportunity to build
bridges of trust during its reconstruction.

Secondly, reconciliation should always be based
on local approaches, local vocabulary and, most
important, local actors. Too often, however, their
efforts are dismissed by political actors. Nevertheless,
it is only through local approaches that we stand a
chance to engage the deep emotional wounds left by
conflict. Let us remember that emotions are not just
private reactions, but also the basis of sociopolitical
forces that are critical for the construction of identity
and community. Therefore, it is important to consider
reconciliation as a way of recasting the emotional
legacies of conflict.

Thirdly, different dimensions of
reconciliation - interpersonal, intergroup or
inter-State - demand different types of engagement.
Accordingly, we need to consider different types of
local actors. Local authorities and municipalities, and
their potential power as insider reconcilers, are often
overlooked. For example, the city of Coventry in the
United Kingdom, which was badly bombed during
the Second World War, led an amazing mission of
reconciliation and worked with the war-torn cities of
iron curtain countries, such as Dresden, Belgrade and
Warsaw, during the Cold War years. Let us recognize
the bravery and foresight of insider reconcilers such
as Provost Howard, who, immediately following the
bombing ofCoventry Cathedral, called for reconciliation
rather than revenge.

Fourthly, financial support and projects become
helpful only when they are part of a larger, locally
designed and led process. The United Nations and its
Member States have to increase funding, but must also
make it more flexible. Effective reconciliation requires
agility to react to changing situations and longevity,
which project cycles rarely enable. That is particularly
important to ensure the full participation of women
and young people, as they tend to be excluded and
marginalized in wider peacebuilding processes.
Without women and young people, reconciliation can
never be successful.

Fifthly, it is important to remember that launching
a truth and reconciliation commission is not enough,
although it is often necessary to address past injustices
and establish what happened. Different attempts
at reconciliation - whether they focus on truth
finding, reparations, education, peace journalism,
addressing past grievances or writing a common
history - should all be interlinked and connected to
the wider socioeconomic and political realities of post-
conflict societies. Let us not forget that reconciliation
is a process, not just a programme.

Finally, we must not think that reconciliation
happens only after violent conflict. It needs to happen
all the time and everywhere - sometimes even as the
first option to achieve peace. In today's world many
societies are deeply divided along religious, political,
ethnic, racial or economic fault lines. Our politics
are divisive. Therefore, we need to reduce prejudices,
challenge stereotypes and tackle dehumanization. We
need to support everyday peace and reconciliation.
Our activities as politicians, diplomats, civil society
workers, academics, the media and the private sector
should engender trust, compromise and cooperation.

Reconciliation matters because if individual
and collective traumas are not addressed, residual
grievances can provide a basis for self-perpetuating
cycles of violence among future generations. For divided
societies to heal and come together, we need strategies
in place that enable us to negotiate past grievances, and
allow us to reflect upon how memories and emotions
force the past to become the politics of the present.

Designing effective reconciliation requires the
involvement of relevant local actors, particularly women
and young people. As members of the international
community, we should faithfully support the processes
that we help to design.

Faith can be a significant inspiration for
reconciliation, but its manipulation can also lead to
further division, hatred or violence. Like all other
actors, faith actors need to be scrutinized according
to their actions, and that is what research, monitoring
impact and evaluation help to accomplish.
Reconciliation can be effective only when it is
deeply contextual. Sometimes the traditions that heal
relationships may, unfortunately, need to be revitalized.
That is where knowledge of local actors is critical, and
building networks of actors and good practices could
inspire others.

At the School for Conflict Analysis and Resolution
at George Mason University, and its newly founded Mary
Hoch Center for Reconciliation, we undertake research
on locally led reconciliation practices. With a specific
focus on insider reconcilers, we facilitate collaboration
among scholars and practitioners, examining how faith
and indigenous narratives mitigate conflicts and heal
community relationships. We remain available to assist
the United Nations in its mission to advance the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, particularly Goal
16, on peace, justice and strong institutions.

