Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin by

thanking Mr. Mark Lowcock for his very objective,
yet alarming, briefing. We would like to express our
gratitude for his efforts, his team and the activities
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in Yemen.

I would also like to thank the United Kingdom
for taking the initiative to convene this very timely
meeting. It demonstrates the desperate urgency of the
humanitarian situation in Yemen. We have observed the
continued deterioration of the living conditions of the
Yemeni population, as just described by Mr. Lowcock.
The situation of civilians is getting worse day by day, as
Yemen is now on the brink of the worst famine. We are
appalled by reports estimating that up to 4 million more
Yemenis may become severely food insecure by the end
of the year if conditions do not improve. The country
may also face a new wave of the cholera epidemic,
as the number of suspected cases has increased. The
dire situation of Yemeni civilians continues to be
exacerbated by the escalation of hostilities and attacks
on civilian infrastructure.

We believe that the highly alarming situation of
children in Yemen requires the special attention of the
Council. Every 10 minutes a Yemeni child dies from
entirely preventable war-related causes, and thousands
have already been killed or injured as a result ofconflict.
Currently, almost every child in Yemen is in need of
aid and, according to recent estimates, an additional
1 million children are now at risk of descending into
famine. Those numbers are deeply disturbing and
horrifying. We urge all parties to the conflict, as well
as those with influence over them, to take immediate
action to save Yemeni children from hunger and the
atrocities of war.

We are also alarmed by the escalation of fighting
in and around Al-Hudaydah, where an increase in air
strikes, naval and ground shelling has resulted in scores
of civilian casualties as well as damage to civilian
infrastructure. The intensification of hostilities in
Al-Hudaydah poses a major threat not only to the city
and its inhabitants, but also to the critical lifeline for
humanitarian assistance. The disruption of the strategic
supply chain leading through Al-Hudaydah would have
disastrous humanitarian consequences for millions
of people across the country. It is therefore crucial to
maintain the full functioning of the port and to ensure
that all roads leading from Al-Hudaydah are accessible
in order to enable basic commodities to be delivered.

The collapse of the economy and State structures
is yet another factor contributing to the further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
As a result of the rapid devaluation of the Yemeni rial,
prices of basic commodities are skyrocketing and the
purchasing power ofmillions ofpeople is falling. Could
any of us imagine being forced to live on less than $1 a
day? In the light of such a tragic humanitarian situation,
I would like to point to the provisions ofthe presidential
statement adopted in March (S/PRST/2018/5) by the
Council and to recall four important points. First,
concrete steps must be taken to de-escalate the
fighting and establish a durable cessation of hostilities.
Secondly, safe and unhindered humanitarian access
must be ensured. Thirdly, international humanitarian
law must be respected and the protection of civilians
ensured at all times. Lastly, immediate measures need
to be taken to stabilize the economy and support the
exchange rate. These issues are still very urgent.

In conclusion, the Council bears the responsibility
for the situation in Yemen. It is time to take concrete
action in order to bring the conflict to an end. We
must stand united in our call to the parties to step
up their engagement in an inclusive, United Nations-
led political process without preconditions, so that a
peaceful solution can soon be reached for the sake of
the Yemeni people.

