Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and to
wish you every success. You can count on our support. I
must also pay tribute to Ambassador Lavrov of the
Russian Federation, for his excellent stewardship of the
Council during the month of December.

Since the civil war started in Abkhazia three years
ago, the international community has made concerted
efforts to find a solution to the constitutional crises in that
region of Georgia, but such efforts have been thwarted by
the self-declared Government of Abkhazia, which
continues to reject proposals for a unitary state. We
sometimes wonder whether Security Council resolutions
and presidential statements mean anything to the parties
to the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia, particularly to Mr.
Ardzinba and his forces. The callousness with which the
Abkhaz side treats the plight of the 250,000 refugees that

 

they have expelled from their homes is most disheartening,
to say the least.

We believe that it is time the Abkhaz authorities took
the decisions of the Security Council regarding the peace
process in Abkhazia seriously. Botswana believes that a
comprehensive political settlement of the conflict in
Georgia is still possible. The essential elements for such a
settlement are already in place, and they include the safe
return of refugees and internally displaced persons,
preservation of the territorial integrity of the Republic of
Georgia and a constitutional framework conferring a special
status on Abkhazia. These elements have already been
accepted by the Government of the Republic of Georgia,
and the Abkhaz side should show its commitment to the
peaceful resolution of the conflict by doing likewise.

We are deeply disturbed by the level of violence and
ethnic killings in the Gali region. Human rights violations,
particularly towards the Georgian population in that region,
cannot be allowed to continue with impunity. The Abkhaz
authorities have a responsibility for the safety of all peoples
in Abkhazia, irrespective of their ethnic origin. It is for this
reason that we support the language of operative paragraph
7 of the draft resolution before us, which calls upon on the
Abkhaz leadership to ensure the protection of all persons in
areas under its control.

The draft resolution requests the Secretary-General to
report to the Council within the next three months on the
efforts of his Special Envoy and the Russian Federation as
facilitator to find a solution to the Abkhaz problem. It is
our fervent hope that this time substantive progress on both
the political and refugee questions will be made so that
peace and security can return to Georgia.

In conclusion, I wish to extend my delegation's sincere
thanks to the Secretary-General's Special Envoy,
Ambassador Brunner, and to the Government of the
Russian Federation for their untiring efforts to find a
solution to the Georgia-Abkhaz conflict.

