Mr. Gaye (spoke in French): I express my deep
respect to the Council and I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to update its members, from my vantage
point in Bangui, on the situation in the Central African
Republic. The security situation remains tense in the
capital and within the country. The recent attack on the
Church of Our Lady of Fatima in Bangui on 28 May,
in which 11 people, including the priest, were killed,
illustrates not only the dangerous spiral of attacks and
reprisals affecting the country, but also a radicalization
of both parties and the risk that the situation may grow
more deadly yet.

The attack followed an incident in Bangui in
the same week, in which three young Muslims were
brutally killed, probably by anti-Balaka elements, while
traveling to a football match organized to promote
intercommunal reconciliation. These events provoked
spontaneous popular demonstrations against what some
consider to be a failure on the part of the transitional
authorities and international forces to restore security.
A number of barricades were erected in the city and
had to be removed by international forces. Bangui was
paralysed for three days and several people were killed.

The spiral of violence and retaliation has also
affected the interior of the country, in the west and the
centre in particular. In the north-west, along the border
with Chad, an increasing number of attacks on villages
by heavily armed ex-Sele'ka and Peuhl groups - the
Mbororos - were reported. This probably indicates
an attempt on the part of the ex-Seleka to extend their
area of control to the west, even as the anti-Balakas
are strengthening their presence in these same areas.
Consequently, there have been a number of violent
clashes between anti-Balakas and ex-Seleka.

(spoke in English)

Many villages have been set ablaze, causing the
displacement of local populations. Ex-Sele'ka have
also enhanced their presence in Bambari, where they
established their military command centre. Forces
from the African-led International Support Mission for
the Central African Republic (MISCA) and Operation
Sangaris have been deployed to Bambari.

Civilian communities remain direct targets of
sectarian violence and reprisal killings. Yesterday, for
example, in Bambari, 18 people were reportedly killed,
including 3 children and l woman, and 8 were wounded
in an attack by anti-Balaka against the Peuhl. Twenty-
two houses were set ablaze. In retaliation, the ex-Seleka
killed eight persons and wounded four later in the day.
Another 129 civilians sought refuge at the MISCA
base, of which 58 were moved from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) compound.

The few Muslim communities that are left in Bangui
remain largely confined to their neighbourhoods,
mainly in the PK5 district. They are encircled by
anti-Balaka who are not only preventing people from
leaving but are also cutting off food and medical
supplies. There are also reports of anti-Balaka targeting
non-Muslim individuals who are believed to be helping
Muslim populations through the provision of supplies or
services. Elements of the Central African Armed Forces
are involved in many of those incidents alongside the
anti-Balaka. Throughout the country, approximately
20,000 people from minority communities are trapped
in 16 locations; if they leave, they may be attacked
before they reach safety.

MISCA and Operation Sangaris are doing their
best to stabilize the situation and protect civilians in
their areas of deployment, while humanitarian actors
are addressing the critical needs of the displaced
people. However, their conditions remain precarious.
The European Union military operation in the Central
African Republic has now reached its full operational
capability and is providing security at the Bangui
airport as well as in the third and fifth arrondissements
of Bangui. We are working closely with those forces
to coordinate efforts to enhance the protection of
populations under threat and to prevent further
violence. However, the protection needs in the country
are enormous, and there is an urgent need to strengthen
MISCA's capabilities to provide an effective response.
Furthermore, international forces can be effective only
if their efforts are coupled with effective measures to
extend State authority, mediate between communities
and armed groups and fight impunity - most important,
by restoring the penal chain. MINUSCA is focusing on
supporting initiatives in those areas.

The MINUSCA guard unit is now deployed in
Bangui, Bouar and Bambari. It has proven to be a
critical asset in ensuring the security of United Nations
installations and personnel and to extricate staff
members under threat.

The human rights and humanitarian situation
remains of serious concern. Violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law continue to be
committed by all armed groups and civilians, using
weapons with impunity. More than half a million people
remain displaced, including 370,000 who have crossed
the borders, placing a significant strain on neighbouring
countries. Half the population of the Central African
Republic is in need of humanitarian assistance.

Let me now turn to the political situation, which
has deteriorated noticeably over the past month. The
continuing insecurity created by the various armed
groups is improving too slowly to satisfy the population.
That has led to growing criticism about the inability
of the Transitional Government to deliver on security,
which risks undermining its authority. The Government
is struggling to govern the country without its own
security forces or financial means. At the same time,
the political elite are deeply divided, and there is a high
level of political and social antagonism and distrust
among political actors and among communities. That
does not bode well for the holding of credible elections
early next year.
The recent attempt by the ex-Seleka to unify its
structures and the establishment of its headquarters in
the central city of Bambari were perceived by both the
Government and parts of the population as a provocative
attempt at de facto partition. However, political
cohesiveness within the ex-Seleka structure remains
weak. The anti-Balaka movement remains highly fluid,
despite ongoing efforts to create an organizational and
command structure. It is still difficult to gauge what
role the anti-Balaka could or should play in the political
dialogue that the country must begin.

There is no doubt that disarmament and an inclusive
political dialogue are essential steps to achieve lasting
security. The recent seminar facilitated by the Centre
for Humanitarian Dialogue at the request of the Head
of State of the Transition and the dialogue initiative of
a local non-governmental organization are encouraging
developments. They indicate that many Central Africans
are ready for dialogue ifthey believe it will bring peace.
Such dialogue should lead to a political agreement with
regard to elections, disarmament and the composition of
the national armed forces and other key political issues,
including the future of governance, decentralization,
the question of constructively addressing the root
causes of the crisis, and the economic future. That will
be vital to create the conditions conducive to the return
of refugees and displaced persons.

Based on our consultations with key regional actors,
including the mediator, President Sassou Nguesso
of the Republic of the Congo, a representative of
President Deby Itno of Chad, the Chair of the Economic
Community of Central African States and national
stakeholders, we believe that there is an immediate
need to support an inclusive negotiation process on
disarmament that results in a political agreement and
the eventual disarmament of all armed groups. There is
no doubt that the process will be complicated and will
certainly require time to fully evolve. It is essential that
the dialogue process be owned by Central Africans.
However, there will be no lasting solution without the
continued engagement of the subregion.

MINUSCA is working with the transitional
authorities and the international security forces to
prevent further violence in the capital and throughout
the country, including by investigating violations
and in order to take concrete measures to ensure
that perpetrators are held accountable. To that end,
MINUSCA is increasing its civilian component and
preparing for its deployment to a number of locations
outside Bangui by the end of July, with a focus on
supporting local authorities and enhancing efforts
to protect civilians. Efforts continue to establish the
peacekeeping operation and prepare for a seamless
transfer of authority from MISCA to MINUSCA
on 15 September. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations will brief the Council in mid-July on the
state of play with regard to the deployment of the
peacekeeping operation and the transition from MISCA
to MINUSCA.

(spoke in French)

The attention that the international community
has paid to the Central African Republic in recent
months has contributed to preventing the country from
falling further into the spiral of violence. MINUSCA,
the United Nations country team and the international
forces continue to make the necessary efforts to support
the authorities and the people of the Central African
Republic to address immediate challenges and prevent
a further deterioration of the situation. However, the
situation in the Central African Republic remains
complex and multifaceted. Facing it will require time
and resources. The continued commitment and resolve
of the region and the wider international community
and a unified and cohesive approach will be critical
factors in achieving that goal.

