Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): At the outset, my delegation would like
to express its appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important open debate of the Security
Council on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. My delegation has full
confidence that the current debate will be a meaningful
opportunity to contribute substantially to a settlement
of Middle East issues.

The peaceful settlement of the Palestinian question
is today one of the top priorities among the Middle East
issues that cannot be delayed and is directly linked to
ensuring world peace and security. The Middle East
issue, which was triggered by Israel's occupation of
Arab territories in 1948, has not been solved to date,
more than 70 years later, due to the high-handedness of
Israel, coupled with the biased policies voiced by some.
Israel's fast expansion of settlements, the ongoing
blockade of the Gaza Strip and ruthless suppression
of peaceful Palestinian protesters have sparked
condemnation and rejection across the world, as they
constitute a series of obstacles for the Palestinian people
in their struggle to reclaim their occupied territories
and establish an independent State.

The unlawful and unjust behaviour of Israel is
closely linked to the double-standard attitude of a
specific permanent member of the Security Council that
bankrolls and sponsors Israel's territorial expansion.
We cannot overlook the fact that permanent members
of the Security Council insist, on the one hand, on the
importance of ensuring peace while, on the other hand,
back Israel's ruthless crackdown on the Palestinian
people while arrogantly seeking to change the status of
East Jerusalem. The status of East Jerusalem is a very
sensitive issue. It must be treated fairly by restoring
the Palestinian people's right to self-determination and
through a comprehensive and lasting solution to Middle
East issues.

In that context, my delegation asserts that it is
important to fully implement resolution 2334 (2016),
which sets forth requirements for establishing an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, based on the pre-l967 borders, as well
as the other relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly calling for a complete halt to the expansion
of settlements and the ruthless crackdown on the
Palestinian people and opposing any attempt to change
the status of East Jerusalem.

Furthermore, the Security Council should fully
discharge its responsibility to ensure international peace
and security, as desired by the international community.
The Council is mandated to ensure international peace
and security and should focus directly on the nature of
the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, and take measures to fairly address those
issues. It should also thoroughly investigate every type
of illegal act committed by Israel, including territorial
expansion, and take legally binding measures aimed at
completely halting those acts.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
will continue to extend its unwavering support for
and solidarity with the Palestinian people in their
struggle to end the occupation by Israel and regain
their legitimate national rights, including the right to
establish an independent State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. At the same time, my delegation expresses
its full support for and solidarity with the Syrian people
in their struggle to regain the occupied Syrian Golan
and achieve their country's territorial integrity.

In conclusion, my delegation avails itself of this
opportunity to clarify once again the principled position
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea that all
controversial issues must be solved through dialogue
and negotiations among the parties concerned without
any foreign intervention.

