Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Festus
Mogae and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. David Shearer, for their briefings today.

With great sadness, we see that South Sudan is
experiencing a serious political, security, humanitarian
and economic crisis, which has shown no improvement
in recent months. To the contrary, seen in the most
generous light, the situation has stalled. Millions of
South Sudanese people need humanitarian aid. The
conditions for displaced persons and refugees are
alarming; women and children are suffering from
food insecurity and lack basic services; and there
have been outbreaks of such diseases as cholera and
measles - just to mention some of the problems in
the country. Restrictions on access to humanitarian
aid is therefore inadmissible. The parties must ensure
unimpeded and safe access for all humanitarian
workers and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) on a permanent basis.

We condemn the clashes that have been taking
place in the Upper Nile region. We continue to believe
that the first step towards peace is the immediate
cessation of hostilities between the parties. Although
the Government declared a ceasefire, it sadly was not
carried out. If clashes persist, there will be no way
to establish a dialogue. We regret the obvious lack of
political will.

The solution to the conflict in South Sudan will be
through a credible political process and an inclusive
dialogue that will lead to compliance with the 2015
Agreement. Accordingly, we should support the
initiatives of the regional organizations. We emphasize
that both the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) have taken a stance
in a timely in order to firmly address the main measures
that need to be taken immediately. The African
Union Peace and Security Council's communique of
20 September called for the parties to join efforts that
were recently undertaken to create momentum and
restore the political process in South Sudan through a
high-level revitalization forum upon the initiative of
IGAD. It is important that there be complementarity
among the initiatives, and efforts need to be unified.

Another important item is to submit a memorandum
of understanding for establishing the Hybrid Court. We
believe that accountability would help the processes of
reconciliation and recovery that are key to establishing
lasting peace. It is vital that this process be led
by the African Union, and we would highlight the
willingness of the Government to move forward with
the establishment of the Court.

With respect to the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force (RPF), we applaud the good offices
of the Special Representative in facilitating the arrival
of the Rwanda advance team. It is important to work
together with the Government to allow for the proper
functioning of the RPF. Similarly, we look forward to
the deployment of the Ethiopian troops in the coming
weeks. The RPF presence will enable UNMISS to
address the conflict, protect civilians and provide
humanitarian assistance more effectively.

In conclusion, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNMISS
for the work and sacrifices they have made in South
Sudan. Their focus on protecting civilians is noteworthy.
We express our greatest support for this work.

