I would like to start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu and Director-General Arias for their briefings today. The Director-General's presence, along with Mrs. Nakamitsu, underscores the cooperation between the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations on this issue affecting international peace and security. I thank Director-General Arias for his eighty-sixth monthly report (see S/2020/1152, annex) and for his update today on the work of the OPCW. Despite the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the OPCW Technical Secretariat has spared no effort in attempting to take forward its mandated activities. We are grateful for the professionalism and dedication of the OPCW and its personnel. We take particular note of the updates on the work of the Declaration Assessment Team. The Director-General's report raises two important points. First, we note that the Declaration Assessment Team and Syria were able to close three outstanding issues related to Syria's initial declaration. That shows that contrary to the assertions of some that the outstanding issues are artificial, they are in fact real and eminently capable of being resolved. Secondly, the report highlights the evidence collected by the Declaration Assessment Team since 2014 indicating the production or weaponization of chemical- warfare nerve agents at a production facility that the Syrian regime declared never to have been used for such production. That underlines the serious nature and importance of resolving the remaining 19 issues. In addition, the unresolved issues related to Syria's declaration include thousands of munitions and hundreds of tons of chemical agents that Syria has not accounted for. Until all of the issues are resolved, the complete elimination of Syria's chemical weapons programme cannot be verified, as required under resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). Given that the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) and the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) have established that the Syrian regime has used chemical weapons on at least seven occasions since 2013, it is beyond dispute that the situation represents an ongoing threat to international peace and security. In the light of that situation, we welcome the resolve shown by the OPCW Executive Council in adopting its decision of 9 July in response to the findings of the IIT on the 2017 chemical-weapon attacks carried out by the Syrian Arab Air Force in Ltamenah. In that decision, the Executive Council was explicit in stipulating that Syria had to declare the chemical weapons and facilities in its possession, acknowledge its chemical-weapon activity and resolve the outstanding issues related to its initial declaration. As Director-General Arias has once again confirmed today, Syria failed to comply with the decision, and that will now be addressed during the next part of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention in April 2021. Just as the OPCW Executive Council and the Conference of the States Parties have a role to play in upholding compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention and their own decisions, the Security Council has a clear and distinct obligation to address Syria's repeated breaches of resolution 2118 (2013). Those breaches include the use of chemical weapons, as identified by both the JIM and the IIT, the retention and production of chemical weapons in order to carry out those attacks and the failure to comply fully with the OPCW, including with regard to its initial declaration and ensuring access for the Investigation and Identification Team. We were unequivocal on the action that the Security Council should take in response to non-compliance with resolution 2118 (2013). Not to act would be a dereliction of the Council's duty. Finally, I would like to reiterate the United Kingdom's trust and confidence in the OPCW, including its work and dedicated staff. We have full confidence in the expertise of the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the robust methodologies of its Fact-Finding Mission in investigating the allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. It is not surprising that the individuals working at the Technical Secretariat hold a range of views, and a robust assessment process should involve debate and challenge. However, as the Director-General confirmed, the Technical Secretariat took all views, evidence and theories into account in reaching its considered overall judgment regarding the attack in Douma. The OPCW Technical Secretariat and its multinational personnel showed great professionalism and resilience under intense external pressure and scrutiny. That included, as we have heard, cyberattacks, such as the foiled attempted cyberattack by Russia's Military Intelligence Service in The Hague in 2018, and a sustained disinformation campaign designed to undermine its credibility. Attempts to undermine the OPCW and its staff have intensified since the use of nerve agents in the Salisbury and Amesbury attack in 2018, the vote by the Conference of the States Parties to give the Technical Secretariat the role of attributing responsibility for the chemical-weapon attacks in Syria in 2018 and the poisoning this year of the Russian opposition politician Alexei Navalny with a nerve agent from the Novichok group. Only a year ago, the Security Council adopted a presidential statement that unanimously reaffirmed its strong support for the work of the OPCW (S/ PRST/2019/14). Just two weeks ago, the overwhelming majority of States parties from across all regional groups voted in favour of the OPCW's budget, which included renewed funding for the IIT and other Technical Secretariat teams working on the Syria file. As a permanent member of the Security Council, the United Kingdom is well aware of the responsibility conferred on us by the States Members of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security. We will continue to act on behalf of the vast majority of Member States who believe in the necessity of protecting the long-held norm prohibiting the use of chemical weapons and holding to account those who violate it. I have questions for the Director-General, which I will raise now, but he may prefer to answer them in the closed session, as is customary. Some have argued that Syria verifiably destroyed all of its chemical weapons in 2014 and that the OPCW has not been able to find any evidence to the contrary since then. How would Mr. Arias respond to that? Our second question is as follows. In some respects, Syria appears to be engaging ina process with the OPCW, and yet the verification of its initial declaration has been outstanding for seven years. How can Syria improve its engagement, and how does the Director-General assess the prospects of achieving a complete and accurate declaration by the Syrian Arab Republic as to its chemical weapons programme? What is needed in order to achieve that? And our third question: does the Director-General know of any other case in which it has been necessary for the Technical Secretariat to continually engage with a State party over several years in order to arrive at a declaration that is considered accurate and complete, in accordance with the CWC?
