Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I would like to welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General at this important discussion of a country in our
region. I would also like to thank the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Jamaica and the Bahamas - The
Honourable Keith Knight and Mr. Frederick
Mitchell - for their eloquent statements. I also wish to
thank the Permanent Representative of Haiti for his
statement.

Chile regrets that once again the political
situation in Haiti has reached a crisis and that that has
obliged the Security Council to take up the issue once
again. At the same time, we believe that this is a timely
debate, enabling us to listen carefully to various
countries who, together with the Council, have shown
their concern about the situation, so that we can then
discuss and devise a way to deal with the political and
constitutional crisis in Haiti, which needs a peaceful
solution to the conflict.

We view the violent events with concern. We
believe in particular that the efforts of the international
community should be focused on finding a political
solution to the crisis. Its principal objective should be
to support an agreement that would facilitate the
restoration of peace, democracy and full respect for
human rights in Haiti. To that end, my country's
position comprises five points.

First, as we indicate in the draft presidential
statement that we will adopt today, we favour a
political solution by constitutional and peaceful means,
which can be achieved on the basis of the plan of
action of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), the
Organization of American States (OAS) and variants
that may emerge in the negotiating process.

Secondly, we consider that that process should be
conducted by regional and subregional organs that
currently are acting, although the Security Council
should not discard a more robust action should it
become necessary, as has occurred in the past. That
was endorsed by the resolution adopted today by the
Permanent Council of the OAS, which urges that the
Security Council take necessary and urgent measures
under the United Nations Charter and calls upon the
Secretary-General of the OAS to maintain close contact
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, with
a view to ensuring coordination and complementarity
in the roles that both organizations are to play.

Thirdly, we support the appointment of a special
adviser of the Secretary-General for Haiti. We consider
that very important, particularly with regard to
supporting the coordination of United Nations
activities, as well as those undertaken by other regional
organizations, both in the political area and with regard
to humanitarian assistance.
Fourthly, we consider that any formula that is
used in the consideration of dispatching a police or
civilian force should be used to support the political
agreement, once it is attained.

Finally, we wish to say that any solution to the
political and constitutional problems in Haiti in the
short term must, as an urgent matter, anticipate a plan
for humanitarian assistance and, in the medium and
long term, a plan for economic and social development,
with the view to giving resolute support to the political
process and thereby to avoiding such painful and
unfortunate crises as this one, which has serious effects
on the people of Haiti.

