The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Belgium.

I should like at the outset to thank the
representatives of the Secretariat for their briefings.

I wish to discuss four points. First, the statement
made on behalf of the European Union on 26 August,
to which the representative of France referred in his
statement to the Council, and the statement that the
Belgian Minister for Foreign Affairs made the same
day on behalf of the Belgian Government, are clear.
Together with its partners in the European Union,
Belgium unreservedly condemns the unilateral decision
of the Russian Federation to recognize the
independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia. That, as
we see it, is an act that is based on no legal framework.
It violates the territorial integrity of Georgia and goes
against all the principles of international law that
govern international relations. It contravenes United
Nations resolutions, in particular resolution 1808
(2008), adopted unanimously as recently as last April.
Finally, it also runs counter to the Helsinki Final Act.

As was stated by the Secretary-General in his
declaration of 26 August, Belgium fears that the
Russian decision may have serious negative
implications for security and stability in the region.
Belgium reaffirms its unconditional support for the
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders and calls on the Russian Federation
to reverse its decision.

Secondly, Belgium continues to advocate for a
full implementation of the six-point peace plan with
respect for the additional clarifications embodied in the
exchange of letters between French President Sarkozy
and Georgian President Saakashvili. The continued
presence of Russian troops on Georgian territory
outside of the borders established by the six-point
accord and its clarifications, particularly, for example,
in the port of Poti area, constitute a violation of the
accord.

Thirdly, my delegation also regrets the fact that
the Security Council has not yet been able to take a
unified stand on the conflict in Georgia,
notwithstanding the efforts of the French delegation,
among others, to whom my delegation wishes to
express its deep appreciation. It is clear that the
international community, and among others, the United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union, have a
critical role to play in stabilizing the region. In this
context, it is up to the Security Council to draw up the
framework for the implementation of an international
mechanism embodied in the six-point accord. The
Russian decision to recognize South Ossetia and
Abkhazia is not one to facilitate finding the necessary
consensus.

Finally, Belgium is seriously concerned with
respect to the humanitarian situation. We note that
reports indicate grave violence and destruction of
Villages that have traditionally important Georgian
majorities within the conflict zone. This situation needs
to be properly investigated, as appropriate, by a United
Nations fact-finding mission. In this context, we would
once again stress the need for free humanitarian access
to all the areas touched by conflict and the immediate
establishment of conditions that will make it possible
for refugees who have fled to return home.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

