Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): The objective of the
international community's involvement in the territories
of the former Yugoslavia is to promote peace and
discourage more war, and therefore the outbreak of
hostilities and the broad military offensive of the Croatian

 

Government, following the failure of the recent Geneva
talks, are regrettable. The Security Council therefore
condemned these negative developments in its presidential
statement of 4 August 1995.

The launching of the military offensive has produced
very serious and negative consequences. Through the
Secretary-General's letter of 7 August 1995 and the
constant, almost daily briefings of the Secretariat, we have
been made aware of some worrisome developments. It has
come to light, for example, that our Blue Helmets were not
only attacked but also used as human shields and made to
march in front of the advancing Croatian army. United
Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia
(UNCRO) personnel have already suffered three fatalities.
My Government would like to seize this opportunity to
send its formal condolences to the Government of the
Czech Republic and the Government of Denmark for the
loss of some of their brave young men.

Furthermore, we are now faced with the humanitarian
nightmare of the war, with over 100,000 refugees and
displaced persons urgently needing assistance. Related to
this, we have confirmed reports of the shelling of some
refugee columns and civilian targets.

The draft resolution before us, dealing with Croatia,
attempts to respond to some of this fallout from the broad
military offensive by the Croatian Government and is aimed
at helping to stabilize the situation. Hence, the draft
resolution will enjoy the support of my delegation.

In accordance with the text of the draft resolution, my
delegation regrets the breakdown of the Geneva talks,
deplores the recent military offensive of the Croatian
Government and condemns the shelling of civilian targets.
My Government unreservedly condemns the unacceptable
acts of the Croatian Government forces against UNCRO
personnel and the civilian population and would like to
remind the Croatian Government of its duty to ensure the
safety and protection of United Nations personnel within its
territory, as well as of its obligations under international
humanitarian law. We have condemned, vigorously and
often, the Bosnian Serbs for such actions, and we find them
even more objectionable coming from the army of a
Member State of the United Nations. We hope the
investigations and processes under way to identify and
punish the culprits will be concluded soon.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we fully
endorse the request made to the Secretary-General in
operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution to assess
urgently, in cooperation with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the humanitarian
situation and needs of the civilian population, both
refugees and internationally displaced persons.
Furthermore, we call on the Croatian authorities to move
quickly to restore normality to all the areas under their
control, ensure safe passage for those who want to leave
and encourage the return of those who would like to go
back to their homes.

As the Security Council has emphasized repeatedly,
there can be no military solution to the conflict in Croatia
or, indeed, throughout the former Yugoslavia. My
delegation believes that all efforts must therefore be made
and, indeed, intensified to avoid broadening war in the
Balkans. We urge all the parties and others concerned to
exercise maximum restraint on all fronts, and especially
in the area known as Sector East. We further call on all
the parties to return to the negotiating table and promptly
resume talks under the auspices of the Co-Chairmen of
the Steering Committee of the International Conference
on the Former Yugoslavia.

My delegation believes that a peaceful solution to
the conflict in Croatia and Bosnia is still possible and is
now even more urgent. The prospect of a larger Balkan
conflict is not unavoidable. Events on the ground may, in
fact, have offered new negotiating possibilities for a
settlement in the Balkans. However, time is of the
essence, and we need to redouble our efforts if we are to
take advantage of the latest developments on the ground
to get political negotiations restarted and intensified.

In this connection, the Contact Group must redouble
its efforts and demonstrate greater unity of action in its
dealings with all the parties, with no favourites. We must
propose solutions that would promote a comprehensive
and lasting peace that ensures the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States in the former Yugoslavia
within their internationally recognized borders and on the
basis of mutual recognition of all the successor States.
Moreover, all genuine efforts and initiatives must be
welcomed and encouraged, and that is why the recent
initiative of President Yeltsin of the Russian Federation
and those of some other members of the Contact Group
deserve our full support.

Finally, we salute all the personnel of UNCRO and
the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) for
their continued service in the cause of peace and their

 

discharge of their noble duties under very trying and
exceptional circumstances.

