Mr. Berteling (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
associated countries - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia - align themselves with this statement.
Norway also aligns itself with this statement.

Today the Council decides on what is hopefully the
last extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) before the
elections in Liberia, and the European Union wishes, on
this occasion, to highlight once again the importance we
attach to a peaceful and democratic solution to the
devastating conflict which has raged in Liberia for all too
long now.

 

We wish to congratulate the Liberian people on the
recent substantial progress made in the peace process. The
security situation has improved and violence against
civilians has decreased. Disarmament and demobilization
are largely in compliance with the Abuja Agreement; civil
society is being revitalized and political parties reactivated;
most of the country can now be reached by the
humanitarian-assistance agencies; cabinet meetings of the
Liberian National Transitional Government have resumed;
and a start is being made with reform of the police force.
Although we are not blind to the dangers that could still
threaten the process, we agree with the Secretary-General
that

"the prospects for peace now seem to be more
promising than at any time since the start of the civil
war". (S/l997/237, para. 64)

The European Union therefore fully supports the
electoral process as defined by the Liberians and the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
on the basis of the recommendations of the ECOWAS
Committee of Nine. These recommendations were endorsed
by the Chairman of ECOWAS and were supported by the
second Ministerial Meeting of the ad hoc Special
Conference to Support the Peace Process in Liberia, held
here in New York on 20 February. We welcome the fact
that the military component of UNOMIL has now finally
reached its full, though small, authorized strength, and we
support the Secretary-General's proposal that UNOMIL's
electoral unit be strengthened. Every effort should be made
to enable as many Liberian refugees as possible to be
registered and to vote. The Union notes in this respect the
need for voluntary repatriation in the shortest possible time.

Since the timetable for the elections is very tight, we
look forward to the installation of the new independent
Elections Commission on 2 April; we hope that the
reconstituted Supreme Court will follow suit soon
thereafter. At this critical juncture, strict adherence to the
agreed timetable - the enactment of the electoral law and
regulations by the end of March, voter registration in April,
and the election campaign in May - is of the utmost
importance. Provided the timetable is respected, the
European Union confirms its willingness to provide
financial and technical assistance to the electoral process.
With European funding, a study has already been carried
out on the preparations for the elections. The European
Union also intends to send a team of election observers to
Liberia.

In only two months' time the people of Liberia will
vote to freely elect their President and Parliament. Last
April, we did not dare dream that today there would be a
realistic prospect that elections could take place so soon.
Liberia and the international community owe this in no
small measure to the unabated efforts of ECOWAS and
its successive Chairmen, to the ECOWAS Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) and its Force Commander, to
UNOMIL and to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. United Nations agencies as well as
non-governmental organizations have kept Liberians and
their hopes alive during their ordeal. European Union
member States have made substantial financial
contributions to the peace process. The increased strength
of ECOMOG will enable it to play a crucial role in
providing a secure environment for the elections. Clear
understandings between UNOMIL and ECOWAS are
called for in this regard. Important European contributions
have also been given for the reintegration of soldiers in
civil society following their demobilization. In this regard
we would like to stress the importance of immediate
arrangements for child soldiers to return to their families
and to be reintegrated into society. Bridging programmes
have gained momentum, but should be stepped up further.

We must all work to the best of our abilities to make
the peace process the decisive success we have been
pursuing for several years now. But it is the Liberian
people themselves who bear the ultimate responsibility for
success or failure. We therefore urge all Liberians, and
specifically their leaders, to cooperate with the elections
and the peace process as a whole, to respect human
rights, to facilitate humanitarian assistance and to seek
further disarmament and genuine reconciliation.

