Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): We congratulate
Cote d'Ivoire on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December and for
convening today's important debate.

We consider the proposed topic for today's debate
to be pertinent to the overall workings of the United
Nations in terms of addressing various challenges faced
by its members. It is well established that regional
organizations, because of their particular sense of
history and culture and the strong bonds that often
exist among countries, not only know the root causes of
conflicts best but they are also well positioned to resolve
such conflicts peacefully. Indeed, on 20 November, in
this Chamber, we heard how the African Union (AU),
guided by its Agenda 2063 and its Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative, was making an increasingly significant
impact, but we also heard repeated emphasis on strong
cooperation and support among the countries of the
region, as well as from the United Nations and other
international partners (see S/PV.8407).

For its part, Indonesia remains determined to stand
shoulder to shoulder with Africa. Our partnership with
Africa has only become stronger since the historic
Bandung Conference of 1955, thanks to ongoing
mutual trust and our respect for African countries as
they chart their priorities. The partnership is currently
made manifest through numerous multifaceted
support programmes.

As a founding member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Indonesia has
always promoted the role of regional and subregional
organizations in fostering peace. Indonesia also
strongly supports interregional engagement between
South-East Asia and all other regions. With its three
pillars of political-security community, economic
community, and sociocultural community, ASEAN
has truly become an ecosystem of collective peace
and prosperity. Relying exclusively on the peaceful
settlement of disputes, ASEAN's many mechanisms
of cooperation and cross-fertilization under the three
pillars have led to virtually no conflict in the region
and provided robust peace dividends for development.
In that connection, we believe that greater recourse
to Chapter VI and Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations holds tremendous potential for making
the world more peaceful and stable.

Let me highlight several issues that need to
be taken into consideration in order to improve
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional arrangements for the prevention and
peaceful resolution of conflicts.

First, the restructuring of the United Nations
peace and security pillar should place a stronger
emphasis on cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations. Regular and meaningful consultation
among the United Nations and regional organizations is
critical. In that regard, we welcome the focus to enhance
substantive interaction and practical frameworks
between the United Nations and ASEAN, as well as
with the AU and other regional organizations.

Secondly, countries in the regions, particularly
those that have an important bearing on conflicts, must
act responsibly and become part of the solution. One
of the observations in the Secretary-General's report
on United Nations activities in support of mediation
(A/72/115) is that there has been a substantial rise
in the regionalization and internationalization of
conflicts, complicating their resolution. The zero-sum
approach must be renounced. Helping to ensure that
peace prevails will ultimately benefit everyone. It is
also imperative that the Security Council maintain the
practice of dialogue involving all countries concerned
with a view to finding a lasting solution to the problem
that is acceptable to all the countries involved.

Thirdly, even when regional organizations are fully

determined to play their role, they can do only so much
if the Security Council does not stand by the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, international law
and international humanitarian law, based on the spirit
of multilateralism. Just as regional arrangements must
not hold back in advancing credible and regionally
owned solutions to sustaining peace, the Council must
not hold back in enlisting their support, as well as in
upholding the Charter and international law.

Fourthly, adequate resources to ensure that
regional mechanisms can meet their commitments
are critical. Responding to the proposals of the High
Representative for the AU Peace Fund, the Secretary-
General has pointed to financial options to support
AU-initiated peace-support operations. It is essential
that the Council also play its part in addressing that
issue. In that regard, we support the draft resolution on
financing African Union-led peace-support operations
currently being discussed by Council members.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Indonesia will continue to play an active role in
helping to facilitate a better harnessing of the regional
expertise and networks of influence. Through our
upcoming membership of the Security Council, we are
also determined to work intensively to place a higher
emphasis on dialogue, prevention and principles based
on the peaceful settlement of disputes.

