Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia, the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, and the European Free
Trade Association country member of the European
Economic Area Iceland declare that they align
themselves with this statement.

With the beginning of the military conflict in
Iraq, we are faced with a new situation. Our hope is
that the conflict will end with the minimum loss of
human life and suffering.

At the meeting of the European Council on 20
and 21 March, the European Union heads of State and
Government addressed the common challenges we
face.

The European Union is committed to the
territorial integrity, sovereignty, political stability and
full and effective disarmament of Iraq on all its
territory, as well as to respect for the rights of the Iraqi
people, including all persons belonging to minorities.

The European Union believes that the United
Nations must continue to play a central role during and
after the current crisis. The United Nations system has
a unique capacity and practical experience in
coordinating assistance in post-conflict States. The
Security Council should give the United Nations a
strong mandate for this mission.

We urgently need to address the major
humanitarian needs that will arise from the conflict.
The European Union is committed to be actively
involved in this field, in accordance with established
principles. We support efforts based on proposals by
the Secretary-General to adapt the oil for food
programme to changing circumstances so that it can
continue to meet the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi
people.

We want to contribute effectively to conditions
allowing all Iraqis to live in freedom, dignity and
prosperity under a representative Government that will
be at peace with its neighbours and will be an active
member of the international community.

On the regional front, the European Union
expresses solidarity with and stands ready to assist
those countries that are faced with problems and risks
as a result of the conflict, including possible refugee
flows. The European Union will actively engage in
supporting regional stability. We call on all countries of
the region to refrain from actions that could lead to
further instability. The countries of the region have also
a particular responsibility to prevent acts of terrorism.

The European Union will continue to work
actively towards the reinvigoration of the Middle East
peace process through the immediate publication and
implementation of the road map as endorsed by the
Quartet.

We will deepen our dialogue and cooperation in
all fields with the Arab and the Islamic worlds. We
hope that it will soon be possible to use the
considerable opportunities offered by the Barcelona
process to good account.

We reiterate our commitment to the fundamental
role of the United Nations in the international system
and to the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
stability.

We will continue to contribute to the further
strengthening of the international coalition against
terrorism. Finally, we will also intensify work for a
comprehensive, coherent and effective multilateral
policy of the international community to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

