Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting. I welcome Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany. I also thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, as well as Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen, President-designate of the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), for their valuable briefings. Tunisia reiterates its full support for the NPT as the cornerstone of the entire non-proliferation regime. We are committed to contributing to the success of the upcoming NPT Review Conference. We also stress that the credibility ofthe NPT is underpinned by the balanced implementation of its three pillars - disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In that regard, we express our concern that the continued lack of any concrete progress in the area of nuclear non-proliferation could weaken the entire non-proliferation regime. In addition, certain States still prioritize nuclear weapons in their security doctrines. They permit their use against non-nuclear-weapon States. The announcement of modernizing nuclear arsenals is also a source of concern, as it portends a dangerous and qualitative nuclear arms race. Tunisia is following with concern the difficulties, at both the bilateral and multilateral levels, that confront some conventions on the non-proliferation or reduction of nuclear weapons. We hope that all parties concerned will resume dialogue to maintain the existing conventions and push for their complete and effective implementation, thereby contributing to support for the non-proliferation and disarmament regime on the basis of international law. Tunisia stresses the importance of achieving the universality of the NPT through the accession of non-party States as non-nuclear-weapon States. We also stress the dire need for all States parties to honour the pledges made at previous review conferences. The failure of the 2015 NPT Review Conference must not dampen our efforts. Instead, we should redouble our efforts to maintain the credibility and sustainability of the regime established by the Treaty. That requires us to work for the success of the 2020 Review Conference by adopting a clear outcome on the implementation of all previous commitments and promoting the effectiveness of the Treaty. In that regard, we recall that the decision to establish a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction was and remains integral to the indefinite extension of the Treaty during the 1995 Review and Extension Conference. Tunisia believes that the establishment of zones free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction is of great importance since that would lead to realizing objectives relating to the disarmament of weapons of mass destruction and non-proliferation, thereby promoting peace and security at both the regional and international levels. In line with our policy and principled positions on disarmament and non-proliferation, Tunisia acceded to the NPT, the Biological Weapons Convention, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone 'Treaty. Tunisia also supported the adoption by the General Assembly of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, based on our belief that the Treaty is in line with the NPT and supports its objectives. We believe that the conference on the establishment of a middle east zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction represents the proper framework in which to bring together all parties concerned and establish a constructive dialogue toaddress disarmament and non-proliferation challenges in the region. Following that track, with the concerted effort of all, will lead to the establishment of a regional mechanism that contributes to consolidating the pillars of sustained peace and security in the region and promoting cooperation in that field, on the basis of decisions and recommendations reached by consensus. We consider that the conference is also a step in the right direction that deserves support from the depositary States of the NPT and the sponsors of the 1995 decision on the Middle East. We would like to reiterate that the responsibility to free the Middle East from weapons of mass destruction is a collective international responsibility. We call upon all parties concerned to participate in future sessions of the Conference.
