Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would first
like to warmly welcome His Excellency Mr. Toussaint
Kongo-Doudou, Minister for Foreign Affairs, African
Integration and Francophonie of the Central African
Republic, and his presence here in the Council.

Chad is pleased that resolution 2149 (2014)) was
adopted unanimously. We voted in favour of it in the
hope of seeing the international community mobilize
all the resources necessary to help the Central African
Republic emerge from the serious and unprecedented
crisis it is undergoing. Chad has had a presence
in the Central African Republic since 1994, in the
various missions that have been deployed there on the
initiative of the subregion, in the framework of the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
or the Economic Community of Central African
States. The Chadian contingent has thus been part of
successive missions, including the Force multinationale
de l'Afrique centrale, the Force multinationale en
Centrafrique, the Mission for the Consolidation of
Peace in the Central African Republic (MICOPAX),
in its incarnations as MICOPAX l and MICOPAX
2, and, finally, the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA). By
participating in all those missions alongside the other
nations of Central Africa, Chad has hoped to make
a modest contribution within the strong collective
will of the international community, with the aim of
stabilizing the Central African Republic and helping it
avoid a crisis with regional ramifications. In assisting
it we are also hoping to contribute to our own security
and that of the entire subregion.

As the Council is aware, in the wake of the serious
accusations that have been made against our contingent
within MISCA by the spokesperson for the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
concerning the incident that occurred on Saturday,
29 March in Bangui, Chad has decided to withdraw its
contingent from MISCA. For months, and well before
the accusations were made, Chad, whose presence is
probably bothersome to the agendas of some, was a
target of a particularly malicious media campaign.
Though my vote, Chad reaffirms that its withdrawal
from MISCA in no way diminishes its commitment and
firm willingness to provide all possible support both
to the Central African actors and to the efforts of the
African Union and the entire international community
in its quest for a way out of the crisis in the Central
African Republic.

Despite the undeniable progress that has been
made on the ground, thanks to the work of MISCA
and the French forces of Operation Sangaris, whose
courage and efforts we must commend, we should not
forget that the situation remains serious and attacks on
civilians continue. It is imperative that the international
community demand that all those responsible, including
the various militias, bring all the attacks on the peaceful
civilian population to an immediate halt and refrain
from any other action that might compromise efforts
to restore peace, security and stability and promote
national reconciliation. While awaiting for MINUSCA
to effectively deploy, it is absolutely crucial that the
international community take adequate measures to
put an end to the massacres and the horrible scenes of
lynching that have been perpetrated against the civilian
population as a whole and Muslims in particular.

From this viewpoint, considering the seriousness of
the situation, we believe the international community
should increase its logistical and financial support to
MISCA and speed up the deployment of police and
gendarme units in every urban centre. It should also
be remembered that the humanitarian situation remains
extremely worrying, with hundreds of thousands of
displaced persons and refugees. We appeal urgently
to the international community to strengthen its
humanitarian aid to the victims of violence, those
displaced in Bangui and the other cities Central African
Republic, as well as to the refugees in other countries
of the subregion.

In conclusion, re-establishing trust among all the
elements of Central African society and promoting a
spirit of citizenship that transcends ethnic and religious
differences are essential conditions for a return to
lasting peace, tolerance and peaceful coexistence
among the various communities of Central Africa.

