Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): The adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004), 10 years ago, on 28 April
2004, was a historic breakthrough in the fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their delivery systems. I wish to thank the Republic of
Korea for having organized this high-level debate on the
issue, as well as for submitting presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/7, which we have just adopted.

Resolution 1540 (2004) was a historic step for
several reasons. For the first time, the Council involved
itself in the issue of the risk posed by biological,
chemical, nuclear and radiological weapons falling
into the hands of terrorist groups or other non-State
actors, thus constituting a threat to peace and security.
Moreover, by framing the resolution under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Naions, the Council decided
to play its role as guarantor of international security
and stability by demanding, in an unprecedented way,
that Member States take concrete measures to prevent
the risk that weapons of mass destruction could fall into
the wrong hands. Finally, by setting up the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
Council gave itself the means to ensure ongoing follow-
up to the resolution and to support cooperation among
States to combat weapons mass destruction.

Ten years after its adoption, we can see undeniable
progress in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Today, a majority of the countries of the world
have adopted measures to enshrine the provisions of the
resolution in their national laws. In that regard, I welcome
the work of the South Korean chairmanship of the 1540
Committee and its experts aimed at encouraging the
few countries that have not yet done so to submit their
reports to the Committee on the implementation of the
resolution in their national legislation.

Moreover, the main international, regional and
subregional organizaions now have adopted strategies
to implement and promote the measures set out in the
resolution. Therefore, since 2004, the European Union
has promoted the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). In July 2013, the Foreign Affairs Council of the
Union adopted a new decision specifically addressing
the resolution, allocating more than €l.5 million to
supporting regional efforts to implement it.

France is also taking on its responsibilities. In the
1540 Committee, we coordinate the working group
on assistance, which is an essential component of the
work of the Committee. In that context, France, along
with its partners, is continuing efforts towards the
holding of a conference in Paris on this subject, as
we said we would. In addition, in all forums in which
we participate, we advocate for the fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and for
strengthening measures under resolution 1540 (2004),
including strict implementation.

Despite the undeniable success ofthe past 10 years,
much remains to be done. In order to address the issue
of emerging technologies possibly being exploited by
terrorists, all Member States should further strengthen
export controls, prevent and suppress the financing of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
secure sensitive goods and materials. In recognizing
those challenges, at the Nuclear Security Summit held
at The Hague at the end of March, France committed
to launching an initiative aimed at strengthening the
security of radioactive sources, including highly
radioactive sources. Indeed, while fortunately
infrequent, but nonetheless disturbing, cases of theft
illustrate the need for better conceptualizing the
security of such radioactive sources in order to avoid
the fatal consequences of their possible use by groups
or individuals. That is a matter of ensuring that such
sources are not diverted for criminal purposes and
that they continue to be used for purposes in which
they render very important services - in industry,
agriculture, medical and health areas, university settings
and for scientific research. France's efforts include
working to strengthen the international rules pertaining
to minimizing the use of highly radioactive sources and
establishing a group of exporters of radioactive sources
to strengthen international cooperation to prevent loss
of Government control over such materials.

The proliferation activites of North Korea and
its nuclear and ballistics tests, which we strongly
condemn, illustrate the need to ensure the full
implementaiton of resolution 1540 (2004). In the event
of new provocations, North Korea would expose itself
to new Security Council sanctions. In that context, I
would add that the Republic of Korea and our friends in
the region can count on France's solidarity.

Lastly, I would like to commend the Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Korea for successfully
energizing the work ofthe 1540 Committee since 2013,
so as to guarantee the optimal implementation of the
resolution throughout the world.

