Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation at today's
meeting of the Prime Minister of Djibouti and we are
grateful to him for the evaluation he gave us. We have
also listened carefully to the statement by the
Permanent Representative of Eritrea.

The Russian Federation is seriously concerned
over the serious rise in confrontation that took place on
the border between Djibouti and Eritrea earlier this
month. Russia fully agrees with the statement made by
the President of the Security Council adopted in
connection with this incident, which includes a
condemnation of the hostilities begun by Eritrea
against Djibouti in Ras Doumeira and Doumeira
Island. We call on both sides to take upon themselves
the obligation of observing a ceasefire, show maximum
restraint and return to their previous positions.

Russia is carefully observing the developments in
the situation on the border between Eritrea and
Djibouti. We believe that the border problems must be
settled only through negotiations. We call upon both
sides to cooperate and undertake diplomatic efforts for
a peaceful settlement and in strict conformity with the
rules of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.

We support the efforts undertaken by the African
Union and the League of Arab States and the various
interested parties in order to achieve an early solution
to the confrontation and a settlement between Djibouti
and Eritrea. We call upon both sides to cooperate in
this endeavour. We are counting on the implementation
of what has been called for by the Security Council and
of the recommendation of the Secretary-General to
make use of his good offices in coordination with
regional organizations. The aim is to initiate bilateral
negotiations between Djibouti and Eritrea that may
engender greater trust and bring about a peaceful
settlement to the situation on the border between these
two countries.

The Security Council will doubtless continue to
follow the momentum in the situation in the interest of
supporting stability and of preventing a destabilization
in this important region of the Horn of Africa.

