Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is grateful to you, Mr. President, for the
work done since your assumption of the Chairmanship
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). We would
like to associate ourselves with the comments made by
the members of the Security Council - and in
particular with those made by the Ambassador of the
United States, who preceded me - in commending the
work carried out by the Chairman, his team and the
support staff of the Secretariat.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the Ambassador of Peru on behalf of the
Rio Group. However, I would like to underscore a few
points of particular importance to Mexico in the
common fight against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, as well as to make some remarks
regarding the work of the Committee in the context of
the United Nations.

In the global campaign against terrorism we have
had to recognize that terrorism is not an isolated
phenomenon. Rather, terrorism is planned and carried
out against the backdrop of social conditions, historical
conflicts and - in the current situation in particular -
other activities of organized crime, including the
proliferation of, and easy access to, small arms and
light weapons. It is for that reason that we believe that,
to be effective, our fight against terrorism must be
coordinated and comprehensive, both in this and in
every other forum. It must also address every relevant
aspect and interrelationship of terrorism.

My delegation has supported having the United
Nations - and especially the CTC and multilateral
bodies - take full responsibility for adhering to human
rights, international humanitarian law and the Charter
of the United Nations in carrying out their work. The
Committee has taken important steps in that regard by
including, without discrimination, a statement in its
letters to every State indicating that any measure to
combat terrorism must be in line with international
humanitarian law, human rights and the specific rights
and needs of refugees. In the same vein, the meeting
between the CTC and the Vice-Chairman of the Human
Rights Committee has been very useful in increasing
awareness and exploring possible areas of future
action. The Security Council must continue to address
this particular aspect. It must also continue to promote
the necessary measures to avoid any arbitrary action
that could heighten the already terrible impact of
terrorism or lead anyone to question the legitimacy of
our efforts.

Another important matter that must be dealt with
is the issue of access to weapons by terrorists and the
opportunities they are provided by legal vacuums and
the economic interests of underground producers and
dealers. The Committee has begun to look into the
transfer of weapons of mass destruction, which is a
step Mexico energetically supports. The useful
exchange held on 15 May with the organizations
mentioned in the report by Ambassador Arias has made
it possible for the CTC to begin to call upon States to
provide information on legislative measures in force to
prevent such types of weapons from falling into the
wrong hands. We believe that this topic should be
given the necessary priority, while respecting the
priorities set out initially by the Committee in order to
avoid creating complications in the pace of its work.

More broadly speaking, we must not forget the
daily threat posed by illicit trafficking in small arms
and light weapons. The recently held Biennial meeting
of States to consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action on Small Arms not only
demonstrated the growing linkage between those
weapons and terrorism, it also pointed to the urgent
need to solve both problems comprehensively. We
therefore welcome the Committee's decision to take on
board Mexico's initiative to put questions to States in
the near future concerning the measures they are
adopting to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit
traffic in small arms and light weapons in line with the
United Nations Programme of Action.

We believe the progress made to strengthen
alliances with the competent international, regional and
subregional organizations to be positive. Such
organizations have served to complement the
Committee's work and are designed to further
strengthen its efforts. Our delegation would like to be
apprised of the outcome of the upcoming high-level
meeting between the United Nations and regional
organizations, which is to be held on 29 and 30 July, at
which international terrorism will be one of the main
subjects.

We recognize the tremendous amount of work
carried out by Ambassador Arias and Ambassador
Munoz of Chile to create closer links between the CTC
and the Committee established under resolution 1267
(1999), concerning Al Qaeda, as well as to clarify
existing distinctions between each Committee's
mandates and activities. Thanks to that updating effort
by both Chairmen, it is clear that the Committee
established under resolution 1267 (1999) is a sanctions
enforcement body, whereas the Committee established
under resolution 1373 (2001) is geared towards
cooperation and facilitating assistance. It is also clear
that the Committee established under resolution 1267
(1999) is the sole body authorized to keep lists. My
delegation fully agrees with the comments urging
caution made by some members of the Council that,
until a satisfactory solution is found in the context of
the General Assembly to the matter of a generally
accepted definition of terrorism, the Committee
established under resolution 1373 (2001) must avoid
becoming distracted from doing its important work by
the drawing up of lists. To that end, we must intensify
our efforts in the Sixth Committee to finalize the draft
comprehensive convention on terrorism.

Finally, I would like to refer to the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in facilitating assistance.
We recognize the crucial role played by the experts in
identifying the needs of Member States in
implementing resolution 1373 (2001). We are
convinced that in many cases, non-compliance is due to
a lack of technical capacity to meet fully the
Committee's requirements and to make the necessary
changes to national legislation and judicial structures.
We hope that the provision of assistance will remain
one of the key pillars of the Committee and that the
Committee's machinery will be enhanced so that such
assistance strengthens national structures, making them
capable of preventing and eradicating terrorism.

