Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to beging by warmly
welcoming and thanking you, Mr. President, and the
Angolan presidency for convening today's open debate.
We also appreciate the comprehensive concept note
(see S/2016/223) circulated, which helps to guide this
timely discussion. We welcome and acknowledge the
presence and participation of high-level representatives,
including ministers and senior Government officials
around the table and from countries of the Great Lakes
region. My delegation thanks the Secretary-General
and all the other briefers for their presentations. We
commend their dedication to bring peace and stability
to the region and we fully support their ongoing efforts.

Malaysia welcomes the Great Lakes Region
Strategic Framework and the road map just presented.
We hope that the plans elaborated will galvanize both
Member States and regional and international actors in
strengthening the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region.

While aligning my delegation by the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, Malaysia
wishes to emphasize the following with a View to
further contribute to the discussion.

First, it is imperative that we bring an end to all
armed conflicts in the Great Lakes region. Ending the
cycle of violence will require a multi-pronged approach
that entails both short- and long-term measures.

Secondly, we must redouble our efforts to
neutralize the lingering vestiges of armed groups,
which are the main cause of insecurity in the region.
We welcome the resumption of cooperation between
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo and the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to defeat armed
groups operating in the eastern part of the country. We
urge the parties to armed conflicts in other parts of the
region to disarm and commit to participate in peaceful
ways to resolve conflict.

Thirdly, in addition to coordinated military
operations, tackling the drivers of conflict - such as
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
the illegal exploitation ofnatural resources - is equally
important. Disrupting the sources of income of armed
groups is vital in weakening and dismantling them for
good. Strengthening regional mechanisms to tackle the
illicit flow and promote the sustainable management of
natural resources is essential.

Fourthly, the importance of dialogue and respecting
peace processes and agreements as part of ending
armed conflict and preventing it from recurring cannot
be overemphasized.

Fifthly, governance frameworks and the capacity of
national institutions must be shored up. In particular,
we wish to highlight the importance of security sector
reform and of strengthening justice systems and
accountability mechanisms to fight impunity, especially
for serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law.

In addition to those aspects, serious attention
must also be given to the root causes of conflict and
Violence in the region, in particular poverty. Efforts
to improve socioeconomic development in the Great
Lakes region are therefore crucial, and should be
carried out in tandem with efforts to end violent
conflict and strengthen State authority in enforcing
the rule of law, justice and accountability. We welcome
initiatives, such as last month's Great Lakes Private
Sector Investment Conference, held in Kinshasa and
jointly organized by the Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, which provide much-needed opportunities for
economic cooperation and transformation. We hope
that the momentum from the Investment Conference
will be sustained through strengthened engagement
among Member States, regional organizations and the
international community.

On our part, Malaysia remains committed to
providing capacity-building training to member
States of the Great Lakes region through the Malaysia
Technical Cooperation Programme (MTCP). To date,
approximately 3,000 participants from 13 countries
of the region have benefitted from MTCP training in
areas such public administration, good governance,
health services, education, sustainable development,
agriculture, poverty alleviation, investment promotion,
information and communications technologies
and banking.

The well-being and prosperity of the people
of the Great Lakes region must be at the heart of all
our efforts. We wish to draw special attention to the
children and youth of the region, who have borne the
brunt of decades of conflict and who remain vulnerable
to grave violations where armed conflict persists in
the region. Thousands of children remain among the
ranks of armed groups across the region. Securing their
release and facilitating their reintegration into their
communities must be given importance as part of long-
term measures to break the cycle of conflict. We pay
tribute to the tireless work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, UNICEF and national and international
partners in advocating for child protection, including
the release and reintegration of children associated with
armed forces and groups and providing much-needed
services to children affected by armed conflict. We
call on all parties to armed conflict in the Great Lakes
region to end and prevent violations and abuses against
children, including by adopting and implementing
child-protection action plans and commitments in
cooperation with the United Nations.

Malaysia also strongly supports efforts to empower
youth in the region, including through projects
and initiatives outlined in the Regional Strategic
Framework. We call on the international community to
support those efforts. We believe that the rich dividends
in peace and stability for the region will be well-worth
the investment in supporting the development of
children and youth.

In conclusion, Malaysia believes that this vision
of peace, security and stability - shared not just by
countries in the region but also by the international
community - is achievable through our collective
efforts and sustained political will. It is time to close
once and for all the chapter of conflict and destruction
that has haunted the Great Lakes region for over a
century and to raise the curtain on an era of peace and
security. We hope that today's open debate will pave
the way towards the beginning of such an end.

