Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate. I also thank Under-
Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing
and the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine
for their statements.

Since the most recent open debate on this item in July
(see S/PV.7007), encouraging political developments
have taken place in the Middle East. After years of
procrastination and virtual paralysis, a new dynamic
may be emerging as a prospect for progress on the
Syrian and on the Israeli-Palestinian tracks appears.

On the Syrian crisis, a military intervention has
been avoided by diplomacy. It is hard to reconcile the
need to protect civilians in Syria with the option of a
military solution, which would in all likelihood only
trigger more suffering and instability. Brazil welcomes
the convergence of views between the United States
and Russia that generated momentum for the adoption
of resolution 2118 (2013) and led to the endorsement of
the final communique of the Geneva Action Group of
June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex).

Brazil unequivocally condemns the use of chemical
weapons in Syria and the ensuing loss of lives. We
welcome the Syrian Government's decision to accede
to the Chemical Weapons Convention and to apply
it immediately. As one of the original signatories
of the Convention, we will continue to press for the
universalization of that instrument and urge those
countries that have not yet adhered to do so at the
earliest possible date.

The Syrian Government must continue to cooperate
fully with the United Nations and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in the
implementation of its obligations. The opposition must
also cooperate. In case of non-compliance, it is clear
from the text of resolution 2118 (2013) that authorization
for measures under Chapter VII can be contemplated
only through a new Security Council resolution.

We reiterate our belief that there is no military
solution to the conflict, and call for the cessation of
all arms supply to all parties to the Syrian conflict.
While welcoming the effort towards the elimination of
chemical weapons, we must not forget that the brunt
of civilian deaths in Syria is caused by conventional
weapons, which continue to flow.

All parties should seize the new impetus and
follow the path of a negotiated political solution that
takes into consideration the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people. The Geneva communique should
be implemented as a matter of urgency. Brazil renews
its support for Joint Special Representative Lakhdar
Brahimi, as well as for the prompt convening of the
"Geneva II" conference. In that regard, we consider
that, in addition to regional stakeholders, other players
who could contribute to the success of the conference
should be invited to participate.

We renew our condemnation of all violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law by all
parties and call for immediate humanitarian access to
those in need. The Government in Damascus bears the
largest share of responsibility for the cycle of violence
that has victimized a large number of civilians,
especially women, children and youth. It is the duty
of the Government to protect its citizens. We are also
aware of the responsibilities of the armed opposition.

In the same vein, in line with the findings
contained in the report of the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
(A/HRC/21/50), we reiterate our grave concern at the
negative impact of unilateral sanctions on the living
conditions of the Syrian people. We praise the efforts
of neighbouring countries to host Syrian refugees
and underscore the principle of burden-sharing. Let
me also express Brazil's strong support for the policy
of Lebanon, under President Michel Sleiman, of
dissociation from the Syrian conflict.

Brazil welcomes the resumption of direct
final-status negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians, and commends the efforts ofUnited States
Secretary of State Kerry to that effect. We hope that
the current talks will lead to the realization of the two-
State solution based on the 1967 borders, and call on the
parties to adhere to the agreed upon time frame of nine
months to reach a comprehensive peace agreement.
We underscore that the process must lead to a final

peace agreement, not an interim one. To that end, it is
Brazil's expectation that negotiations deal with all main
subjects.

The continuing settlement activities and settler
violence against civilians in Palestine constitute
violations of international law. They are contrary
to the required improvement of the atmosphere for
negotiations to reach a successful outcome and harmful
to the two-State solution itself. Brazil condemned the
recent launches of rockets and mortar shells from Gaza
and Syria into Israel. We welcome Israel's decision to
release Palestinian prisoners and encourage Israel to set
free a new group, as soon as possible.

In that context, there is even more reason to call
on the Security Council to fully exercise its functions
with regard to the Palestinian question and provide
support for the peace process. Brazil also expects that
the Quartet, whose statement of 27 September was a
welcome development after a long period of silence,
report regularly to the Security Council.

In order to provide broader support for the first
serious effort at a comprehensive resolution of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict in such a long time, serious
consideration should be given to the establishment of a
support group to the Quartet, with wider geographical
representation.

The current negotiation process presents an
opportunity that must not be missed. Brazil has been
emphasizing the importance of listening to Israeli and
Palestinian civil societies. A number of organizations
from both sides can contribute significantly to
galvanizing the political will for peace. Brazil will
be, as usual, ready to provide its support to initiatives,
including those that involve representatives from civil
societies, in order to work towards reconciliation and
sustainable peace.

