We are grateful to the Indonesian presidency for convening this debate on an issue that deserves in-depth reflection. Spain aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex 27). The linkage between terrorism and organized crime has long been discussed. Recently, there have been a growing interlinkage and cooperation between both phenomena due in particular to the increasing involvement of terrorist groups in organized crime for two main purposes: to obtain funding and for logistical support. There are several reasons for this interlinkage: on the one hand, the transnational aspect, flexibility and adaptability of organized crime. On the other hand, the evolution of terrorist organizations from highly centralized and closed structures, completely separate from other kinds of crime, to decentralized networks with multiple connections to organized crime or to everyday crime. That trend began to be observed in Spain following the attacks of 11 September 2001 in New York and particularly of 11 March 2004 in Madrid, where the explosives used were purchased from criminals involved in drug trafficking. The analysis of terrorist activity since then has affirmed and intensified the trend and, in our case, led to our intelligence and police services adaptation their responses with two main objectives: on the one hand, to link investigations of both phenomena - terrorism and organized crime - and, on the one hand, to share the intelligence related to both phenomena. Based on such premises, in 2014 the Centre for Intelligence against Terrorism and Organized Crime was created from two pre-existing bodies: the Centre for Intelligence against Organized Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Coordination Centre. That amalgamation, based on the structure of so-called mergers, breaks with the traditional organizational separation of the fight against both phenomena. As one of the more specific outcomes, the corresponding databases were also linked, making it possible to detect overlaps in up to 14 per cent of investigations, mainly among individuals linked to terrorist organizations involved in drug trafficking and money laundering. The next step was the adoption, in January 2019, of the new National Strategy against Organized Crime and Serious Crime, which addresses the link between organized crime and terrorism as one of its main areas of action. Among other measures, it proposes establishing joint investigation teams, made up of police units specialized in each of those criminal phenomena, improved databases to enable the early detection of links and promoting the exchange of information at the international level. These measures clearly demonstrate the importance that Spain attaches to strengthening the investigation of linkages between organized crime and terrorism. A greater joint effort at the international level is essential to continuing progress in that area. In that connection, we believe that in recent years significant steps have been taken, such as the adoption last year by the Security Council of the two resolutions 2482 (2019) and 2462 (2019), which further the discussion and analysis of this issue and provide a series of important instruments for moving forward. From now on, we will continue to discuss and analyse both phenomena and work towards better implementation of the measures contained in those resolutions. While significant progress has been made in that regard, the scale of the problem and the increasing evidence of this interlinkage require us to continue our efforts to strengthen our international cooperation and collaboration by using all opportunities available to us. The upcoming United Nations Global Counter- Terrorism Strategy Review may therefore be a good occasion to continue addressing the interlinkage between terrorism and organized crime, while maintaining the ultimate goal shared by all, namely, to put an end to the scourge of terrorism.
