Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
briefers for their presentations. I wish in particular to
thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for
the efforts made by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs on the ground.

The military escalation in north-west Syria continues
even as we speak. Reported airstrikes and shelling
have damaged 26 health-care facilities and almost 40
schools in the area. Attacks on densely populated areas,
homes, medical facilities and settlements for internally
displaced persons are unacceptable and must stop. All
parties must, as their first priority, protect civilians
in Idlib.

Any military operation, even if carried out against
United Nations-listed terrorist entities, should be fully
in line with international humanitarian and human
rights law, in order to preserve from harm the thousands
of civilians trapped in the middle of the fighting.
The protection of civilians and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance are not a choice but a legal
obligation of all sides to the conflict. Those that do not
comply should be held accountable.

Let me once again underline the significance of
ensuring that the de-escalation zone in Idlib, as agreed
in the memorandum of understanding between Russia
and Turkey, is effectively restored and fully respected.
The recent escalation has already resulted in another
displacement of more than 350,000 persons.

In addition, I want to stress our concern about the
dismal state of health-care facilities in Syria. Most
of them are not functional, and those still operating
are too poorly equipped to be able to provide care to
patients with injuries or further support to persons
with disabilities. In our opinion, the international
community, especially the Security Council, should
vigorously advocate for the health and protection of
civilians, especially women, children and persons with
disabilities, as stated in resolution 2475 (2019).

Let me turn to the issue of humanitarian access
in Syria, especially in Al-Hol camp, where children
constitute the majority of the population, as well as
Rukban camp, where the situation is increasingly dire
owing to the limited movement of goods and the fact
that there is practically no external access.
As recalled during today's briefing, the second and
most recent humanitarian convoy to Rukban delivered
life-saving aid to the inhabitants of the camp at the
beginning of February. As we approach the end of
June, no progress has been made in terms of the third
convoy. We urge the Syrian authorities to swiftly
mobilize the next inter-agency convoy to Rukban,
where approximately 28,000 people remain in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, let me once again stress the
crucial importance of the effective and credible
re-implementation of the Idlib de-escalation zone as a
sine qua non for averting a humanitarian catastrophe
in Syria and of making much-needed progress in the
political process, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

