Mrs. Eshmambetova (Kyrgyzstan) (interpretation from Russian): Allow me to thank you, Sir, for convening
this meeting of the Security Council on the situation in
Afghanistan and for having invited all the interested
countries to participate. I thank you also for kindly
having given my country the opportunity to be among the
first to speak at this meeting. Allow me also to express
the hope that the discussion, will lead to the establishment
of a mechanism for joint action to achieve national accord
in Afghanistan. In this meeting, we see a revival of the
idea of the effectiveness of the United Nations and of
transparency in the work of the Security Council.

The Kyrgyz Republic does not directly border on
Afghanistan; however, as an integral part of the Central
Asian region, it cannot indifferently and impassively
observe the situation in that country, which has become
drastically exacerbated since last September. The brutal
retaliation against former President Najibullah, the
humiliating situation of women, the threat to the security
of international personnel, and military operations in the
Tajik-Afghan border area: all of this cannot fail to be of
concern to the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. The
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic believes it necessary
to make use of all means at the disposal of the United
Nations to contain the military and political conflict and
to prevent its growth, which could pose a threat to
regional security.

The view of the Kyrgyz Republic with respect to a
practical solution to the crisis, and to preventing the
escalation of hostilities and their possible expansion into
a protracted war in Afghanistan, is based on the well-
known General Assembly resolution 50/88 of 19
December 1995; the statement of the President of the
Security Council of 28 September 1996 and his remarks
of 3 October 1996; the 7 October 1996 statement of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali; and the
joint Almaty declaration of the leaders of Central Asian
States and of the Russian Federation.

The position of the Kyrgyz Republic on this issue is
as follows. First, there should be an immediate cessation
of hostilities and the holding on neutral territory of

 

negotiations between the parties to the conflict. Secondly,
third parties must not interfere in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan or in the process of inter-Afghan relations.
Thirdly, the political process to establish a broad-based
interim government should be promoted. Fourthly, human
rights, especially the rights of women, must be respected.
And fifthly, Afghanistan should remain a single and
indivisible State within its present borders.

I wish to take this opportunity to assure the Council
that the Kyrgyz Republic will spare no effort or means
available to promote, on the basis of existing agreements
with the countries of Central Asia and the Russian
Federation, the restoration of long-awaited peace on the
long-suffering land of Afghanistan and to help it in its
economic recovery. We also hope that, as a result of the
discussion on the situation in Afghanistan, the Security
Council will arrive at a decision.

