Mr. Darmanovic' (Montenegro): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's debate
on youth and peace and security, and I commend Peru's
strong commitment to this issue. I also thank today's
briefers for their valuable input to this debate.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union. Still, I
would like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.

We are continuously witnessing the dramatic
consequences of conflict and Violence in different
parts of the world. It is often young people who face
obstacles, ranging from discrimination, marginalization
and poverty to armed conflict. Their voices are
distinctively underrepresented on issues that concern
them, including peacebuilding and the prevention of
conflict. Young people are the main victims of direct
violence in conflict situations, but sometimes also are
the perpetrators of violence, due to their vulnerability
to both voluntary and involuntary military recruitment.

The issue of youth and peace and security
requires joint action. We welcome the findings and
recommendations of the progress study on youth and
peace and security (see S/2018/86), pursuant to landmark
resolution 2250 (2015). Montenegro participated in the
negotiations for that resolution as part of the Eastern
Europe and Central Asian region.

The potential of youth to facilitate peace processes
is often undermined. We believe that it is crucial to
involve youth in such processes as stakeholders and
decision makers. That allows them to gain ownership
of the policies that affect them and all of us.

There are many talented and creative young men and
women who are pioneering innovation and new social
media tools and ways to reach the young population.
Montenegro supports all efforts aimed at voicing the
needs and priorities of young people and proposing
sustainable solutions for their problems. The national
youth strategy ofMontenegro for the period 2017 to 2021
focuses on facilitating the access of young people to the
labour market and employment and to quality education,
their active participation in decision-making processes

and policy creation and access to quality health care
and to culture, both as creators and consumers. That
is how we are striving to create an efficient framework
for the systematic improvement of the position of
young people in Montenegro. We strongly believe that
investing in youth is the best investment for the stability
and prosperity of our society.

The contribution of the United Nations system
in Montenegro, through different programmes and
projects, particularly the Programme on Youth
Empowerment, is ofgreat importance for enabling young
people to use their full potential in decision-making,
entrepreneurship and participation in various social
activities. Montenegro is also very active in connecting
youth from the region of the western Balkans.
Representatives from the Government and civil sector
of Montenegro participated in a comprehensive process
of establishing the Regional Youth Cooperation Office.
We are proud that Montenegro was the first to establish
a liaison office for that important regional initiative,
which aims at reconciliation through the joint activities
of young people of the western Balkans region.

Young people around the world can make an
important contribution to sustaining peace and
stability. We realize that achieving the goals of peace
and development concerns their future, and they should
have a crucial stake in it. It is both a demographic
and democratic imperative that young people actively
participate in decision-making and are treated as a
vital asset to any society. Providing young people with
the right educational tools for crisis prevention and
peacebuilding has a positive impact on development
and sustainable peace. Montenegro genuinely supports
United Nations efforts to create spaces in which youth
can contribute to the peace and security agenda, and it
stands ready to be a reliable partner in those endeavours.

