Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mariano Fernandez Amunategui for his briefing and we
are grateful to him and all the personnel of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
for their dedicated work.

One and a half years after the devastating
earthquake, the people of Haiti are still facing daunting
challenges. There has been progress, but we remain
concerned about the continued plight of the Haitian
population. Despite the successful and peaceful
conclusion of the presidential elections, Haiti is still
paralyzed by political uncertainty. Political leaders in
Haiti urgently need to live up to their responsibilities to
end the stalemate and start working together. Restoring
the credibility and leadership of the Government as
well as the confidence of the Haitian people in their
political system is a prerequisite for any real progress.
Ultimately, both political and economic success will
depend upon strengthening the rule of law in all areas
of society. A lack of legal certainty is the biggest
impediment to increased foreign investment.

MINUSTAH is playing a vital role in maintaining
peace, security and stability in Haiti and must continue
to do so. We are grateful to all the troop contributors
for their efforts. At the same time we should look into
possible adjustments in the size and structure of
MINUSTAH personnel in line with the security
assessment presented to us.

We are reassured to hear of the serious efforts
undertaken by both the troop contributors and the
Secretariat to enforce the United Nations zero-
tolerance policy on misconduct by its personnel. This
is indeed of paramount importance for the acceptance
of peacekeeping forces anywhere in the world.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
welcome the results of the real-time evaluation on the
impact of humanitarian action in Haiti commissioned
by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee. The results
clearly indicate the need to improve the link between
relief, reconstruction and development activities. It
also revealed a critical lack of longer term
development perspectives, especially for those 600,000
persons still living in camps and shelters. The
International Humanitarian Partnership's field mission
to Haiti planned for November will provide
participating Member States with an opportunity to
consider first-hand the value of United Nations-led
multilateral humanitarian action and coordination. As
incoming Chair of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs Donor Support Group, we
encourage all participating Member States to ensure
participation from capitals in the field mission.

In concluding, we concur with previous speakers
that MINUSTAH's continued presence, with gradual
adjustments, still remains a prerequisite for the
stability and development of the country and for peace
and security in the region.

