Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Malta, Cyprus, Turkey, Iceland and
Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.

We welcome the participation of Mr. Nebojsa
Covic, Deputy Prime Minister of the Yugoslav
Constituent Republic of Serbia, in today's meeting of
the Council.

The European Union welcomes the election by
the Kosovo Assembly of the President of Kosovo,
Mr. Ibrahim Rugova, and the establishment of a
Government, which mark an important step forward in
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). The Union believes that these newly
established institutions will fully take on the functions
assigned to them by the Constitutional Framework for
Provisional Self-Government. We congratulate Special
Representative Steiner for his success in brokering an
agreement on the formation of the Government, and
support his intention to hold municipal elections on 21
September.

We look forward to a resolution ofthe question of
the participation of the Povratak Coalition in the
Government. Povratak has a crucial role to play in
shaping Kosovo's new institutions.

The European Union supports the intention of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
tackle the challenges of laying the foundation for
economic development; establishing a political culture
based on the rule of law, including the fight against
organized crime and violence; and building a fair and
just society with dignity for all. The European Union
calls on all the parties to cooperate fully with the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR in pursuing those
objectives.

The fight against organized crime and violence
continues to be of the utmost importance to the Union.
Freedom from fear is a fundamental requirement if
democracy is to take root in Kosovo. We support all
steps aimed at the eradication of organized crime and
violence and welcome the recently adopted regulation
to step up the investigation of criminal activities. We
also look forward to forthcoming regulations to tackle
the economic crime that is hindering progress in the
establishment of a functioning economy.

The European Union continues to support the full
implementation of the Common Document for
cooperation between UNMIK and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, signed last November. We hope that
there will be significant progress in all areas within
that framework. We welcome the announcement that all
Kosovo Albanians detained in the Republic of Serbia
have been returned to Kosovo. That does, indeed,
constitute a good example of the efficacy of such
cooperation.

We also expect cooperation between the elected
representatives of the people of Kosovo, UNMIK and
Belgrade to be instrumental in creating the conditions
for the security and freedom of movement of all
communities that are necessary to ensure an increase in
the return of displaced Serbs to Kosovo.

The Union reiterates the need for full respect of
the border Agreement between the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, signed in February 2001. It welcomes the
decision of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Steiner, and the President of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to set up a joint
committee to deal with practical problems on the
ground that might arise as a result of its
implementation. We look forward to further measures
to enhance police cooperation between UNMIK and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in the fight
against organized crime.

We have reiterated that the main objective for the
people of Kosovo is integration into the European
Union. But if it is to have a European future, it must be
a Kosovo with a multi-ethnic, democratic society,
based on the rule of law, and with dignity and freedom
of movement for all communities. We encourage the
newly established provisional institutions and the
community leaders to do their utmost to achieve these
goals, with the assistance of UNMIK, the European
Union and the international community at large.

The European Union remains committed to
providing economic and political support to Kosovo.
We are by far the biggest contributor to the
reconstruction effort in the province, where we are
providing assistance in such areas as economic, fiscal
and monetary policy and management, as well as in the
building of local capacity.

We would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the progress made in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia in the implementation of the
Framework Agreement, as well as the success of the
donors' meeting, organized earlier in the month in
Brussels by the European Commission and the World
Bank.

The European Union firmly believes that
concentrating the energies of the region on economic
development, institutional reform and European
integration is the best way to bring about stability and
overcome conflict.

I would like to conclude by saying that we remain
committed to continuing our economic assistance
within the stabilization and association process, in
conformity with the existing policy of conditionality,
based on the achievement of European standards.

