Ms. Poroli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, on behalf of my delegation, I should like through
you, Sir, to thank the Permanent Representatives of
Australia, Morocco and the Republic of Korea for their
briefings and for their laudable work at the head of their
respective subsidiary bodies.

Argentina believes that the United Nations has a key
role to play in multilateral action and that the General
Assembly, the Security Council and their subsidiary
bodies are the most appropriate forums for effective
efforts to counter terrorism. We also believe that
ongoing cooperation among the Committees - whose
work we are considering today - and their Groups of
Experts strengthens coordination and consistency in
the activities of the United Nations in this sphere.

I underscore the importance of the open
briefings - held jointly by the Chairmen of the
three Committees and of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1718 (2006) ,
on the role of the Security Council and the Financial
Action Task Force to halt the financing and proliferation
of terrorism. We believe that, generally speaking, the
holding of these open briefings on a regular basis is
a good practice that strengthens the link between the
Security Council and all Member States. We therefore
encourage the Committees to pursue their efforts to
that end.

I should like to refer to the work of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities. Like the Chairman of the Committee,
we stress the importance of following clear and fair
procedures. We believe that it remains essential to
ensure respect for due process. We highlight the work of
Ombudsperson Kimberley Prost for its professionalism
and independence. On the basis of this experience,
we understand that it may be possible to consider
strengthening her mandate or extending it to all the
Sanctions Committees.

We share the Chairman's concern that the regime
should remain relevant and effective. The consolidated
list must therefore be reviewed periodically by the
Committee in order to ensure its quality and utility to the
Member States when they implement it. We appreciate
the work done by the Monitoring Team in that regard.
The availability of the list in the six official languages
of the Organization is of particular importance in that
respect and has a direct link to its implementation by
the competent authorities. In that regard, I particularly
welcome the efforts of the Chairman of the Committee,
Ambassador Quinlan, and his team to resolve this
problem. We also appreciate the cooperation of the
Secretariat in that respect.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism plays a
crucial role in making the international community's
fight against terrorism more effective. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
makes an essential contribution in its assistance to the
Committee and in building the capacities of States. My
delegation therefore participates with great interest
in the negotiations on the Committee's report to the
Council on CTED's work with a view to the review of
its mandate. We also hope that CTED will continue to
cooperate in building States' capacities, and believe
that respect for human rights should remain a cross-
cutting issue in its own work and that of the Committee,
as well as in the overall fight against terrorism.

Resolution 1540 (2004) and the Committee
established pursuant to it are essential instruments
in preventing weapons of mass destruction and
their delivery systems from falling into the hands of
terrorists. However, the efficacy of international efforts
to that end hinges on the adoption and implementation
of the requisite national measures and on regional
coordination. We are therefore convinced that resolution
1540 (2004) should be implemented at the regional
level, in which the effective control of technology and
dual-use materials is made possible by the effective
harmonization of operational and legislative efforts in
each region.

I underscore the importance for States to brief the
Committee on their practical efforts to implement the
resolution, in follow-up to the note of the Committee
Chairman. Such practices can be models that may
be adapted to the realities of other regions, thereby
enhancing their effective implementation. As we
approach the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the
resolution next year, we highlight the efforts of the
Committee Chairman to achieve universality in its
implementation and the presentation of reports. My
delegation fully supports such efforts.

In conclusion, I reiterate our support for initiatives
that help to improve transparency in the work of the
Security Council and its subsidiary bodies and that
strengthen coordination and cooperation among the
three Committees and their Groups of Experts. As
we understand it, greater synergy among the three
Committees would improve the Security Council's
contribution to the fight against terrorism and allow
the matter to be addressed in a more comprehensive
manner.

