Mr. Stareevic' (Serbia): At the outset, let me
express the satisfaction of the Republic of Serbia with
the efforts of the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Theodor Meron and Mr.
Serge Brammertz, with regard to Serbia's cooperation
with the Tribunal. I would like to thank Judge Patrick
Robinson for his distinguished service as President of
the Tribunal and to congratulate Judge Meron on the
assumption of the presidency of the ICTY. Also, allow
me to use this occasion to pay my respects to the
President and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Ms. Khalida
Rachid Khan and Mr. Hassan Bubacar J allow.

Concerning Serbia's cooperation with the ICTY,
it is my pleasure to say that Serbia, once again, shares
the Prosecutor's assessment on all aspects of
cooperation. The last two fugitives before the Tribunal
have been arrested and transferred to The Hague by
Serbian authorities, and my Government is in
accordance with the Prosecutor that "these arrests are
milestones to remember" (S/2011/716, annex 11, para. 47).

With regard to the other aspects of cooperation
pertaining to access to documents, archives and
witnesses, I would like to add that such cooperation
between Serbia and the Tribunal has been impeccable
for a long time and that the high level of cooperation
was successfully maintained during the reporting
period. New requests for assistance are received on a
daily basis and are considered without delay.

With the transfer of the last two indictees to the
Tribunal and the fact that there are no outstanding
ICTY requests for assistance regarding the ongoing
proceedings before the Tribunal, Serbia believes that it
has now, undoubtedly, fully cooperated with the
Tribunal. Serbia is confident that the level of
cooperation achieved will continue in the coming
period and that it will secure a smooth transition to
future cooperation with the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

With that chapter of cooperation with the ICTY
closed and following the total fulfilment of
international obligations in good faith, Serbia is at long
last in a position to assign its capacities to issues
concerning the future prosperity and reconciliation of
the region.

Taking all the above into consideration, it is
evident that Serbia, as well as the whole region, has
greatly changed since the Secretary-General, in his
report to the Security Council of 3 May 1993
(S/25704), stated that he is of the view that the
enforcement of sentences should take place outside the
territory of the former Yugoslavia. Therefore, the
Republic of Serbia is ready to share responsibility with
other countries in regard to that issue and will pursue
its initiative whereby Serbia and other countries of the
former Yugoslavia willing to do the same are allowed
to sign agreements with the Tribunal on the
enforcement of sentences. Serbia expects that the
Security Council will pay attention to that initiative.

Serbia is also willing to continue to cooperate
with the Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals on issues related to the archives
of the Tribunal. Serbia maintains its position as
submitted to the Security Council in October 2008 and
March 2009, and reiterates its readiness to actively
participate in all future discussions on those issues.

Our successful cooperation with the Tribunal
gives us a moral right to continue to call for an
effective investigation into alleged crimes involving
murder for the purpose of organ trafficking committed
by the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army. Serbia
expects that the ongoing investigation into those war
crimes allegations, as detailed in the 7 January report
of the Special Rapporteur of the Council of Europe will
be conducted professionally, impartially and efficiently
in order to establish the truth and bring the perpetrators
to justice.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
mutual goals of Serbia and the Tribunal have proven to
be identical and feasible. We hope that the fulfilment of
those goals have contributed to the achievement of
international justice, the further normalization of the
situation and the improvement of relations among the
States of the Balkans. Through its efforts and the
results achieved, Serbia has made a significant
contribution to the ICTY completion strategy and, at
the same time, to the process of building confidence in
the work of national and international institutions.

