Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. Let me also thank you for convening this
public meeting on the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). We believe that today's meeting
offers a valuable opportunity for the wider membership
of the United Nations to share its views on a subject of
the utmost importance.

More than a year has passed since the horrendous
acts of terrorism of September 2001. Since then, with
the CTC standing at the forefront of our global efforts
in the fight against terrorism, the resolve of the
international community has been further strengthened
and its readiness significantly enhanced. In that regard,
I would like to express my delegation's appreciation to
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock for his outstanding
leadership in steering the work of the CTC. Our
appreciation goes also to his team at the United
Kingdom Mission, as well as to the independent
experts and the Secretariat staff, for their dedicated
efforts.

We have recorded important progress following
the Security Council's adoption of resolution 1373
(2001), which laid down a comprehensive road map to
combat terrorism. The concerted action taken by the
international community has led to the dismantling of
many terrorist networks and the disrupting of their
channels of financial support. In that common
endeavour, it is noteworthy that global participation
and cooperation have been consistent and pervasive, as
reflected by the fact that more than 170 States have
submitted their reports to the CTC on steps taken under
resolution 1373 (2001).

My delegation notes that the CTC is now
focusing its work on reviewing the second reports
submitted by Member States, identifying gaps in
domestic legislation and Government machinery in the
field of counter-terrorism and proposing future
measures to be taken by national Governments. We
also note the expanding focus of the CTC regarding its
framework of cooperation with other international,
regional and subregional organizations and its role in
facilitating assistance.

My Government in June 2002 submitted its
second report to the CTC and that report is now under
review by the Committee. The Republic of Korea
welcomes the CTC's work programme for the coming
months and stands ready to lend its full support.

On the national level, the Republic of Korea has
been according paramount importance to the issue of
counter-terrorism. Our specific measures to implement
resolution 1373 (2001) include the establishment and
active operation of the Korea Financial Intelligence
Unit (KFIU) to prevent and combat terrorist financing.
As far as the 12 international conventions and
protocols relating to terrorism are concerned, the
Republic of Korea is currently a party to eight of those
legal instruments. Two other instruments, on unlawful
acts against the safety of maritime navigation and of
fixed platforms located on the continental shelf, have
now been placed before the National Assembly for its
consideration, with a view to our accession to them by
the end of this year.

Furthermore, we are expediting the process of
early ratification of the two remaining conventions, on
the suppression of the financing of terrorism and on the
suppression of terrorist bombings, which we have
already signed.

The Republic of Korea has also been continuing
its active participation in regional forums related to
counter-terrorism. Within the context of such regional
endeavours, my Government, along with the
Governments of Japan and Singapore, co-hosted the
Second Workshop on Counter-Terrorism of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations Regional
Forum, which was held in Tokyo on 1 and 2 October
2002. On that occasion, we presented, among other
things, the successful anti-terrorism measures taken
during the 2002 FIFA World Cup tournament held in
Korea and Japan, which could contribute to the
establishment of best practices in managing major
international events.

In the global efforts to fight terrorism, my
Government attaches great importance to following up
on the initiatives of the Financial Action Task Force in
the field of combating terrorist financing, and hopes to
become a member of that body upon the expansion of
its membership.

As the CTC enters its second year of work, we
believe that it would be useful to find ways to
disseminate the achievements of the CTC in the fight
against international terrorism to a wider arena. The
CTC's experience and expertise, based on its in-depth
reviews of national reports covering nearly all corners
of the world, could offer the best source of wisdom
with regard to our common endeavour to eliminate the
threat of terrorism. Given the still incomplete
international legal regime in this field, the strengths,
setbacks and patterns of national counter-terrorism
measures identified by the CTC would be of particular
benefit to the relevant deliberations in the General
Assembly.

Because the global menace of terrorism has not
been entirely eliminated, as reflected in the recently
published report of a United Nations monitoring group,
my delegation believes that the international
community should remain fully vigilant about such
threats under the guiding role of the CTC. In that
regard, I would like to reiterate the unswerving
commitment of the Republic of Korea to fighting the
scourge of terrorism in an effective, comprehensive and
sustained manner. We also reaffirm our full support for
the mandate of the CTC to enable all States to expand
their capacity and readiness to counter terrorism on all
fronts.

