Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): This debate shows clearly how well-founded was
your initiative, Mr. President. In this context, we associate
ourselves with those who have thanked you for preparing,
with the support of the members of the Council, a
statement on children in armed conflict, which we will
soon be adopting. This is a very welcome move.

Many figures and statistics have already been
mentioned that clearly illustrate the seriousness of the
problem that we face. I will confine myself, therefore, to
underscoring the truly overwhelming nature of the facts
that attest to the very high numbers of children who are
forcibly recruited as combatants, both in regular armies
and in armed groups. This is a particularly deplorable
phenomenon, and we must do our utmost to eradicate it.

 

The question we are dealing with is therefore very
serious and multifaceted. It warrants that every effort be
effectively deployed to reverse the tremendously disquieting
trend of involving children in armed conflict.

From the very outset, France supported the idea put
forward by the Secretary-General to give a mandate to a
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and we welcome the
appointment to this post of Mr. Olara Otunnu. All of us at
the United Nations are familiar with his dedication, energy
and effectiveness. I wish therefore simply to reaffirm our
support for his work and to voice the strong hope that, in
View of the magnitude and the implications of his mandate,
the Special Representative will receive the whole-hearted
and active cooperation of all entities of the United Nations
system. Almost all of these are concerned by the question
of children in armed conflict, but I should like to mention
in particular the United Nations Children's Fund, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the High
Commissioner for Refugees. Mr. Otunnu should likewise
also be able to rely on the cooperation of Governments and
non-governmental entities.

France fully endorses the provisions contained in the
presidential statement that we will be adopting, in particular
with respect to protection for humanitarian assistance, the
need to take into consideration the humanitarian impact of
sanctions, the importance of developing and implementing
programmes tailored to the needs of children, in particular
in the area of their social reintegration and rehabilitation.

I listened very attentively to the various points made
so forcefully by previous speakers, all of which, it appears,
deserve our support. But I should like to draw the Council's
attention to one element that seems particularly urgent and
important: the need for universal ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and, of course, the
need for its effective implementation. We hope that the
efforts undertaken to conclude an additional optional
protocol to the Convention, which will specifically address
the question of children in armed conflict, will bear fruit at
the earliest possible date.

We have witnessed in the various United Nations
bodies all the positive consequences of the determination of
delegations to implement the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. We are fully aware of the vigilance and
dynamism the Committee on the Rights of the Child has
shown in that area. I believe, therefore, that we must
mobilize our efforts to take specific steps to conclude that
additional protocol relating to children in armed conflict. In
my view, this would be the first positive and felicitous
result of the presidential statement that we will be
adopting, and I wish once again to thank you, Sir, for
having taken this initiative on behalf of the delegations
that are members of the Council.

