Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are pleased to welcome today's briefers,
Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz, to whom we
express our gratitude for their comprehensive reports.

The existence of bodies such as the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals is crucial
to achieving societies free of impunity. The work of
the Residual Mechanism reaffirms the commitment of
the United Nations to the protection of human rights
and the world peace that we all long for. We commend
the Mechanism's progress in the cases of Turinabo et
al., Stanisic' and Simatovic', and Karadeic' and Mladic'.
We hope to see the conclusion of the outstanding
cases by 2020, as anticipated by President Agius in
his assessment in May (S/2019/417, annex I). We also
recognize the work that this judicial body has done to
protect and support some 3,150 witnesses.

The Dominican Republic reiterates its support for
the work of the President of the Residual Mechanism,
whom we especially commend for his dedication to the
task of unifying and harmonizing the requirements,
working methods and processes of the Chambers that
make up the Mechanism with a View to increasing
productivity and consistency and achieving its goals
for 2020. We also support Mr. Agius's call to the
international community to join the bilateral and
multilateral efforts to cooperate on the relocation
of released persons and those who have served their
sentences, who have a right to have their documents
restored to them and to be reintegrated into society, in
keeping with the relevant international standards.

Security Council members also have an obligation
to work with the bodies and offices established under
its mandates. We therefore consider it vital to support
the Mechanism's budget in the relevant United
Nations forum. Even with the cuts and administrative
adjustments that the President of the Mechanism has
made, there can be no question that the allocation of
sufficient funds is essential to the Mechanism's success.

On another note, we congratulate the Office of
the Prosecutor on the progress made in prosecuting
fugitives, as described in its most recent report
(S/2019/888, annex II). We urge the international
community to show solidarity and cooperate on the
identification, investigation and capture of individuals
sought by the Mechanism. In addition, we would like
to touch on the subject of orders for the early release
of convicted persons. We are concerned about the fact
that such orders are not yet regulated by a specific set
of conditions, despite what was agreed in paragraph
10 of resolution 2422 (2018). We believe that it is
vital to set up an early-release regime that provides
for the participation of victims and the States or
communities affected.

Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to
express our gratitude to Peru, the outgoing Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
for its excellent work during its two years leading
the group.

