Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to New
York and thank you for chairing this open debate. I
would also like to thank Special Coordinator Robert
Serry for his comprehensive briefing and the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements, which we
have carefully noted.
Since our last open debate on this item in this
Council (see S/PV.6520), the Palestinian factions have
signed an agreement. The main elements of the
agreement include reform of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the holding of elections by May 2012,
and the establishment of unified agencies, national
reconciliation and a joint committee to implement the
agreement. The unity between the Palestinian parties
should not only end the division between the West

Bank and Gaza, but also create State institutions in
Gaza. To this end, we hope that the Palestinian parties
will succeed in the speedy implementation of the
reconciliation agreement. We also hope that Hamas
will not only accept the State of Israel as a reality, but
also cooperate with the Palestinian Authority to deal
with Israel's security concerns.

Stalemate in the peace talks, however, appears to
be giving rise to a sense of desperation in the
Palestinian territories. For more than four months now,
the monthly debates on the Palestinian issue in this
Council have hinged on the hope that the Quartet
would put forward a set of practical steps that could
enable Palestinians and Israelis to resume talks. This
hope was yet again belied when the Quartet meeting
Washington, DC, on 11 July ended without any
statement.

Over the past few years, the Palestinian authority
has made significant progress in building State
institutions, improving the economy of the West Bank
and rapprochement with various factions, including
Hamas. This progress has invited commendation from
the international community at large. The State-
building efforts of the Palestinian Authority have,
however, reached their geographical and institutional
limits. Any further progress would require the
resumption of talks on final status issues.

The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip,
meanwhile, remains a cause for serious concern. The
blockade of Gaza is not only adversely affecting the
population, but also driving militant elements to vent
their frustration through violence, thereby further
complicating the situation on the ground and increasing
Israel's vulnerability and security concerns.

The stalemate in peace talks and the grim
humanitarian situation can further complicate an
already fragile situation. We share the sense of the
international community that the freezing of settlement
activity in the Palestinian territories could enable the
peace talks to resume. We therefore call upon Israel to
implement Prime Minister Netanyahu's address to the
Knesset in May this year, wherein he said that Israel
could consider territorial compromise in return for
security and recognition. Putting a stop to settlement
activities should be the first step in this process. Unless
this essential step is taken and peace talks resume, the
growing desperation may lead the parties to actions
that could spiral out of control. As the month of
September approaches, it is important to realize that
there is limited time for Palestinians and Israeli to seize
the opportunity.

Other issues relating to Arab lands that remain
under Israeli occupation are equally important.
Progress on the Lebanese and Syrian tracks constitutes
the essential core to achieving a comprehensive and
durable peace in the region. In a region witnessing
protests movements all around, the continuing impasse
in peace talks could have destabilizing effect on a
much larger area. In this context, the events of 15 May
and 5 June show how fragile the situation is and how
easily violence can be incited on a larger scale,
destabilizing the whole region. We are therefore afraid
that if the peace talks do not recommence quickly,
unilateral steps by the parties will ensue, which would
increase the distance between them and make it more
difficult to find a comprehensive settlement. We
therefore call on the members of the Quartet to
intensify their collective and individual efforts to break
the stalemate.

India has a long-standing tradition of solidarity
with the Palestinian people. India has supported the
Palestinian people's struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital and living within secure
and recognized borders, side by side and at peace with
Israel, as endorsed in the Arab Peace initiative, the
Quartet Road Map and relevant Security Council
resolutions.

India has been assisting in the capacity- and
institution-building of the Palestinian people with
material and technical assistance programmes. Through
the India, Brazil and South Africa forum, India has
extended assistance. India is also contributing
$1 million to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
continuing our solidarity with the Palestinian people in
their pursuit of legitimate goals and quest for
development based on dignity and self-reliance. In
addition, we have provided untied budgetary support of
$10 million to the Palestinian Authority for each of the
past two years.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our expectation
that the parties will restart talks without further delay.
These talks should lead to a final and comprehensive
resolution of the Middle East conflict. We owe it to
ourselves and to future generations of Israelis and
Palestinians to ensure that they do not remain mired in
conflict, but live in peace and security.

