The President: I should like to acknowledge the
presence at the Council table of the Minister of
International Development of Norway, Ms. Anne
Kristin Sydnes. On behalf of the Council I extend a
warm welcome to her.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The responsibility of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security:
HIV/AIDS and international peacekeeping
operations

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Costa Rica, India, Nigeria
and Sweden, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Heinbecker
(Canada), Mr. Niehaas (Costa Rica), Mr. Sharma
(India), Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria) and Ms. Schori
(Sweden) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Dr. Piot to take a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.


