Ms. Traore (Mali) (spoke in French): At the outset,
let me convey to you, Sir, the warm congratulations of
the delegation of Mali on your country's assumption
to the presidency of the Council for the month of
December and to assure you of the full cooperation
of our country, Mali, which is pleased to have such
excellent relations with the Kingdom of Morocco. I
should like also to reiterate to the Indian presidency my
delegation's congratulations on the outstanding manner
in which it guided the work of the Council last month.

The Government of Mali wishes to reaffirm its
gratitude to the Secretary-General for the attention he
has devoted and all of the efforts that he is undertaking
to bring about a lasting resolution to the serious crisis
that is currently facing Mali. We are also grateful to
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), our broader family; the African Union;
the European Union; the United Nations system as
a whole; and all of Mali's bilateral and multilateral
partners for their strong mobilization with respect to
the issues facing Mali in its quest for peace, stability
and development.

In September, the Government of Mali requested
the adoption by the Security Council of a resolution
authorizing, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, the deployment of an international
military force in order to assist the Malian army
to recover and secure its territory. Following that
request, the Council adopted resolution 2071 (2012) on
12 October, which, inter alia, requests the Secretary-
General to submit to it a report. We are considering that
report (S/2012/894) this morning.

The Government reiterates to the Secretary-
General its gratitude for the outstanding manner in
which the report was drafted, which reflects the great
interest that the Secretary-General is taking in the
situation in Mali. The Government of Mali has taken
note of the report and remains convinced that following
this consideration, the Security Council will authorize
the deployment of an African-led international support
mission for Mali in order to ease the suffering of the
people who have been under occupation for nine months
and to spare the subregion and even the rest of the world
an even more serious disaster whose repercussions
cannot be predicted.

The Government fully endorses the statements to
be made shortly by the representatives of ECOWAS
and the African Union. We participated in the process
leading to the conclusions contained in those statements
and share the views expressed therein.

We also take this opportunity to make a number
of comments concerning points that the Government of
Mali wishes to make following its reading of the report.

My delegation wishes first to underscore the urgency
of deploying the force in northern Mali. In reading the
report, we have understood that the Secretary-General
does not really believe that the deployment is urgent.
We say this because the daily plight of the people of
Mali under occupation is sufficiently well known. It
includes daily floggings and amputations. Only in
Mali are citizens' limbs amputated under the pretext
of the so-called implementation of sharia law. Other
Islamic countries do not carry out such acts. There are
summary executions. The Secretary-General recalls
that child soldiers of all nationalities are being recruited
to carry out jihad in northern Mali. There are stonings,
pillaging and the destruction of cultural and historical
sites and monuments that are categorized as UNESCO
world heritage sites. The most basic human rights are
continually violated by a hoard of terrorists and other
criminals in organized groups who are not even Malians.
They are so firmly convinced of their conquest that we
have heard that they have called for reinforcements.
Infiltrations of terrorists and extremists from the north
and from the south have also been reported regularly
by the security forces. This painful and disturbing
conclusion has led the Malian transition authorities to
call for the deployment of the international force.

Since independence, the rebellion has always
been dealt with by the Malian authorities and previous
authorities in accordance with their resources and
together with the neighbouring countries, in particular
through dialogue. However, the rebellion's recent
connection to terrorism requires us to change our stance.
I take this opportunity to specify that the Government
of Mali has requested international aid to drive out the
terrorists, extremists and other organized criminals,
who are most often foreigners and not Malian nationals.
We have not asked for the international force to fight
ethnic minorities. The Government wishes to assure
the Council of that.

In addition, the Government of Mali would like to
reassure the Council that the request for the deployment
of the force is not aimed at destabilizing neighbouring
countries. Our neighbours' security and stability and
the excellent relations we enjoy with each of them are of
the highest concern to us. That is why the Government
continues to believe that the Security Council, given
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, in accordance with
the Charter, will act quickly to avert a catastrophic
upheaval of security and the culture, cultural space
and human rights in Mali and the region, which would
entail serious and systematic violations of the most
basic human rights. The force is sought to ensure that
we have a certain amount of security in those spheres.

The deployment of the force is urgent; merely
discussing it acts as a deterrent. We have noted a
measure of calm since the meeting held in Bamako
on 19 October, but it has been precarious and a
certain reversal has since been observed. When it was
announced that there could be no war before September
2013, the terrorists have stepped up their activities and
sought reinforcements to wage jihad from Mali. Mali is
on its way to becoming a breeding ground for terrorism
in West Africa, Africa as a whole and throughout the
entire world.

In his report, the Secretary-General rightfully
raises questions about the financing, training, equipping
and relations between the different components of the
force. We recall that all these issues have been ironed
out in open discussion among military experts. Better
yet, the strategic concept that was the outcome of those
discussions is a consensus document. It is the result
of the active and joint participation of all the parties
involved: ECOWAS and West Africa, the African
Union, the United Nations, the European Union, the
core countries - Algeria, Mauritania, Niger and
Mali - France, the United States, Canada and Germany.
Participation was broad and the document presented is
consensus-based.

We note the enthusiasm and commitment of the
European Union, France and certain troop-contributing
countries to supporting Mali in training, equipping and
financing the force, in accordance with resolution 2071
(2012). I wish to convey to each one our gratitude. In
our view, the Security Council could encourage and
support this international mobilization by adopting a
resolution authorizing the deployment of the force. All
countries that want to intervene wish to do so within
the framework of international legality.

In his report, the Secretary-General underscores
the need for the ruling class of Mali to find lasting
solutions to the recurring grievances of the Tuaregs
and the northern communities. The Government
of Mali would like to point out that the historical
advancement of our people clearly demonstrates that
our leaders have, since independence, always favoured
negotiated solutions that are the outcome of dialogue
and consultations, with the mediation of neighbouring
countries, in order to resolve crises. Mali is known for
its commitment to settling disputes by peaceful means
because it is firmly attached to the ideals of dialogue
and lasting peace and stability.

Drawing on this tradition of dialogue, since the
outset of the current crisis in January the Malian
authorities have continually reaffirmed their
commitment to dialogue with those of our compatriots
who are not terrorists or instruments of organized
crime, and do not challenge the territorial integrity,
national unity or secular nature of the Republic of Mali.
In accordance with the commitment to dialogue with
our fellow citizens who accept the conditions that I have
just underscored, the Government will work tirelessly
to set up a national negotiating commission in order to
begin negotiations, with ECOWAS mediation.

Several days ago, the Government sent to
Ouagadougou a delegation of mediators led by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, as recalled by the
Secretary-General, in order to begin direct dialogue with
the Mouvement national pour la libe'ration de l'Azawad
and Ansar Dine. We have received information with
regard to the conclusion of that agreement. They are
ready to withdraw.

The report tends to limit United Nations action
to the option of negotiating at the expense of the
requested intervention. The Government of Mali draws
the attention of the Council to the shortcomings of that
approach, which would not be sufficient to overcome
the entrenched terrorists. Mali has always addressed
this question through dialogue, but this time the nexus
with organized terrorism calls for military intervention.

We note that the passages of the report portraying
the Tuareg community as a marginalized minority
in Mali do not reflect the reality on the ground. The
Tuareg community represents barely 35 per cent of
the total population of northern Mali and less than
4 per cent of the total population of the Republic. The
census statistics confirm that there are 447,650 Tuareg
out of more than 14 million inhabitants. I recall that
this community does not support the rebellion; a few
Tuareg have joined the rebellion, but not the Tuareg
community as a whole.

Owing to travel constraints, not all members of my
delegation were able to come to New York. However,
the Vice-President of the Assembly of Mali is a Tuareg
and has been a member of the National Assembly for
more than 20 years. It is regrettable to note that that
small minority - perhaps calling it a small minority
is not quite appropriate, because a minority is already
a small number - but that tiny minority, which claims
the right to speak on behalf of all the communities of
the north, is a condensation of people that are entire
ethnic mix. The rebel Tuaregs are only a small minority.

It should be emphasized that in the past ten
years, three of the four prime ministers who led the
Government came from the north, and one of them
was a Tuareg. Some institutions of the Republic,
including the High Council of Communities, which
is the equivalent of the Senate in some countries, are
led by Tuaregs. Moreover, in accordance with the
provisions of pacts and agreements signed to manage
the rebellion, the Government adopted a policy of
positive discrimination. That has led to representation
of the Tuareg community in each governmental team
that has been set up. For more than 10 years, there have
been one or two Tuaregs in the Government.

The Government decided on full integration in
the public service of young graduates from the north,
whether Tuareg or of other ethnicity, without taking
the national civil service examination. As members
know, in many developing countries, entry into the
civil service is governed by an examination. Positive
discrimination has enabled citizens of the north to join
the civil service without taking the examination.

The Government also decided to integrate 2,500
ex-combatants in the armed forces - the army, the
police, the gendarmerie, the national guard, customs
and the forest and wildlife service. Those young people
have been integrated at the grade proposed to the
Government by their movement. That is clear positive
discrimination. preople from the south wanted to rebel,
that would be a reason for them to do so, but they were
understanding. Everyone in Mali, the Government and
the people, wanted to resolve the situation in northern
Mali and the Tuareg issue.

In addition, there is the reintegration of more than
9,000 ex-combatants in the implementation of the small
development projects and programmes administered
directly by the population of the north. Furthermore,
Mali committed itselfto a democratic process with State
decentralization and devolvement, which provide the
opportunity to all Mali citizens to actively participate
in the development of their community.

With the support of some partners represented
in this Chamber, the Government has established
development programmes in the areas of road
infrastructure to open up the country's interior. It has
implemented agricultural, water, drinking water supply
and grazing projects and the building of health-care
centres and schools. A special characteristic of the
north is that the schools and health-care centres are
under the Tuareg communities. That is an example of
positive discrimination.

As the Council can note, the Government benefits
from that policy to assure the Security Council that the
Tuareg community has never been marginalized. It is
not marginalized and never will be. It certainly lives in
an area abandoned to nature, namely, the Sahara. There
are very intense development efforts. They cannot be
matched by the efforts undertaken in the south, but the
Government, gravely concerned about that, decided
nationally and in a fully balanced way to implement a
policy of positive discrimination.

The Government shares the concern of the
Secretary-General regarding human rights in the
context of deploying the force. We have just talked
about that. The Government solemnly reaffirms its
commitment to prevent human rights violations and
to fight against impunity. In that connection, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his readiness to
assist Mali in its capacity-building in that regard.

The Government also takes this opportunity
to inform the Council that, apart from the forced
displacement of populations, the crisis has already
undermined access to education for more than
500,000 school-aged children, of whom 300,000 were
already attending school before the crisis. Educational
institutions and equipment have been damaged. The
crisis has caused the displacement of 85 per cent of
teachers and 10,000 pupils towards the south and
50,000 school-aged children to neighbouring countries.
In other words, the population's fundamental rights
have already been significantly violated.

The concern of the Secretary-General is well
founded, and we share it. But we need to strike a
balance. Between ensuring the rights ofthe populations
in the north in times of war and those of the people
whose rights are violated daily, we believe that it is out
of step. The Government of Mali believes that the best
way to protect human rights is to rapidly establish the
conditions to enable the State of Mali to fully exercise
its authority throughout its territory. The planned force
must be quickly set up to that end.

The Government of National Unity of Mali
established last August recognizes that a lasting
settlement to the crisis necessarily means achieving
a unified Mali leading class with regard to the major
goals of restoring the country's full territorial integrity
and of holding credible elections. The Under-Secretary-
General mentioned that in his presentation. There will
be national consultations in a few days, on 11, 12 and
13 December. By then, the road map will exist.

The transition Government has two basic goals,
namely, restoring territorial integrity and convening
elections for the transition so that legitimately elected
authorities can administer the country. The road map
will be shared during the consultations and will be
finalized. A national negotiations committee will
be established. Also, the process of organizing the
elections has been started. The electoral list is being
audited with the support and commitment of certain
partners. The Government itself is also worked to draw
up a budget for the 2013 tax year.

On the Government's behalf, allow me to underscore
the responsibilities of the Security Council to rapidly
act for peace and security in Mali, the region, Africa
and the world. That is indeed urgent, first, to ease the
plight of the Malian population and also to prevent
a similar, if not much more serious, situation for the
people of the Sahel. Urgent action is also required in
order to ensure that northern Mali does not become
a permanent safe haven for terrorism and organized
crime, which is now happening.

Today, the people of Mali are seriously affected
but they hope that members of the Security Council
will give positive attention to their Government's
request for the deployment of the force. It is a matter of
maintaining international peace and security, which is
the primary task of the United Nations system.

On that note of hope, the Government of Mali
requests that Council members, in the light of our
remarks, consider deciding to deploy the mission and
international force in northern Mali. It is an urgent
matter for the security and the entire world.

