Mr. Vale de Almeida: . I am honoured to address
the Security Council today on behalf of the High
Representative of the European Union (EU) for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica
Mogherini, in her capacity as Coordinator of the Joint
Commission established by the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA).

First of all, I extend my warm thanks to Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres, Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Ambassador Pecsteen de
Buytswerve for the great collaboration on these files
over the past few months. Additionally, I would like
to convey my sincere gratitude to the colleagues in
the Secretariat for their dedication and support, in
particular in relation to the procurement channel and
their work to prepare the latest report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) (S/2019/492).

We are just a couple of weeks away from 14 July,
when it will be four years since the historic conclusion
of the JCPOA in Vienna by the Foreign Ministers of
Germany, France, the United Kingdom, China, Russia,
the United States and Iran, as well as the EU High
Representative. At this particular challenging moment,
it is important to remind ourselves of the achievements
ofthe Joint Comprehensive Plan ofAction. It rolled back
Iran's nuclear programme, blocked access to plutonium
and highly-enriched uranium and established the most
robust verification mechanism by the International
Atomic Energy Agency.

The JCPOA is a key element of the global nuclear
non-proliferation architecture and was endorsed
unanimously by the Council through the adoption of
resolution 2231 (2015). It is the only tool available to
provide the international community with the necessary
assurances on Iran's nuclear programme.

That is why the European Union is resolutely
committed to the JCPOA. That is why we continue to
support it and why we are determined to work with the
international community to preserve it. The European
Union has been consistent in its commitment to the
continued full and effective implementation of the
agreement, as long as Iran abides by its commitments.
That has been repeated in numerous statements and
in our most recent European Union Foreign Affairs
Council conclusions in February.

The JCPOA has been delivering on its nuclear
goal of providing the international community with
the necessary reassurances on the exclusively peaceful
nature of Iran's nuclear programme. As confirmed by
15 consecutive reports of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, Iran has continued to implement its
nuclear-related commitments, and it must continue to
do so.

With reference to the Chair's statement after the

6 March Joint Commission meeting, the remaining
participants of the JCPOA recognize that, both

the implementation by Iran of its nuclear-related

commitments and the lifting of sanctions to allow for the

normalization of trade and economic relations with Iran

constitute essential parts of the JCPOA. In that regard,

the European Union and all its 28 member States deeply

regret the withdrawal of the United States from the

agreement. The subsequent reimposition by the United

States of unilateral sanctions and its decisions to not
extend waivers with regard to trade in oil and to not fully
renew waivers for nuclear non-proliferation projects are
having a significant impact on Iran's economy.

As she recalled in her statement on 4 May, the High
Representative - together with the Foreign Ministers of
France, Germany and the United Kingdom - remains
committed to contributing to provide tangible results
and economic dividends to the Iranian people. The
operationalization of the Instrument in Support of
Trade Exchanges, a special-purpose vehicle conducive
to effective financial channels, is moving ahead and
will enable legitimate trade with Iran, consistent with
international and European laws and regulations.

At the same time, the European Union notes with
great concern the various announcements made by
Iran on 8 May regarding its commitments under the
JCPOA. As stressed in the joint statement by High
Representative Federica Mogherini and the Foreign
Ministers of France, Germany and the United Kingdom
on 9 May, the EU remains committed to the JCPOA. It
does not accept any ultimatums and will assess Iran's
compliance on the basis of that country's performance
regarding its nuclear-related commitments under the
JCPOA and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.

A number of projects are being implemented in
support of annex III of the JCPOA on civil nuclear
cooperation, particularly in the field of nuclear safety
and regulatory support. Annex III helps us get a better
understanding of Iran's nuclear needs and gradually
build confidence in Iran's programme. It also plays a
significant role for Iran, as it balances the limitations of
the nuclear programme with civil nuclear development
and longer-term engagement.

Established under annex IV of the JCPOA, the
procurementchannelremainsauniquenon-proliferation,
transparency and confidence-building instrument. It is
a key mechanism for preventing the misuse of nuclear
or dual-use items and to ensure that exports of such
items are consistent with the JCPOA. We recognize
the challenges brought about by the United States
withdrawal from the JCPOA and the reimposition of
sanctions. The procurement channel, however, remains
a Security Council mechanism, and the decision on a
proposal for transfer is endorsed by all 15 members.

In the seventh report of the Joint Commission to
the Security Council on the status of the Procurement
Working Group's decisions and on any implementation
issues (see S/2019/488), submitted to the Facilitator
on 13 June and subsequently circulated as a Council
document, the remaining participants stated their
commitment to continuing to review proposals in an
impartial and independent manner. In that context, it
is a positive signal that the channel keeps receiving
proposals, albeit at a decreased pace. Forty-four
proposals have been submitted to date.

A substantial amount of outreach has been
conducted during the past few years, and countries
around the world are aware of the procedures of the
channel. Our outreach efforts will continue, together
with colleagues from the Security Council secretariat
and the Facilitator. We expect that all Council members
will continue to support the preservation of the channel,
in line with resolution 2231 (2015).

While the JCPOA addresses nuclear
non-proliferation aspects, a series of events outside
the nuclear domain are increasingly worrying. The
European Union consistently calls for reducing tension
and regional military build-up by all actors. The
European Union has repeatedly urged Iran to refrain
from activities that could deepen mistrust, such as
ballistic missiles tests, which are inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015).

The European Union is a strong promoter of
multilateral diplomacy and continues to advocate for
dialogue and constructive engagement. Thanks to
the JCPOA, the EU has been able to hold discussions
with Iran on regional issues. Five EU-led discussions
with France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom
have already taken place, with a focus on exchanging
views with Iran on regional stability. It is thanks to the
JCPOA that this dialogue, as well as other channels of
communications between the EU and Iran, has been set
up and provides useful platforms for discussions.

Today, we may be at a critical juncture regarding
the future of the JCPOA. Yet, it should be recalled that
the JCPOA is a nuclear agreement that has been working
and delivering on its goals. There is also no credible,
peaceful alternative to it. The European Union , together
with other partners of the international community, will
continue to work relentlessly to preserve the JCPOA as
long as Iran abides by its commitments.

