Mr. Nitzan (Israel): I am compelled to take the
floor again today. I will be brief.

As in previous meetings, we have heard many
Arab and other representatives from the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) criticizing Israel. I would like again
to point out to those same representatives, Arab and
others, that they choose to ignore the crimes of the Chair
of NAM, Iran, at their own peril. In particular, it comes
as quite a surprise that the Non-Aligned Movement has
the nerve to lecture Israel on human rights, while two
members ofNAM, Iran and Syria, are the world's worst
human rights abusers. Iran oppresses its own people
and helps other States to slaughter theirs. Today in Iran,
free expression is repressed, minorities are persecuted,
women are denied their basic rights and the regime
has executed more people than any other country in
the world. Since fighting broke out in Syria almost
three years ago, Iran has provided financial, political
and logistical support to Al-Assad, while also sending
Hizbullah militia to assist the Syrian Government forces
in killing civilians. NAM's cynicism and hypocrisy is
shameful.

I must admit that I was astonished to hear the
Iranian representative speak about non-compliance
with Security Council resolutions. How absurd that is. I
wish that I could be shocked by the accusations hurled
by the Syrian representative today, turning the meeting
into a theatre of the absurd. The Syrian representative
has the audacity to shed crocodile tears about the
situation ofthe Palestinians, while his own Government
kills and pursues a policy of starvation against the
Palestinian population in the Yarmouk camp. While the
Syrian Government bombs schools and kills children,
the Syrian representative finds it necessary to complain
here in the Security Council about the curriculum in
schools in Israel. That is the theatre of the absurd at its
worst.

The Syrian representative's accusations against Israel
with regard to violations of the 1974 Disengagement
Agreement are baseless. Syria systematically violates
the Agreement and Israel only provides and will
continue to provide humanitarian aid to the Golan
population, including soldiers and other residents of
the Golan who are severely injured. Just recently, Israel
treated a severaly injured soldier of the Syrian armed
forces, who came to the border asking for help. That
happened only two weeks ago but, of course, that was
not part of the Syrian representative's statement here at
today's meeting.
I would like to respond to a State in our southern
vincinity, whose representative spoke about the situation
in Gaza. To begin with, there is no blockade on Gaza.
In fact, all goods and humanitarian aid - let me repeat
it - all humanitarian aid entering Gaza comes from
Israel. It seems that that representative's concerns has
less to do with the humanitarian need in Gaza and more
to do with demonizing Israel. One does not need to be
able to understand the writing on the Rosetta Stone to
discover that Gaza has an additional entry point.

Lastly, it took a great deal of audacity on the
part of the Malaysian representative to criticize the
human rights record of my country. Israel is a thriving
multicultural democracy, in which the rights of all
minorities are respected and all religions are tolerated.
That is in contrast to Malaysia, whose serious human
rights violations include torture, the denial of due
process and the abuse of workers' rights. That is to
say nothing of the Government curtailing the right to
freedom of expression and religion.

I could continue but, out of respect for the serious
work before us and the limited time of the Council, I
will refrain from doing so.

