Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Our meeting is drawing to a close, and I am
now perhaps within my rights, as doyen of the Security
Council, to welcome our new United States colleague,
Ambassador Nikki Haley. From time to time we may
have differences on particular issues, but her efforts
will greatly influence the Council's ability to effectively
carry out its collective functions as the body with the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. I would therefore like to wish her
every success.

In her statement, Ambassador Haley touched on
the issue of Crimea. In that connection, I would like to
remind her that it was the United States Constitution
that proclaimed those marvellous, historic words "We
the people". The people of Crimea clearly expressed
their will in a referendum in which 93 per cent of the
population voted for reunification with Russia, from
which Crimea had been unjustly and unlawfully severed.
And, by the way, that expression of the people's will
has subsequently been confirmed in a number of public
opinion surveys conducted by Western organizations.

Still on the issue of Crimea, however, it is the
representative of the United Kingdom, as aggressive as
ever, who for some reason persists in saying that the
crisis in Ukraine began with Crimea. I am compelled
yet again to recall that the whole thing began with
a coup that owed a great deal to external support.
Here is my advice to the representative of the United
Kingdom about his position. Give back the Malvinas;
give back Gibraltar; give back the part of Cyprus that
was annexed; give back the Chagos archipelago in
the Indian Ocean, which has been turned into a huge
military base. Perhaps then his conscience will be a
little clearer and he will be able to speak to other topics.

While we sometimes have to deal in controversy,
I believe nonetheless that our job as diplomats in the
Security Council is to adopt resolutions and see to it
that they are strictly implemented. Ten days from
now we will observe the second anniversary of the
adoption of the Minsk package of measures and the
corresponding agreements, while 17 February is
the second anniversary of the Council's adoption of
resolution 2202 (2015), giving the Minsk agreements
international legal status. From time to time, we hear
that Russia is not fulfilling the Minsk agreements; but
the President of Ukraine says that the military provisions
of the Minsk agreements must be complied with before
the political ones are dealt with. It is not hard to figure
out who is right and who is wrong here. All we have
to do is look at a Security Council document - the
same resolution 2202 (2015), to which the package of
measures is attached as annex I. It contains some very
simple propositions that we can all understand.

Regarding the relationship between military and
political measures, paragraph 9 of the annex provides
for

"Reinstatement of full control over the State
border by the Government of Ukraine throughout
the conflict area, starting on day 1 after the local
elections and ending after the comprehensive
political settlement provided that paragraph
11 has been implemented in consultation with
and upon agreement by representatives of certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in the
framework of the Trilateral Contact Group."

That means that certain military steps should start only
after various political measures have been implemented.
Now, what are those conditions in paragraph 11 that
have to be implemented? Paragraph 11 provides for

"Carrying out constitutional reform in
Ukraine with a new constitution providing for
decentralization as a key element as well as
adopting permanent legislation on the special status
of certain areas in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions
in line with measures as set out in the footnote".

And the footnote clearly sets out the eight measures
that must be taken in order to ensure special status for
south-eastern Ukraine. They are extremely precise.
The President of France, who made a very active
and substantive contribution, and the Chancellor and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany, who
made a number of proposals that were then agreed to
by everyone, did not spend 17 hours drafting them in
vain..

There can simply be no arguing here. And, logically,
who could suggest or expect that Donetsk and Luhansk
should close off their borders and allow themselves to
be walled in? And then what? Throw themselves on
the mercy of the Kyiv authorities? Can the citizens of
Donetsk and Luhansk trust the Kyiv authorities? At
one point - I believe it was 1 July 2014 - President
Poroshenko appeared on Ukrainian television and
said that the citizens of Donetsk and Luhansk were so
beloved in Kyiv that there would be no heavy-artillery
shelling of residential areas during their anti-terrorism
operations. He said that his valiant warriors had other
ways of recovering those territories and that they would
not be shelling residential areas with heavy weapons.

Since then, Mr. Apakan can confirm that not a
single day has passed when residential areas have not
been shelled targets, while high-rise buildings are fired
on one day and then fired on again the next. Take the
photograph that Ambassador Yelchenko showed us
today. If it is a picture ofa ruined building in Avdiivka,
of course it is terrible. But he could have brought similar
photos of other areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions, as many as you like. Why did he not do that?

Yes, of course, Ukrainian soldiers have died in the
fighting, and there is nothing good about that. But most
of those who have died on the Donetsk and Luhansk
side have been civilians, including women and children.
Why not talk about them? Of course we could draft some
document, but if we are serious people representing
serious Governments, especially the Governments

that have been directly involved in the process, by the
way, let me point out to dear Ambassador Haley that
we know how they respect the American authorities
in Kyiv, which means that in this regard the American
authorities can have some very serious influence on the
developing situation. All that is needed is to call for
the implementation of the relatively simple provisions
in the Minsk package in order to restore Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. And yet Kyiv's
actions are in fact bringing about the destruction of
its territorial integrity. Ambassador Yelchenko says
that the local people cannot do this, cannot wreak such
destruction, and so forth. But can the local Ukrainians
on the Ukrainian side wreak such destruction on
Donetsk and Luhansk? It seems that they can. Do they
not consider these Ukrainian citizens their brethren?
While that would be very sad, we know that that is
exactly What some hotheads in Kyiv think and believe.

I would like to appeal to the common-sense section
of the Ukrainian political spectrum. But I repeat that,
needless to say, without major influence from those
on the external factor side, the Normandy format and
others, none of this will succeed. Because they will
simply deceive their own people with unsubstantiated
claims that own population that Kyiv has somehow
complied with the Minsk agreements. They say that
they are recapturing their country, metre by metre. How
many people will have to die as they progress metre
by metre from Avdiivka to the Ukrainian border? How
many Ukrainian soldiers and civilians will have to die?
And this at a time when a political alternative exists,
agreed to at the highest level, and including President
Poroshenko's participation two years ago. While it is
therefore regrettable that what we heard today from
the Ukrainian delegation was totally irresponsible, I
hope that our frank discussion will still enable those
who really want to resolve the Ukrainian crisis to look
at things more objectively and push Kyiv into taking
the steps that are essential to establishing peace in
Ukraine. It would certainly be a tragedy if the situation
we have faced in the past two or three years should drag
on any longer.

