The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank President Ali Bongo Ondimba for having
convened this important meeting. I greatly appreciate
Gabon's leadership in submitting the vital resolution
1983 (2011), which has just been adopted. Now is the
time for bold action.
3

More than 10 years ago, then United States
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke pushed for the first
discussion of HIV and AIDS in the Council Chamber.
Ambassador Holbrooke was the consummate diplomat,
but he was determined to raise the issue of HIV and
AIDS even when it was undiplomatic. I commend the
initiative of President Ali Bongo Ondimba. I am glad,
that for the second time, the Security Council is
discussing this important issue in parallel with the
General Assembly.

We have come a long way since health issues
were first discussed in the Council. I have continued
with great regularity to bring AIDS to the Council's
attention, particularly in my reports on sexual and
gender-based violence and in those that highlight the
important contributions of women to peace and
security.

Whenever AIDS is part of the equation, the
United Nations is working to be part of the solution.
That began in 2000, when resolution 1308 (2000) was
adopted. Today, the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and a number of Governments are
organizing training events for our Blue Helmets and
troops in different countries so that they can make a
difference.

(spoke in English)

Commitment starts at the top. I am raising this
issue directly with world leaders, and my senior aides
are equally passionate about our AIDS response. In
Timor-Leste, my former Special Representative
stepped up to test for HIV. The Deputy Special
Representative quickly followed. So did the United
Nations Police Commissioner, the Deputy Police
Commissioner and many others. They were getting
information on their health, setting an example and
countering fear, stigma and discrimination.

In Lebanon, our Force Commander organized an
event on prevention on World AIDS Day. Then and
there, a contingent commander decided to be tested.
Many of his troops were encouraged by his leadership.
They also volunteered. For our personnel,
predeployment HIV training is standard. We have
trained over 1,500 peacekeepers as peer counsellors. In
just five years, the number of Blue Helmets seeking
voluntary counselling and testing increased from fewer
than 2,000 to more than 14,000.
But we are not just helping our peacekeepers -
they work so that people recovering from war do not
also have to recover from disease. It is all part of the
broader mission that the Council entrusts to our troops:
to stop gender and sexual-based violence, to enhance
the role of women and to protect children. It is also
part of a broader international campaign, the Global
Strategy for Women's and Children's Health. In
conflict zones, refugee camps and anywhere people
fear for their lives, women, young people and children
are more vulnerable to contracting HIV.

Before resolution 1308 (2000) was adopted,
uniformed personnel were viewed in terms of the risk
they might pose to civilians. We now understand that
United Nations troops and police are part of
prevention, treatment and care. For example, we are
working in Cote d'Ivoire, which has the highest
prevalence of HIV in West Africa. The United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and United Nations co-
sponsors are training troops and police on HIV, human
rights and gender equality. They are also providing
technical support on HIV in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
By making HIV prevention part of our DDR activities,
we can protect civilians from HIV. We can reduce
discrimination. And we can help former soldiers living
with HIV get the care and treatment they deserve.

We have to talk about sensitive issues when it
comes to HIV and AIDS. We must be frank about
where we are falling short. The Council has made
major strides in addressing sexual violence in conflict.
But rape is still a weapon of choice. This is an
atrocious human rights violation. It is a war crime. And
it is a public health threat. Women and girls are
extremely vulnerable as victims but, more than that,
they are agents of progress and change. I urge all
members to link efforts to combat HIV and AIDS with
our campaigns against sexual violence and for the
rights of women. That means addressing the dangerous
interaction between AIDS, the international drug trade,
sex trafficking and the abuse of women. This problem
is not getting the attention it deserves.

We also need action after the ink dries on
agreements and the guns fall silent. We need to help
shattered societies prevent the spread of HIV. And we
must provide treatment to everyone who needs it. We
can get the job done with our regional partners as long
as we involve civil society organizations - the
11-3654]
activists, researchers and health workers who have
brought us so far.

Today we are marking 30 years of our struggle
against AIDS. But let us focus on a different number:
zero. Let us get to no new infections, no discrimination
and no AIDS-related deaths. That is our goal.

