Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour of
resolution 2209 (2015), in connection with the reports
of the fact-finding mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) regarding
the use of chlorine as a chemical weapon in the
Syrian Arab Republic (S/2015/138, annex). In that
regard, we were guided by our principled position on
the unacceptability of the use of chemical weapons
by anyone. We also took into account the need for
the Security Council to maintain a unified position
regarding the Syrian chemical weapons dossier, as
embodied in resolution 2118 (2013).

We stress that further activity of the OPCW fact-
finding mission should be based on professionalism,
objectivity and impartiality. Any conclusions on the
facts related to the use of chemical weapons should be
based on sound proof. To that end, we should strictly
observe the provisions of the General Assembly's
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the OPCW, which envisions that cases of particular
gravity and urgency shall be brought directly to the
attention of the General Assembly and the Security
Council by the OPCW Executive Council, by way of
the Secretary-General, in accordance with existing
procedures.

In future, we will strictly base our position on
the fact that only the guiding bodies of the OPCW
may confirm the facts of alleged violations of the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction and resolution 2118 (2013).
That approach is envisaged both in the Convention and
in the communique on the Syrian chemical weapons
programme agreed upon by the United States and the
Russian Federation on 14 September 2013 in Geneva.

We Wish to once again state categorically that we do
not accept the possible use of sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations without an
attempt to confirm any allegations based on proof.

