Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his report, for setting out
the action that the International Criminal Court (ICC)
has taken over the past seven years on Darfur and for
briefing us on the latest developments in the work of
the Court on this matter. The United Kingdom continues
to support that work and, as his time in office comes
to an end, I commend the Prosecutor and his team for
their efforts in pursuit of justice for the victims of this
conflict.

The last six months have not seen as much progress
in Darfur as we had hoped. The inauguration of the
Darfur Regional Authority in February was an important
step towards the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur, as was the establishment of the
Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission, the
Darfur Land Commission and the National Human
Rights Commission. We welcome those developments.
Implementation, however, has not progressed as
planned, and those authorities are not yet functioning
institutions. The people of Darfur have yet to see
tangible improvements to their lives as a result.

We once again look to the Government of the Sudan
to demonstrate its commitment to the Doha Document.
We hope that the high presidential committee will
expedite its implementation. We urge the Government to
deliver its funding commitments to the Darfur Regional
Authority, allowing it to establish well-structured and
well-resourced institutions, delivering for the people of
Darfur before they lose hope in the Doha Document.

We urge those movements that have not signed the
Doha Document to support its implementation and to
engage constructively in the peace process. We hope that
all Darfuris will engage in an internal dialogue, and, as
set out in the African Union-United Nations framework
for facilitation of the Darfur peace process, will
themselves determine the nature of those consultations.
Those developments, however, are marred by the
continuing reports of violence in Darfur. The human
rights situation is deteriorating, with continuing reports
of violence against women and children, often of a
sexual or gender-based nature. Ground attacks targeting
civilians, humanitarian workers and peacekeepers
continue. In the past year, 10 peacekeepers have
died and 20 injured in nine attacks against the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). That is outrageous and must be
condemned. It is unacceptable that UNAMID continues
to be prevented from accessing and investigating such
attacks. The Government and the armed movements
must stop preventing access by humanitarian agencies
to those most in need of assistance.

Given these ongoing and deeply concerning issues,
the continuing jurisdiction of the Court in Darfur is
all the more relevant, and the Prosecutor's continued
efforts to monitor and investigate allegations are vital.

The arrest warrant issued against the Sudanese
Defence Minister, Abdelrahim Hussein, for crimes
against humanity and war crimes means that there are
now four outstanding arrests that the Government of the
Sudan has failed to take action to enforce. Instead, it
continues to obstruct the pursuit of justice for the people
of Darfur. The Government of the Sudan is bound to
comply with the obligation laid down by the Council
in resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate fully with the
ICC and its investigations. No citing of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties or quotations from
other people alter that fact. It remains their obligation.

The United Kingdom has repeatedly asked the
Government of the Sudan to comply with that obligation,
and we repeat that call today. Indeed, we call on all
States to cooperate with the ICC to end impunity.

In conclusion, we want once again to thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his efforts to achieve justice
for the victims of this conflict over the past seven years
and, indeed, to thank him for all his efforts to end
impunity while in the Office of the Prosecutor at the
International Criminal Court.

