Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank Mr. Alan Doss for the briefing
he has just given us regarding the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire. I would also like to thank Mr. Aziz Pahad,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa,
and Ms. Mojanku Gumbi for being with us today. Their
presence in New York is of particular importance to my
delegation, as I believe it is for all the members of the
Security Council. It is important for a simple and
fundamental reason: that the international community
places great hopes on the efforts of South Africa and
the personal involvement of President Thabo Mbeki to
help extricate Cote d'Ivoire from the deep-rooted crisis
in which it finds itself.

The crisis in Cote d'Ivoire is indeed of concern,
because the stakes are so high, first and foremost for
Cote d'Ivoire and for Ivorians. For two years now, that
country has been divided, fragmented and increasingly
impoverished. That cannot continue indefinitely. The
stakes are also high for the West African subregion as a
whole. That has been said often around the Council
table. I believe that everyone here is quite certain that
if Cote d'Ivoire were to collapse, the entire region
would be seriously destabilized for a long time to
come.

Lastly, we believe that what is at stake here also
involves the entire African continent. At a time when
Africa is organizing itself and taking its future into its
own hands, it is unacceptable that a serious crisis
should continue in a major country of the continent that
had for years been viewed as the most successful
country in West Africa in terms of development.

Unfortunately, it must be noted that, despite the
outstanding efforts made by President Mbeki, cote
d'Ivoire is still very far returning to the path of
reconciliation. What have we observed? We have
observed, first of all, that the Ivorian parties have not
abandoned the military option, as evidenced by the
very serious events that took place at Logouale on
28 February last. That is unacceptable.

The Ivorian parties must be aware of the fact that
the international community will never agree to a
settlement of the crisis by force or by arms; such a
settlement would not, in any case, be a lasting one. The
international community will also ensure compliance
with the arms embargo, in accordance with resolutions
1572 (2004) and 1584 (2005). I would add that, in such
a context, a strengthening of UNOCI troops seems to
us a sine qua non and very urgent.

Secondly, media campaigns to incite hatred and
spread disinformation persist in C6te d'Ivoire. This
cannot be tolerated either, for we are well aware of the
potentially devastating consequences of such
campaigns.

Thirdly, the political situation remains
deadlocked, and no major progress has been made with
respect to the key elements of the reconciliation
process as defined by Linas-Marcoussis. The
cantonment of forces and the disarmament of the
Forces nouvelles have not begun. The militias have not
been disbanded; indeed, it is clear that they are armed
and continue to pose a serious threat to the country's
stability, in Abidjan and elsewhere. And finally, article
35 of the Constitution has still not been revised. These
obstacles must be overcome.

Indeed, time is running out. Everything possible
must be done to be sure that elections are held
according to the timetable that has been set, that is to
say, next October - seven months from now -
because the holding of free, open and transparent
elections is the only solution to the crisis. I have to say
that, if the elections are not held in October as planned,
Cote d'Ivoire will be embarking on a path that will
take it into unknown territory that is fraught with
danger.

In that context, it is France's view that the efforts
of President Mbeki are vital. I would like to take the
opportunity of Mr. Pahad's presence here to vigorously
restate the fact that France fully supports the mediation
efforts begun by President Mbeki on behalf of the
African Union. We are aware that his task is by no
means an easy one, but he must succeed. The
discussions which will begin in several days with him
in Pretoria are critical here. It is our hope that they will
make it possible to relaunch the dynamic process of
peace in C6te d'Ivoire. To do so, all of the Ivorian
parties will have to demonstrate a sense of
responsibility, and, as the Council has often stated, any
commitments they might make to President Mbeki
must be kept. The international community will have to
be vigilant in that respect.

The last point I wish to raise is that of the
renewed consideration, in the next few days, by the
Security Council of the mandate of UNOCI and of the
Licorne forces. The debate that will be taking place
and the decisions to be taken by the Council will be
decisive. The Council will have to work in close
cooperation with South Africa, the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States.

That is why it is crucial for the Council to pay
very close attention to the African mediation and to
heed its analyses and recommendations. The mandate
of the impartial forces will end on 4 April, when
discussions will be ongoing in Pretoria between
President Mbeki and the Ivorian parties. The Council
will have to be aware of the results of that meeting and
of President Mbeki's analysis of those results. My
delegation therefore proposes renewing the mandate of
the impartial forces for one month, until 4 May. That
will give the Council time to do its work, and we
would then have President Mbeki's report on the
discussions that will be taking place in Pretoria.

Today, one month from 4 May and seven months
from the elections, I can only underscore here once
again our deep concern at the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire. It would be serious indeed if there is no
breakthrough in the next few days as regards the
implementation of Linas-Marcoussis. Once again, that
is why we are counting on President Mbeki to make
that breakthrough, and the Security Council is there to
assist him in so doing.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that
France has always acted in accordance with the
mandate which the Security Council has entrusted to it.
If the Council, taking on board the African viewpoint,
wishes to so do, it will continue to shoulder that
responsibility.

