Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (Spoke in Spanish):
Many thanks to Ambassador Valentin Inzko for his
presentation of his biannual report (S/2016/911, annex)
and, more important, many thanks for the special
report on the referendum held on 25 September in the
Republika Srpska.

I also wish to express our appreciation for the
adoption of resolution 2315 (2016), which once again
points to the multinational commitment to stabilization
on the part of the European Union. which has played
a positive and commendable role in supporting the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

By way of a preliminary remark, I wish to endorse
the contents of the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the EU.

The year 2016 has been a major year for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, marked by a series of landmark events.
I wish to point to one of those events - 15 February,
which is when Bosnia and Herzegovina's candidacy
for integration into the European Union was
presented - which points to the beginning of a path
that will not be easy, a path that Spain knows well. I can
affirm that, in the end, it is a path towards progress and
stability. Bosnia and Herzegovina has already taken the
first important steps on that path towards the European
Union. I will highlight three steps.

The first step is the implementation of the
reform agenda. The second step is the adaption of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement. The third
step is the adoption, on 23 Augus,t of the coordination
mechanism for European Union matters. We welcome
those steps, but in order to continue along the positive
path, it is absolutely necessary that all actors and
relevant political forces address and come up with a
solution to those issues that are of the greatest concern
to the population. I think that one of the greatest
concerns has to do with respect for the rule of law,
which is an irreplaceable and essential pillar of any
State and which is the foundation of the European
Union. It is for that reason that I most lament those
cases where we have seen actions against the rule of law,
against established legislation, against the authority of
institutions and in particular against the authority of
the Bosnian Constitutional Court with respect to its
decision of 17 September on the convening and holding
of a referendum in the Republika Srpska.

Spain calls on all institutional and political actors
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be guided in all their
conduct by the need to fulfil legal requirements. We
also want to see, once and for all, an end to divisive
rhetoric, and we unequivocally condemn any incitement
to hatred. The political leaders ofthe three communities
are especially responsible for seeking reconciliation
and ensuring that everyone can live peacefully together.

I cannot conclude without reiterating Spain's support
for the work carried out by the High Representative. It
is our desire to see necessary progress made as soon as
possible in order to ensure that the five objectives are
met and the two conditions for the conclusion of his
mandate. I also wish to recall my previous statement
(see S/PV.7688) on this issue here in the Security
Council in which I expressed the unequivocal support
of Spain for the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as our
conviction that the stability of the region as a whole is
inseparable from the political stability and progress of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

