Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Ithank you,
Mr, President, for organizing this important meeting.
I would also like to thank Ambassadors De Aguiar
Patriota and Skoog for their illuminating briefings.

Sinceitwas establishd lOyears ago,thepeacebuilding
architecture has made undeniable progress - on the
one hand in the sense of a better understanding of the
specific challenges faced by countries emerging from
conflict, and on the other in improved coordination
of international efforts, particularly on the part of
United Nations entities. The report we are considering
today (S/2015/174) specifically illustrates the way in
which those efforts have made it possible to improve
situations on the ground. I am thinking in particular of
the partnership with the Peacebuilding Fund promoting
greater inclusion of women in Liberia, or of the support
provided to the establishment of the new Parliament in
Guinea.

Echoing Ambassadors De Aguiar Patriota and
Skoog, France would like to recognize the commitment
of the peacebuilding architecture in the fight against
Ebola, a crisis that gravely impacted three countries
on the Commission's agenda. Forced to redirect its
priorities, the Commission made every effort to raise
awareness with respect to the multidimensional effort
needed to combat Ebola, which had public health,
social, economic,and political consequences. To have
been content with a medical response alone, however
crucial, would not have made it possible to adequately
address the very real challenges posed by a lack of
infrastructure, weak health-care systems and the
population's lack of awareness of the public health
challenges. We are therefore pleased to see that the
peacebuilding architecture can make a difference and
can help countries to emerge from crisis.

Further progress can still be made in our collective
efforts. The ability to mobilize long-term resources
and coordinate among a range of donors to support
strategies defined by host States remains a challenge
that has yet to be satisfactorily addressed. The cases
of countries emerging from conflict that relapse into
crisis situations reveal the shortcomings on which we
still have more work to do.

With that in mind, France supports the review of
the peacebuilding architecture, whose linkage to the
strategic review of peacekeeping operations and the
review of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
is vital. Those reviews allow a critical review of the
totality of United Nations peacekeeping endeavours
in countries in crisis or emerging from crisis, across
the whole spectrum of conflicts, from prevention to
post-conflict stabilization, including peacekeeping and
the management of transitional phases. Institutional
reconstruction, the re-establishment of functional
State structures, national reconciliation, transitional
justice and economic recovery are challenges that take
years, sometimes even decades, to deal with. Crisis
management is one thing; addressing such conflicts in
the long term is another, and in that regard we have
made enormous progress.

In that context, I would like to highlight several
points that we consider central. First, it is essential to be
firmly anchored on the ground, in specifics and in local
situations, in order to provide a tailored response and to
support national processes. Moreover, the real work of
the Peacebuilding Commission takes place in country-
specific configurations, which is where it can best be
achieved. Organizational reflection is important but
should always support country configurations. In that
regard, France welcomes the initiative of the Central
African Republic configuration, thanks to which a
donor mobilization meeting was held to support that
country's elections.

Secondly, it is critical that we develop our
thinking and efforts with regard to sequencing and
prioritizing international action. We must work on the
interrelationship among the different United Nations
missions and the forms of engagement, as well as on
mission succession. France is grateful to Japan for its
initiative on lessons learned in mission transitions.

Thirdly and lastly, we can only agree with the
Peacebuilding Commission regarding the importance of
the regional dimension. The States that are neighbours
of post-crisis countries are key players with whom we
must work closely, because crisis issues very often
transcend national borders. Cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations must also be enhanced,
and France welcomes the high priority given to that
area in the work this year.

The report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, chaired by President Ramos-Horta,
was submitted a few days ago, and we are awaiting
the imminent submission of the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture, coordinated by Ambassador Rosenthal,
and the submission in September of the report of the
High-level Advisory Group for a Global Study on
Resolution 1325 (2000). Those reviews are a unique
opportunity to consider the whole chain linking peace,
security and development in the context of the United
Nations summit to adopt the post-2015 development
agenda. We will collectively examine the results of
these strategic revieews and actively engage in the
implementation of the relevant recommendations.

