Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Mufioz for his informative briefing on the
work of the 1267 Committee and the Monitoring Team
and on his visit to several countries from 1 to 8 May.
At the outset, we should note that the adoption of
resolution 1526 (2004) was a further milestone in the
conceptual framework of the Committee and that, since
its adoption, much progress has been made in the
implementation of sanction measures against Al Qaeda
and the Taliban. Since the adoption of that resolution,
the Committee has undertaken the consideration of
many issues pertaining to legal definitions and its own
work programme for 2004 and to the list of States that

have not submitted reports pursuant to resolution 1455

(2003).

Above and beyond the increase in the number of
reports submitted pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003),
we note that since January 2004 19 names of
individuals and six names of terrorist organizations -
some of them proposed by my Government - were
added to the Committee's consolidated list. In this
regard, I must welcome the spirit of cooperation of the
German delegation, with whom we have, on two
occasions, taken joint action that resulted in the listing
of new names on the list.

I would like to commend the new members of the
monitoring team on their appointment and assure them
of the full cooperation of the Algerian delegation. I
welcome in this regard the fact that pro-active steps
have been taken at close range through contacts and
interviews with representatives of about 50 Member
States with a view to further improving links between
the Committee and Member States. Furthermore, the
monitoring team has already undertaken a series of
tasks and has produced many documents. We take note
of that, and we encourage the team to put the final
touches on its in-depth overall analysis of the reports
submitted pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003).

I wish to reiterate my view that we should further
encourage interaction and synergy between the Al
Qaeda and Taliban Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, especially through better
coordination between the monitoring team and the new
CTC Executive Directorate, of which Ambassador
Javier Ruperez has just been named head. I would like
to congratulate him and assure him of the full
cooperation of my delegation.

We fully agree with Ambassador Mufioz with
regard to Member States implementing sanctions, as
well as with regard to legislative measures such as
those related to finance, travel ban and arms
embargoes. We note with him that at the conceptual
level there seems to be some confusion between
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. We
nevertheless believe that this confusion is only
apparent, because experience and the facts have shown
abundantly that terrorist networks are funded in various
ways, including through arms trafficking, organized
crime and drug trafficking.

It will be recalled that in my delegation's
statement on 12 January on the oral report submitted
by Ambassador Munoz, I strongly encouraged the
Committee Chairman and the members of the
monitoring team to continue visits to the field to verify
implementation of sanctions against the Taliban, Al
Qaeda and associated individuals and entities. That
approach is part of a concern to develop better
interaction between the Committee and Member States
on the one hand, and to make up for the lack of
information - even the absence of reports - on the
other.

We then welcome the fact that the Chairman of
the Committee and a team composed of members of
the Committee and of the monitoring team and of the
Secretariat have carried out a visit that, inter alia, took
them to Algeria. Many questions - such as those
pertaining to cooperation and exchange of information,
funding of terrorist organizations, the submission of
names to be added to the consolidated list, arms
embargoes and assistance - were discussed with the
officials of the States visited. We hope that the
Committee will take into account the concerns and
problems raised by those officials, as they come within
its mandate.

I wish to highlight from this standpoint some
elements that we feel are of great interest to the work
of our Committee.

First of all, we believe that the procedure for
notification - as we have stated in the past - should
be encouraged until it becomes embedded in the
relevant resolutions of the Committee. In this context I
wish to emphasize that my delegation recently initiated
a series of informal consultations with members of the
Committee with a view to submitting new names for
inclusion in the Committee's list. Those consultations
have concluded, and we intend to submit the names to
the Committee for consideration very soon.

The Security Council must then further examine
the propaganda and justification given by terrorists,
which in some ways is more dangerous and more
harmful than the financing of terrorism.

In view of the fact that terrorism is a global
threat, with global effects for both peace and
development and for human rights and the rule of law,
we believe that it is not only fallacious but dangerous
to maintain the distinction between the notions of
international terrorism and transnational terrorism. As
we see it, States that still draw that distinction should
reconsider their concepts and become aware of the
interconnection of terrorist networks and their
interactions regardless of their motivations, their
location and their ways of acting.

Kidnapping is one way terrorist groups collect
funds, and we advocate an international ban on
payment of ransom.

Lastly, we believe it is useful to think further
about better use of the potential and possibilities
provided by the United Nations Charter in order to lead
States to cooperate fully in the fight against terrorism,
including with regard to extradition, which is one of
the most important levers of judicial cooperation.

These are a few ideas I wish to convey today in
order to contribute to the debate on the ways to
strengthen the efforts of the international community in
its fight against terrorism.

Finally, I wish to renew my country's firm
commitment to the fight against terrorism, to express
our full support for the recommendations of
Ambassador Mufioz and to encourage the Committee to
cooperate fully with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and, more especially, with its Executive Director.

