Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
I would like to commend the Russian Federation for
its initiative to convene today's important debate
on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security.

Terrorism and related criminal activities continue
to represent a serious threat to international peace
and security, the enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms and the political independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States
Members of the United Nations. Such activities also
impede social and economic development. Terrorism
constitutes one of the most serious crimes and must be
condemned and prosecuted. Instances of shielding and
glorifying terrorists should not be tolerated.

The sensitive geographic location of Azerbaijan
and continued existence of unresolved conflicts in the
region, together with the notorious ethnic cleansing
and occupation of my country's sovereign territories,
increase the level of transborder threats, including
terrorism. Since the end of the 19805, as a means of
realizing groundless and unlawful territorial claims
and as a method of warfare, externally directed
terrorist attacks have been repeatedly perpetrated
against Azerbaijan, claiming the lives of thousands of
its citizens, including civilians.

While recognizing the significance of addressing
all conditions that are conducive to the spread of
terrorism, it is critical that intensify conflict-resolution
efforts be intensified in various parts of the world.
Areas of armed conflict, in particular territories
under foreign military occupation, often create fertile
ground for terrorists and organized criminal groups
and networks to benefit from the exploitation of natural
resources, illicit trafficking in drugs and cultural
property, money-laundering and other related crimes.

We recognize that significant efforts have been
made by the United Nations and other international,
regional and subregional organizations to develop
cooperation and coordination and strengthen the
capacities of Member States in combating international
terrorism and organized crime. As a member of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the
Republic of Azerbaijan is interested in maintaining
cooperation within that multilateral platform and
developing mutually beneficial economic, political,
legal and humanitarian relations with the member
States of the CIS on a bilateral basis in accordance with
the principles of sovereign equality and the territorial
integrity of States.

As a dialogue partner, Azerbaijan shares the
purposes and principles of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), which are based on respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
States, and reiterates its full support for the continued
cooperation between the United Nations and the SCO.
Azerbaijan is pleased to be developing its partnership
relations with the SCO in strengthening regional
security and stability, countering terrorism, extremism
and separatism, drug trafficking and related criminal
activities, and promoting regional cooperation in other
areas of mutual interest and concern.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is essential for the promotion
of the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
In a number of instances, regional and subregional
organizations have proved to be indispensable
mechanisms to that end. At the same time, serious
challenges remain. While regional organizations are
normally well positioned to understand the threats and
challenges that their respective regions are facing, it
is obvious that not all of them can boast about their
ability, political will and institutional capacity to ensure
compliance by their member States with the relevant
statutory commitments.

First and foremost, regional organizations should
not let themselves be misused by those who gravely
violate international law and advocate the culture of
impunity. It is crucial that all Member States comply
with their international obligations as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions. They must also
ensure that their respective territories are not used for
terrorist and related criminal activities, in particular for
the financing of and providing, directly or indirectly,
any support for such activities under any pretext
or form.

