Mr. Simonovic': I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Council on the situation of human rights
in Ukraine. The Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights has just issued the third monthly report
of the United Nations human rights monitoring mission
in Ukraine. The report covers the period from 7 May
to 7 June. In this briefing, I will also provide some
updates since the report's 7 June cut-off date.

The report outlines some positive developments
that have occurred over the period through a number
of initiatives and legislative changes. They include
legislative amendments to combat discrimination
and corruption. There have also been legislative
developments relating to amnesty, the lustration of
judges, language rights, ethnic policy, torture and ill-
treatment, the media and the reform of law enforcement
agencies. These are important pieces of legislation that
will go a long way towards ensuring that proper legal
safeguards are put in place to address some of the root
causes of the crisis.

The Government has also taken steps towards the
implementation of the Geneva statement of 17 April
through the organization of round tables on national
unity. The outcome of these round tables contributed
to Parliament's adoption on 20 May of a resolution
entitled "Memorandum of concord and peace". The
memorandum foresees the adoption of a constitutional
reform package that includes the decentralization
of power, special status for the Russian language,
judicial and police reform, and an amnesty law for
anti-Government protesters in the east who would
agree to give up weapons, excluding those who have
committed serious crimes against life and physical
integrity. This is a welcome development.

The report notes that the presidential election took
place on 25 May, with relatively few human rights
violations in most of the country. However, serious
human rights violations took place in that context in
the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, where
attacks on election commissions and commissioners
occurred throughout the pre-electoral period and
during the election, disrupting the holding of elections
and depriving a large proportion of residents of their
right to vote.

Progress in the ongoing accountability processes
for the Maidan violence, as well as for the 2 May
incidents in Odesa, remains slow. Some arrests of
Berkut forces have taken place, but there have been no
prosecutions so far in the case of the 113 persons killed
during the Maidan events between November 2013 and
February 2014.

With regard to the tragic events of 2 May in Odesa,
no fewer than six investigations have been launched.
Our report so far points towards grave inaction, and
concerns with the conduct of the police and the fire
brigade in taking the necessary measures to prevent the
incidents and ensuing casualties. The proliferation of
investigations carries a high risk of miscommunication
and consequent contamination of evidence. The lack of
transparency in the investigations is also of concern. It
will be crucial for these investigations to be carried out
thoroughly, promptly and impartially.

I shall now turn to the east of the country, where we
are seeing the most serious human rights challenges.

The report highlights the rapidly deteriorating
situation in the east. However, the situation has
deteriorated even further, since the cut-off date of
the report. Estimates based on information gathered
from official sources indicate that from 15 April
to 20 June, 423 people, including servicemen and
civilians, were killed. There has been an increase in
arms and recruitment for armed groups. Representative
of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic have
recognized the presence within their ranks of armed
groups of citizens of the Russian Federation, including
from Chechnya and other republics of the North
Caucasus.

Abductions and detentions by armed groups
remain a worrying trend. The lawlessness continues
to spread. Human rights abuses by the armed groups
are increasing and common criminality is rising. The
monitors have recorded 222 cases of abduction and
detention by armed groups since 13 April. Of these, as
of 7 June, 4 had been killed, 81 remained in detention
and 137 had been released.

In the context of the Government's security
operations, there has been an increase in reports of
enforced disappearances and of excessive use of force
that have led to casualties among the population.
Despite security constraints, we continue to monitor
these incidents and to raise them with the Government.
While we have not received reports of the deliberate
targeting of the population, we are verifying allegations
that security forces could have taken measures to prevent
civilian casualties. The Government must ensure that
its armed forces refrain from using excessive force and
that its security operations are at all times in line with
relevant international human rights standards.

The population is leaving, partly due to fear, but
also because of the worsening situation of economic and
social rights. Over the past two weeks, the population of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) has doubled in the
country, with a large movement of people - estimated
at some 15,200 - within the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions. As of 23 June, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees had profiled more than
46,100 1DPs, 11,500 from Crimea and nearly 34,600
from the east. In the absence of a formal registration
system, and given the limited access to some areas by
humanitarian partners, the number of IDPs is likely to
be higher.

The Government has been encouraged to respond
to the humanitarian needs of IDPs, including by
establishing a comprehensive registration system,
formulating legislative and regulatory acts to ease
access to important social and economic rights, and
establishing public assistance programmes. The
mobilization and coordination of civil society-initiated
relief efforts, and cooperation with international donors
and technical assistance, are also crucial.

The report indicates that in May, studies had to be
suspended in several towns in the east, affecting 21,700
pupils. Hospitals remain overcrowded and understaffed,
medical supplies are low, and the Ministry of Health
reports that up to 10 hospitals in the eastern regions are
now closed. Food prices have skyrocketed. Seasonal
vegetables are now on average four to fivetimes more
expensive than before. Meanwhile, it is becoming
increasingly difficult for businesses to operate and
people to go to work. There have been, for instance,
armed attacks on mining companies, which constitute
the main share of the region's economy.

About half of the population of the Donetsk region
is experiencing some problems with access to water.
Since last week, in Slovyansk there has been no running
water. Around 90 per cent of the town is now cut off
from electricity. Phones do not work most of the time
and public transport does not function.

The situation ofjournalists is also alarming. The
Council rightly condemned the recent killing of two
Russian journalists by mortar fire, which followed the
killing of an Italian photojournalist and his Russian
interpreter on 24 May. While the perpetrators of those
recent attacks are yet to be identified, it will be highly
important to ensure accountability.

The report describes the situation in Crimea
as a legal limbo. Although Ukrainian legislation is
supposed to remain in force, also in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 68/262, legal institutions
in Crimea are already being required to comply with
the provisions of legislation of the Russian Federation.
That has very practical effects, as some 15,000 judicial
cases remain in legal limbo between Ukrainian and
Russian laws and legal systems.

The Crimean Tatar population has been facing
some concerning limitations on their enjoyment of the
freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly, association
and religion.

The United Nations human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine has so far been playing an important
role in defusing tensions through its impartial reporting
on the human rights situation. It can play an equally
useful role through human rights and humanitarian
confidence-building measures. The mission has already
facilitated numerous releases ofindividuals detained by
the armed groups. However, such measures should be
based on reciprocity, and individuals that are arbitrarily
detained by the authorities must also be released if
there is no well-founded legal basis for them to remain
in detention. As the mission has contacts on all sides, it
will continue to support and facilitate such initiatives.

President Poroshenko's recently announced
peace plan and unilateral ceasefire is a positive step
in the right direction. It is also encouraging to learn
of yesterday's announcement by the armed groups
that they would observe a ceasefire until Friday. That
creates a window of opportunity for human rights and
humanitarian confidence-building measures.

Beyond the immediate crisis response, respect for
all the human rights of everyone living in Ukraine is a
prerequisite for sustainable peace. The United Nations
human rights monitoring mission stands ready to
support the Government of Ukraine, as well as civil
society and various national and social groups, to make
that happen.

With your permisison, Mr. President, I will now
disconnect from the video teleconference. Because of
an unforseen change in my flight schedule, I will need
to depart now to catch a flight to Bujumbura.
