Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her very comprehensive and insightful briefing, as
well as Ms. Nada Majdalani and Mr. Gidon Bromberg,
co-Directors of EcoPeace Middle East, for their
informative remarks.

Unfortunately, despite our constant calls for a
de-escalation in the Middle East, there has been no
progress at all. The latest developments in the Gaza
Strip and in the West Bank have reminded us how
important it is to continue the de-escalation process.
Despite the recent ceasefire between Israel and
Hamas, the security situation remains volatile, and any
miscalculations could pose the risk of an outbreak of
violence. In that context, I want to underline that all
sides must fully comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

Our priority is restoring a political horizon for the
resumption of a meaningful peace process. We believe
that a negotiated two-State solution and a resolution
of all final-status issues, including Jerusalem,
settlements, the future of Palestinian refugees, borders
and security arrangements, remain a realistic path to
fulfilling the legitimate aspirations of both parties and
achieving long-term peace. We appeal to both sides to
refrain from unilateral steps that prejudge the outcome
of final-status negotiations, and we expect them to
demonstrate their commitment to peace through their
actions and policies. We condemn all acts of violence,
which are fundamentally incompatible with advancing
a peaceful two-State solution.

I would now like to touch briefly on the political
and security situation in the Gaza Strip, which remains
volatile. What we are specifically extremely concerned
about is the fate of the 2 million people in Gaza. Their
limited access to basic services could easily lead to an
escalation of social tensions that may destabilize the
situation in the region even further. Comprehensive
solutions to peace and security must also take into
account the threats posed by climate change and
environmental aspects such as water stress and
competition over natural resources. I greatly appreciate
the comments by the co-Directors of EcoPeace in that
regard. Creating a safe and secure world for all is not
just about our reaction. It is also about anticipation
and prevention. We therefore underline the need for
better climate-related security risk assessment and
management strategies.

We still believe that it will be possible to contribute
positively to the process only by returning to
meaningful bilateral negotiations, based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law,
which encapsulate internationally agreed parameters.
The creation of a political horizon, as well as of an
appropriate framework for political progress, will be
possible only together with regional and international
partners, starting with the Middle East Quartet.

We have been closely following the discussions led
by Egypt on intra-Palestinian reconciliation and hope
that the process will be successful. While we take note
of the formation of the new Palestinian Government,
we continue to urge all Palestinian factions to work
together to achieve the sustainable development of
that process, enabling the Palestinian Authority to
resume its full responsibilities in Gaza. One single and
legitimate Palestinian Authority could be an important
step for the unity of a future Palestinian State and a
basis for a sustainable peace agreement.

Before concluding, I want to underline the crucial
role in the region of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which we should do our utmost to preserve. And last
but not least, I would like to reiterate our commitment
to the security and stability of the region. Before
2010, Poland's largest contingents in peacekeeping
operations were deployed in the Middle East. We are
proud to be able to return to the region by supporting
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon with a
Polish military contingent.

