Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
join Security Council colleagues in welcoming the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Kazakhstan, His Excellency Mr. Kanat Saudabayev, to
the Council today. May I also thank him for his full
briefing, setting out the priorities of Kazakhstan as
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) during 2010. He is
very welcome at the Council here today.

This year marks a significant milestone for
Kazakhstan. The prestigious role of Chairman-in-
Office of the OSCE brings with it important
responsibilities to promote and embody the principles
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy,
good governance and the rule of law on which the
OSCE is founded. The spotlight will inevitably fall on
how well Kazakhstan meets those commitments. This
is a key opportunity for Kazakhstan to show itself as a
regional leader and a prominent international player.

We look forward to working with Kazakhstan to
deliver progress on the key issues facing the OSCE,
most notably the discussion on the future of European
security, the protracted conflicts in Moldova and the
Caucasus, and promoting human rights and
democratization. Those are issues that are important
not just to the OSCE but to the United Nations as well.

We welcome Kazakhstan's focus on the Corfu
process, which has firmly anchored the dialogue on the
future of European security in the OSCE. That is right,
given the OSCE's wide membership and mandate.
Moreover, it is important that security is interpreted
widely and includes issues such as energy security,
human rights and good governance, alongside hard
security issues. The Corfu process must cover all three
OSCE dimensions, reflecting the interdependencies
that require a comprehensive approach to European
security.

The protracted conflicts remain a top priority.
Unresolved issues in Moldova, Nagorny Karabakh and
Georgia have engaged the OSCE's attention for many
years. We commend the effort and energy that
Mr. Saudabayev and his Special Representative,
Mr. Nurgaliyev, have invested to bring together the
various parties, and we look forward to progress during
2010. The OSCE's engagement in South-East Europe is
testament to what can be done to help resolve complex
problems involving national minorities, although, in
this region too, there remains scope for doing more.

On Georgia, we remain committed to the
principle of an OSCE presence as part of a much
needed international scrutiny of the conflict, and
reflecting the OSCE's status as a co-Chair of the
Geneva talks. We urge Kazakhstan to continue to
explore all options that would enable a re-established
OSCE presence in Georgia, including in the region of
South Ossetia. We remain committed to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders.

We commend Kazakhstan's intention to enhance
the OSCE's engagement with Afghanistan, one of its
partners for cooperation. We agree that more can be
done to strengthen border security between
Afghanistan and the OSCE States in that region -
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan.

Finally, we note the importance that Kazakhstan
attaches to holding an OSCE summit during its
chairmanship. As OSCE Ministers agreed in December
2009, if there is to be a summit, it will require adequate
preparation in terms of both substance and modalities.

As Foreign Minister Saudabayev highlighted in
his briefing, the promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of law
are at the heart of the OSCE's comprehensive approach
to security. We welcome the Foreign Minister's
confirmation of the continued importance of that
human dimension in the OSCE's agenda. We also
welcome his pledge on 14 January to pursue further
political liberalization, and we look forward to further
progress on Kazakhstan's domestic reforms.

We will continue to support Kazakhstan's efforts
towards meeting their OSCE commitments, as well as
their forthcoming challenges as Chair.
