The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 751 (1992) concerning
Somalia.
Since 1 January 2002, the Committee has held
sixteen meetings. As Chairman, I made verbal reports
on the work of the Committee to the Missions and to
the press after each formal meeting. I do not intend to
describe in detail the work of the Committee. The
annual report for the year 2002 was issued in document
S/2002/ 1430. This year's report will be issued in a few
days. I would like to make a few brief comments that
could help the next Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia and the
work of the Committee in general.

First, on more general matters that illustrate the
difficulties encountered, Somalia is possibly the only
State subject to sanctions that does not really have a
central Government. There has been a civil war raging
for over 12 years. The two reports of the Panel of
Experts on Somalia described systematic violations of
the arms embargo that was imposed on 23 January
1992, pursuant to Security Council resolution 732
(1992).

For over 12 years, the heads of the Somali
factions have flouted the resolutions that were adopted,
which challenges the very credibility of the Security
Council and the United Nations. It is clear that a new
process must be employed. In addition, the complex
situation in Somalia and the regional repercussions of
the Somalian crisis demand a comprehensive and
integrated approach with respect to the arms embargo
and also with respect to the consequences of that
embargo which spill over the borders of the country
and are connected to the insecurity in the region,
organized crime and international terrorism. A united
approach in the Council and much more effort are both
needed to confront this challenge to the international
community. We need better coordination of the efforts
of the Committee and those of international, regional
and subregional organizations, as well as those of
Member State and non-State actors.

Consensus and resolve in the Council are crucial
in ending the atmosphere of impunity that has existed
for far too long. There is therefore a need to act firmly
and effectively to make up for lost time and broaden
the sanctions regime. Naturally, active cooperation and
wholehearted support by all Member States of the
United Nations is essential. I would stress, in
particular, the responsibility of the front-line States and
neighbouring States.

My second comment relates to the
interdependence of two aspects of the situation in
Somalia: the political aspect dealt with by the Council,
and the sanctions aspect. The approval I used as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 751
(1992) concerning Somalia, which was supported by all
members of the Committee, was that we should look at
the situation in terms of the link between the
implementation of the arms embargo and the political
process in Somalia. The arms embargo is not a goal in
itself, it is simply a tool used to generate the necessary
conditions for promoting Somali national
reconciliation. Accordingly, at this critical moment in
the Somali peace process, it is essential to continue
efforts to ensure harmony between the two aspects of
the situation, while respecting the different specific
nature of the two tasks.

One of the most important measures taken by the
Security Council, which gave new dynamism to the
work of the Committee, was the creation of the Panel
of Experts pursuant to Security Council resolution
1425 (2002). For over ten years, the Committee has
been faced with problem that it did not have enough
resources to deal systematically with information about
arms embargo violations. The Committee needed the
necessary resources to do its work. The Security
Council decision enabled the Committee to obtain
regular, detailed information about violations of the
arms embargo and to work on recommendations to
strengthen the embargo.

The establishment of the first Panel of Experts
was, in itself, a clear message to all of those who
violate the sanctions regime. It also bore witness to the
Council's resolve to ensure strict respect for the
embargo. The work of the two Panels of Experts and
their presence in the region showed that they operated
as a deterrent to those who might violate the sanctions
imposed by the Council.

I would like to take the opportunity to reiterate
my thanks to the experts who were members of the
Panel for their excellent and professional work. In the
last two years, an important aspect of the Committee's
work was its visit to the area, which I had the honour to
lead. The Committee's mission was to convey a clear
message, namely, that the Council was resolved to
ensure full respect for the arms embargo and that
violations would not be tolerated.

We spoke with leaders of neighbouring States and
front-line States, and leaders of regional and
subregional organizations, namely the League of Arab
States and the African Union, and we stressed the need
to find practical steps that could be taken to enhance
the effectiveness of the arms embargo. The
Committee's visit to the region, which was quite
unprecedented in terms of its membership and
objectives, led us to formulate our observations and to
draw up nine recommendations to strengthen the
sanctions regime. I am glad that the most recent
resolution adopted a few days ago by the Council on
Somalia included the main recommendations of the
mission. The mission was able to have direct contact
with Governments of countries involved, with a view
to strengthening cooperation with Member States and
regional and subregional organizations.

One of the conclusions of the Committee that the
Council should follow up on was the lack of technical
capacity in States in the region to monitor their air
space and land and sea borders. Material and technical
assistance should therefore be provided by the
community of donors to those States to strengthen their
national and regional capacities to monitor the main
ports, airports and border crossing points.

It is essential that neighbouring States of Somalia
be encouraged to develop bilateral and subregional
links, so that they can act together to avert violations of
the arms embargo. I hope the Committee will continue
to cooperate with the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), so as to develop some of the
initiatives that are designed to ensure ongoing dialogue
and respect for the arms embargo and reliable
monitoring of the borders.

In my view, information from countries with
significant intelligence gathering resources deployed
along the Horn of Africa could be extremely useful to
the Committee. There have been some problems
between the Council and the countries in question and I
believe efforts must be made to resolve them.

In conclusion, I would very warmly like to thank
the Secretariat for its support to the Committee in the
course of its recent work, particularly Mr. Gregor
Boventer, Secretary of the Committee; Ms. Loraine
Rickard-Martin, former Secretary of the Committee;
Ms. Anna Frangipani-Campino; and Ms. Seok Hoon
Bodek.

As we are preparing to leave the Council and the
Committee, we encourage them to continue to work
with the same energy and commitment. I also wish to
pay tribute to all delegations for their support and the
proactive approach they have taken over the years. In
particular I note the support extended to me by my
Vice-Chairmen, namely, Mexico, Norway and
Germany.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I now call on Mr. Fayssal Mekdad, who will
speak on behalf of the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
918 (1994), concerning Rwanda.

