Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned about the use of chemical weapons
in Syria and feels the suffering that is inflicted upon
the Syrian people by such attacks. China is always
opposed to the use of chemical weapons, under any
circumstances, by any State, organization or individual
and regardless of the motivation.

We support the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) on the chemical weapons of Syria in
carrying out its comprehensive objectives and impartial
investigation of the incidents in question, according to
the mandate of the Security Council, so as to arrive at
a result that is based on conclusive evidence and stands
the test of time and facts.

All Council members have condemned the use
of chemical weapons in Syria, so there is consensus
on demanding that the incidents in question be
investigated. The unity and single voice of the Security
Council on the question of Syrian chemical weapons are
conducive to finding out the facts, bringing to justice
the perpetrators and responsible parties and deterring
the further use of chemical weapons in Syria.

The draft resolution (S/2017/884) that was just
voted on by the Security Council included some
positive elements on which there exists consensus,
such as support for the continued work of the JIM. On
the other hand, some Council members expressed the
hope of comprehensively reviewing the mandate and
extension of the JIM. in connection with the upcoming
report of the Mechanism, so as to help to improve its
work more effectively.

The Security Council could have continued
consultations on the contents of the draft resolution
and the timing of its adoption in an effort to agree
on a document that enjoys the unanimous support of
all Council members. China has tirelessly urged the
Council to continue consultations in a bid for consensus.
However, regrettably, the Council rushed to vote on the
draft resolution in the absence of consensus. That is not
conducive to the unity of the Security Council, nor is it
helpful in solving the Syrian chemical weapons issue.

Against that backdrop, China abstained in the
voting on the draft resolution. Political settlement is the
only way to lift the Syrian people out of their suffering.
Recently, positive progress has been achieved in the
Geneva peace talks and the Astana dialogue. With
regard to the political settlement of the question of
Syria, we are beginning to see the light at the end of
the tunnel.

At this critical juncture, China calls upon all
members of the Council to bear in mind the broader
objective of continuing the political process in Syria,
maintain unity on the question of Syrian chemical
weapons and create favourable conditions for the
Syrian parties to arrive at a settlement that is acceptable
to all as soon as possible through the Geneva peace
talks, thereby playing a constructive role for an early,
comprehensive, just and appropriate settlement of the
question of Syria.

