Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let me
begin by expressing our appreciation to Russia for
convening today's ministerial debate. I listened carefully
to the statements by Secretary-General Guterres,
Secretary-General Norov, Acting Secretary-General
Semerikov and Deputy Executive Secretary Ivanov,
and I commend the cooperation on fighting terrorism
between the United Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Collective Security Treaty Organization.

Terrorism is a public enemy of humankind and
counter-terrorism is a responsibility we all share.
We continue to face a complex and challenging
situation. Terrorism, separatism and extremism remain
rampant and are becoming increasingly pervasive and
home-grown. The close link between terrorism and
extremism is more visible than ever before. For this
reason, international cooperation against terrorism must
be strengthened, not weakened. We need to recognize
that we are in a global community with a shared future.
As such, we must take a holistic approach and deliver
our joint responses, tackling both the symptoms and
root causes of terrorism. Promoting political settlement
is the best option for addressing hotspot issues, and
different civilizations and religions should live in
harmony based on mutual respect.

The global fight against terrorism has lasted nearly
20 years, since the incident of 11 September 2001. The
experience gained and lessons learned over the course
of the global fight deserve to be closely reviewed. As
we confront a new round of resurgent terrorism in the
world, it is important that we take the following actions.

First, we should apply uniform standards and
keep up the pressure. All terrorist activities must be
resolutely combated, irrespective of who is behind
them and of when, where and why they are committed.
There should be no double standard or selectiveness in
this fight. No one should use terrorist forces to pursue
geopolitical gains, still less tie terrorism to a particular
country, ethnicity or religion.

Secondly, we should set clear priorities and
tackle the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes.
The Internet is not beyond the law and should not become
a haven for terrorists. We must prevent terrorist groups
from using the Internet for propaganda, recruitment,
financing, incitement or organization purposes.

Thirdly, we should pay more attention to preventing
and eliminating the root causes of terrorism. We must
take active deradicalization measures to stop the spread
of extremist ideas and thereby remove the breeding
ground for terrorism. We must promote exchange and
dialogue between civilizations that is based on equality,
respect and tolerance and reject the notion of the so-
called clash of civilizations, leaving terrorist forces
no gaps to exploit. More importantly, we must pursue
development, especially sustainable development, if we
are to root out terrorism once and for all.
Fourthly, we should step up cooperation and enable
the United Nations to play its central role. Fighting
terrorism requires the individual efforts of Member
States; however, at the same time, the United Nations
and its Security Council should fully play their key role
in order to ensure better coordination at the national,
regional and global levels. In that connection, it is
crucial to fully implement the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The United Nations and such regional organizations
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the
Commonwealth of Independent States and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization shoulder a
particular responsibility in fighting terrorism. We
must enhance synergies through stronger cooperation
and contribute jointly to safeguarding world peace and
regional stability.

Under the stewardship of Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov, the Office of Counter-Terrorism has done a
great job. It has hosted a series of high-level meetings
this year and has achieved positive outcomes. China
supports the Office in continuing to play its coordinating
role, as well as the holding of a United Nations counter-
terrorism week in June next year. We will favourably
consider hosting a high-level meeting on counter-
terrorism in China. China will stay deeply involved
in international counter-terrorism cooperation. We are
ready to work with all other countries to deny terrorists
safe havens, provide a safe and happy life to our people
and make our world a peaceful and secure place for all.

China's efforts on counter-terrorism and
deradicalization, as an important component of the
global fight against terrorism, have made a valuable
contribution to global progress on that front. Let me
cite two sets of figures. Between 1990 and 2016, the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region was plagued by
violent terrorist activities, seeing thousands of violent
terrorist attacks which, at their peak, numbered one
incident per day. In contrast, there has not been a
single case in Xinjiang in the past three years. What
has made the difference? It is the vigorous measures
taken by the Government of the Autonomous Region,
including drawing on the good experiences of other
countries, to engage in preventive counter-terrorism
and deradicalization, in accordance with the law. Such
efforts have effectively curbed the frequency of terrorist
activities and ensure maximum safeguards for the right
to subsistence, the right to development and other basic
rights of the nearly 25 million people in Xinjiang. The
measures have been supported and endorsed by people
of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang and across China. That
is a basic fact recognized by all foreigners who have
been to Xinjiang.

Past progress shows that the deradicalization
measures in Xinjiang have been highly effective. They
constitute useful experiments in preventive counter-
terrorism and concrete steps in implementing the United
Nations Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism,
as well as China's important contribution to the global
fight against terrorism. The United States and other
individual Western countries have ignored those basic
facts and, in line with their own political agenda, have
engaged in smear campaigns against China's legitimate
measures. China is firmly opposed to what they have
been doing, and the international community should
disagree with their actions.

