Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Algeria's skilful
leadership of the Council this month has been truly
praiseworthy, and we congratulate the delegation of
that country - especially my friend Ambassador
Abdallah Baali and yourself, Mr. Foreign Minister -
on that account. We commend your choice of a topic of
critical urgency. We also commend Mr. Jan Egeland for
his report.

The genocide that took place in Rwanda some 10
years ago stirred our conscience: it reminded us of our
obligation towards civilian victims of armed conflict.
Several conflicts still rage - many of them
severely - in many parts of the world. Some have
transformed into delicate situations of transition. It is
regrettable that civilians continue to be subjected to
extreme violence and that they are denied access to
essential humanitarian assistance. The erosion of social
support structures and the culture of impunity have led
to the spread of such violence. Sexual violence against
women and girls is being used as a means of warfare in
some countries.

New dynamics are being created by the cross-
border and regional dimension of some conflicts. These
require us to adopt a regional and comprehensive
approach. In that respect, Bangladesh welcomes the
increasing role of regional organizations, particularly
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States. There is a broad consensus on the
need to strengthen the process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation
(DDRR) in areas of conflict. We need to adopt a
regional approach to DDRR programmes in view of the
cross-border movement of refugees, combatants and
small arms. Such programmes need secure and
adequate funding to deter the recurrence of violence.

Recent events in C6te d'Ivoire have once again
brought to the fore the need for clearer and more robust
mandates for peacekeeping operations. Bangladesh, as
one of the largest contributors to peacekeeping
operations, would support enhanced robustness for
such mandates, assuming that it is matched by
adequate resources. Security Council resolution 1296
(2000) broadened the mandate of peacekeeping
operations to include the physical protection of
civilians under imminent threat of violence. We are
uncertain, however, whether that expanded mandate
has always been matched by resources, particularly in
terms of the number of personnel.

We are concerned that the security constraints on
humanitarian assistance for 3.5 million civilians in the
occupied Palestinian territories have worsened
following the construction of a barrier through the
West Bank. The wall is having a profound
humanitarian impact on civilians by separating
Palestinian communities from their land, their jobs and
their businesses, and it is severely restricting their
access to food, water, schools and hospitals.

Bangladesh believes that the allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse of women and children by
United Nations personnel need to be addressed
urgently and in a manner that is rigorous, fair and
transparent. This is an area that we cannot afford to
neglect if we are to maintain the Organization's profile
and image at a high level. We also underscore the need
to improve the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel.

It is essential that the international community
remain engaged in order to ensure that civilians caught
in armed conflict are physically protected, that
humanitarian assistance reaches them unhindered and
that, when peace is achieved, they are not deprived of
the dividends. We also need to address the issue
systematically, as outlined in the lO-point programme.

We are encouraged at the determination of the
Council to deter war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. We see the need to break the prevalent
culture of impunity. The establishment of international
tribunals is a step in the right direction. The
international community must pool its efforts to ensure
that those responsible for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide do not escape justice. That is
all the more important if we wish to avoid another
Rwanda. Adherence to and respect for the Geneva
Conventions and other instruments of international
humanitarian and human rights law are crucial. We are
also required to find a balance - specific to each
circumstance - between the delivery of justice and the
national reconciliation process in post-conflict
societies. We cannot, however, allow impunity to
prevail. We need the peace to be sustainable;
otherwise, the society will inexorably slide back into
conflict.

One other area that we need to examine is the
peace process itself. It must address concerns about the
protection of civilians in order to be sustainable. In
addition to addressing security and political
developments, a peace process negotiation should
include commitments by all parties to the conflict to
cease attacks on civilians, to facilitate humanitarian
access, to create conditions conducive to the safe and
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced
persons, to ensure the safety of humanitarian personnel
and to actively participate in DDRR programmes. We
are heartened by the increased coordination between
the military and civilian components of peacekeeping
missions, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF. That
has resulted in accelerated reintegration of child
soldiers and mine action programmes in post-conflict
societies.

Bangladesh has always favoured a multilateral
approach to the maintenance of international peace and
security. We are committed to the principles of
international law, based on justice, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and respect for human dignity.
We share those values with the rest of the international
community. It is only through the consistent and
effective application of those principles that the United
Nations can attain the moral authority and credibility
that will help to make the world a safer place. That
would surely redound to the benefit of us all.

