Mr. Fowler (Canada): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, and really, a very warm thank you to all
colleagues on the Council for their kind words to me and
my delegation as to the task we are all doing. We could not
be doing any of this if we did not have this enormously
strong support from the Council. Your encouragement
today and many, many times previously has been the fuel
on which we have been moving. I think that very
encouragement ought to send a pretty strong message as
to our collective intention. I thank you all for it.

I might note that the basis for much of our work is
the Secretary-General's report last year on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of a durable peace in Africa
(S/ 1998/318), which I think is one of the most innovative
things the Council has done in many years. Of course,
Canada was not on the Council and can take no share of
responsibility for that excellent initiative. That report, to
a significant extent, told it like it was and provided the
context in which we are working.

I have made no secret of the fact, Mr. President, that
I very much wanted this assignment when we were
elected to the Council, because we believe firmly that if
one really wants to get to the sources of conflict in
Africa, one can probably start very usefully with
Mr. Savimbi. UNITA has had a destabilizing influence
throughout central and southern Africa for decades, and
I believe it is truly incumbent upon us in this Council to
stop this as best we can. That struck me as a pretty good
thing to do from a Security Council seat.

Many colleagues have suggested that there are
recommendations we have made that can be implemented
now, or soon. I agree completely, and our intention is to
start immediately working within the sanctions Committee
to bring recommendations to the Council for specific
action or measures whenever that action is right. In other
words, we do not feel at all constrained to wait the six
months until the panels have reported or for any other
thing. If something is right and something deserves to be
done, we will recommend that it be done. A number of
colleagues - Ambassador Andjaba, Ambassador Tiirk
and others - have suggested that there are other things
that need work, not only on the panels, but among
ourselves to make sure that we have a clear understanding
of exactly the kind of thing we want to do and the way
we want to do it. That will take more time, and we will
work on those things as we proceed.

Many colleagues have talked about the panels and
asked what my intentions are and how we will proceed.
My intention is to write to members of the Council this
afternoon to recommend the 10 names I will propose. I
will identify the specific functions for each of those 10,
give a brief synopsis of the curriculum vitae of each
 

individual and, on a no-objections procedure, ask you to
agree. When you have agreed - within a very short period
of time, I hope - I will then simply write to you,
Mr. President - bearing in mind that there may be another
Mr. President by the time that letter gets written - and
suggest that an appropriate document be circulated with the
list of the panel members and stating the fact that they will
immediately begin their work. My attention is to ship a
great pile of documents to each of those 10 members so
they can read into the subject over August, to hold a three-
day meeting of the panel members at the end of August and
assist them in establishing a work plan for the six months,
and to set up a series of meetings here and elsewhere,
certainly in Africa. Then, of course, there will be a final,
long meeting to develop the report, early next year. So
those are my intentions with respect to the panels, and
therefore I think we are right on the edge; there are just a
couple of details we are waiting for concerning a couple of
individuals, and I expect to get those imminently.

With respect to proposals heard today, both
Ambassadors Burleigh and Granovsky spoke of the need to
update and keep current the list of named individuals
subject to specific sanction with respect to financial
transactions and travel. I must admit, I think that is
absolutely accurate; I probably should have included that in
our report. We did hear that kind of thing in our travels,
mention of a specific individual, for instance, and why this
person was not on our list. I think one of the first things I
will do is ask the panels to look at those lists and to make
sure that we cast our net as widely as possible, to ensure
that all the right people have been included and to continue
to encourage all countries to do as Ambassador Burleigh
has indicated the United States Government has done,
which is to bring in very specific penalties relating to those
who assist in the violation of sanctions.

Ambassador Greenstock raised a couple of questions
relating to the fact that close cooperation with the
Secretariat will be vital. Of course, I very much agree with
him. We will be working closely with Mr. Stephanides and
his colleagues in the Department of Political Affairs and
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations with a
View to ensuring, ideally through a continuing United
Nations presence in Luanda, that we remain in very close
touch with the Government of Angola on all of these issues
and that the Government of Angola is aware of what we
are doing and why and how we are doing it and that it
feeds information to us about what is happening on the
ground. Above all, insofar as we are seeking to manage the
arms available to UNITA, we need to be kept very closely
abreast of information about the arms that are available to
UNITA and those that they are encountering in the field
and other such issues.

Ambassador Greenstock also asked a question about
further travel and my own specific intentions with respect
to such travel. I suppose that I should note that my
Government was under the impression that election to the
Security Council meant that I would be sitting around this
table dealing with weighty geostrategic issues, and when
I announced my holiday intentions they said, "Well, what
were you doing in May and July of this year, and why do
you want to take holidays now?" On a more serious note,
the Canadian Government could not have been more
supportive of our sanctions endeavours, and I should like
to take this opportunity to thank my own Government for
that steadfast support.

My intention is to remain fairly close to this table
and to the panels and to work with them. There is a lot of
further travel to be done. Specifically, there are a number
of countries in Central and West Africa that I was unable
to visit but which I hope the panels will arrange to visit.
There are a number of other countries in Eastern Europe
that should be visited in the context of our concern about
weapons flowing to UNITA. There will be other visits -
I may make a couple of short ones. But in the main I will
be working with the panels, and the members of the
panels will be doing the further travel and investigation.

Ambassador Buallay asked some questions about the
arms trade generally and what we could do to better
manage it. That is probably the largest issue impacting on
peace and security and on our fundamental mandate that
I can think of. Both the licit and the illicit trade in arms
- small, medium and otherwise - is a vexing and
complex issue, and there are a number of important
ongoing initiatives. Under-Secretary-General Dhanapala
is pursuing a number of interesting ideas relating to that
issue. The European Commission has launched a number
of initiatives. I know that the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) is considering some. We will be
working with all these people in an effort to bring that
thinking to bear on our very specific issue here.

I wish to note, en passani, that during our meetings
in Kiev we were informed that in 1989 40 per cent of
Ukraine's workforce worked in the arms business. That
number is now 25 per cent. I believe that if we looked
closely at a number of countries, we would see that an
enormously high proportion of the industrial effort of
those countries is devoted to the arms business - and
those arms are going somewhere. It is an enormously

 

profound issue of huge consequence to which we must give
our full attention. I have indicated very clearly in the report
before the Council that the Government of Ukraine was
adamant that it is not sanctions-busting. I have also been
Ancient Mariner-like in my urging of countries to provide
information relating to sanctions-busting, and until we have
firm information in that regard we cannot proceed to the
question of what to do about sanctions busters.

The first responsibility, of course, lies with Member
States. When they join this Organization, all Member States
pass legislation, often called the "United Nations
Participation Act", or something similar, under which those
new Members of the United Nations undertake to abide by
Security Council resolutions and to pass appropriate
legislation to give effect to Security Council resolutions.
One of my persistent messages is to remind countries -
and this is a very good occasion to do it again, and thank
you for giving me the occasion - that the responsibility
for enforcing Security Council sanctions is that of
individual Member States. Individual Member States are
supposed to have that legislation, regulation or decree in
place so that they are in a position to do that. Secondly,
through the President of the Council or the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee, we can urge delinquent
countries to improve their practices in this respect, and,
ultimately, we can embarrass them from the Council. But
the primary responsibility must lie with individual Member
States.

I do not have written commitments with regard to
indications of willingness to cooperate with the panels, but
I have received forceful and enthusiastic oral commitments,
in which I have every faith, from all the countries I visited
that they will work closely with the panels and provide us
with the kind of information that we have been seeking.

Ambassador Tiirk noted that all sanctions regimes are
different. I could not agree more. I believe that there are a
few lessons learned. Ambassador Dejammet and others
mentioned that there are obviously crossovers with
diamonds. Indeed, there might be slightly larger crossovers
with other substances and precious materials generally. In
fact, whether or not they were designed to be so, the
sanctions invoked against UNITA are exactly the kind of
focused sanctions that many of us have been talking about
as the direction in which the Council should go, as opposed
to the broad, pervasive, comprehensive sanctions that do
such huge collateral damage.

I believe that it is fair to say that the sanctions that we
have introduced have not significantly damaged Angola's
neighbours and have been focused very much on a single
purpose. They have not been as strenuously enforced as
they should be, and we are working on that. But they are
the kind of sanctions that we have been talking about
moving towards, and I agree completely with Ambassador
Tiirk that in our application of those sanctions we need
constantly to apply triage or prioritization so that we do
not expend our effort equally, making a huge effort in
areas likely to produce very little return while neglecting
areas where the fastest return could be achieved.

Having said that, I do not believe that we can
neglect any area. But we must keep such prioritization
very much in mind; that, certainly, is my intention. In that
regard, I make no secret of my own belief that, while we
have to take the actions about which I have spoken with
regard to diamonds - and we will do so - it is possible
to deny arms to Mr. Savimbi. It is certainly within the
collective capabilities of all of us around this table to do
so. I hope that we can do so.

I do not know whether I have forgotten anything. If
I have, I hope that there will be lots of opportunities for
members to remind me of it.

Once again I should like to thank you very much,
Mr. President, for arranging this meeting and for giving
me this opportunity to make my pitch.

