Mr. Gambari: In my briefing of 20 March 2002,
I informed the Council that the Secretary-General
intended to send me on an extended mission to Angola,
which intention was endorsed by members of the
Council in their last presidential statement on Angola,
contained in document S/PRST/2002/7, of March 28
2002. The objectives of the mission were to deliver a
written message from the Secretary-General to
President dos Santos; to witness the signing ceremony
of the Memorandum of Understanding, which is
complementary to the Lusaka Protocol; to clarify the
role of the United Nations during the current, and next,
phase of the peace process; and to have substantive
discussions with the President and with senior
members of the Government on how the United
Nations can best assist in the peace process.

During my mission to Luanda, I was received in
audience twice by President dos Santos. I also had
discussions - often more than once - with the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, Planning, Finance,
Territorial Administration and Social Reinsertion, as
well as with the Chief of Staff of the armed forces of
Angola. Furthermore, I met with parliamentarians,
leaders of political parties - including those of
UNITA - representatives of the churches, national and
international non-governmental organizations and
members of the diplomatic corps - including the
ambassadors of the P-S countries resident in Luanda,
ambassadors of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), ambassadors of the European
Union and ambassadors of the troika.

Today I am in a position to report that, as a result
of the consultations I had with the authorities and other
stakeholders in the Angolan peace process, there is
now greater clarity concerning the role of the United
Nations in the present, as well as the next, phase of the
process. Moreover, it is also fair to say that the
prospects for lasting peace in Angola are brighter now
than ever before, and certainly better than during the
previous peace agreements aimed at ending the conflict
in the country. The following are my main
observations.

The signing of the Memorandum of
Understanding in Luanda on 4 April 2002 was perhaps
the most significant public event to take place during
my mission to Angola. The Memorandum formally
brought a halt to the hostilities in one of Africa's
longest-running wars, which had brought untold
suffering to too many people in that country. As
members of the Council may be aware, the
Memorandum details the responsibilities of the
Angolan armed forces and those of UNITA for the
observation of a ceasefire, for quartering UNITA
soldiers and their families and for the collection and
destruction of weapons. The Memorandum also grants
a blanket amnesty for all crimes committed during the
conflict.

Furthermore, the Government also undertook the
following tasks in the Memorandum: to provide
assistance to UNITA soldiers; to manage the quartering
areas; to select and reincorporate about 5,000 members
of the UNITA military force into the Angolan armed
forces and the police; and to demobilize over 50,000
UNITA soldiers. The estimated timeframe for the
completion of these tasks is 262 days from d-day,
which was 4 April 2002. The Government of Angola is
also committed under the Memorandum to assist the
families of UNITA soldiers, about 300,000 persons,
and to provide vocational training and reintegrate
former combatants into civilian life and into the
productive sector.

Moreover, in its 15-point peace plan, which had
been announced earlier, the Government of Angola
pledged to give assistance to demobilized soldiers,
including those from the last three wars - who are
estimated to number about 150,000 - and to take care
of the disabled, orphaned and widowed. In addition, the
Government of Angola undertook the resettlement of
an estimated 4.5 million displaced persons, a figure
provided by the Government itself.

In my statement at the signing ceremony
commemorating the agreement of the Memorandum of
Understanding, I urged the parties to the Angolan
conflict to seize the historic opportunity to end the
tragedy of war in Angola once and for all. I also
pledged the support of the United Nations in the entire
peace process.

However, in signing the Memorandum of
Understanding on behalf of the United Nations as
witness, I expressed, and entered into the text of the
Memorandum, a reservation concerning the non-
recognition by the United Nations of any general
amnesty that includes genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. That statement of principle
left some apprehension in the minds of UNITA and
some people in the armed forces of Angola - as well
as in some segments of civil society - who felt that
this position by the United Nations may undermine the
peace process, because some combatants may believe
that it negates the provisions of the amnesty law that
had recently been passed by the Angolan National
Assembly. I went to great lengths and spent
considerable time during my visit to explain and clarify
the principled position of the United Nations on this
issue.

Concerning the irreversibility of the peace, all the
people with whom I had consultations, including the
authorities and UNITA, believe that the chances of
returning to war in Angola - war such as the ones we
saw in 1994 and 1998 - are now very negligible. A
main factor contributing to this view is the military
debility of UNITA, including through the effectiveness
of United Nations sanctions. In this regard it may be of
interest to recall that General Gato, the Secretary-
General of UNITA, who is now head of the Joint
Military Commission, has said that he was defeated not
by the armed forces of Angola, but by United Nations
forces. I think that this may be a bit of an exaggeration,
but it is the first time that somebody has testified to the
effectiveness of United Nations sanctions.

In any case, other factors that have contributed to
the View that the chances of returning to large-scale
war are now very negligible are the war fatigue on both
sides of the conflict and in the general population; the
adherence of all UNITA regional military commanders
to the Memorandum of Understanding; and the
physical presence in Luanda of the Chief of Staff of
UNITA military forces, General Ukwachitembo
"Kamorteiro", his Deputy, General Samy, and other
senior military officers, as well as the full backing
given to the Memorandum by the political leadership of
UNITA under its Secretary-General, Lukamba Paulo
Gato, who has also been based in Luanda since 3 April
2002. Thus, all those who might want to perpetuate the
war are already back and located in Luanda.

However, the irreversibility of the peace process
will depend on a number of factors. First, the
quartering of UNITA soldiers has to be done right,
promptly and on schedule. Secondly, the humanitarian
needs of their families, including food and medicine,
must be met adequately. Thirdly, conditions must be
created for the promotion of national reconciliation and
national reconstruction. Fourthly, UNITA should
emerge as a united political party and as a credible
interlocutor in the peace process and democratization
in Angola. In this regard, I stressed during my
meetings with Mr. Gato and Mr. Manuvakola, who is
the leader of UNITA-Renovada in Parliament, that the
United Nations has no intention of interfering or
mandate to interfere in the internal affairs of UNITA or
in the emergence of the eventual leader of UNITA. On
the contrary, we in the United Nations hold the view
that UNITA should be allowed to choose its leadership
in complete freedom and without any external
interference.

I would now like to touch on the role of the
United Nations. The Angolan Government has divided
the peace process into two phases. The first deals with
military issues and the implementation of related tasks
under the Memorandum of Understanding, while the
second will deal with political matters under the
Lusaka Protocol. The latter includes, inter alia, the
issue of the second round of presidential elections; the
appointment of some governors, ambassadors and
provincial administrators; the adoption of new national
symbols; and what is called the "deepening" of
democracy, including the revision of the Constitution.

In the first and present phase of the peace
process, the United Nations is expected to participate
as observer in the work of the Joint Military
Commission, which is charged with the implementation
of the Memorandum of Understanding and with
providing up to 11 military observers, including to the
Technical Group of the Joint Military Commission. The
United Nations is also expected to provide technical
assistance in the quartering areas, of which there are
now 36; to assist the Armed Forces of Angola in
managing these areas; and to provide humanitarian
assistance to the families of UNITA military forces and
to about 4.5 million internally displaced persons.

The Government has, however, assumed primary
responsibility for the funding and management of the
quartering areas and for providing assistance to the
family members of UNITA military forces in the
quartering areas. It has also created the National
Reconstruction Service to facilitate the process of
reintegration of former combatants into the productive
sectors and civilian life of the country.

However, the Angolan Government is requesting
the United Nations to help in providing technical and
material support, especially in the quartering areas, and
in the demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants and their families. In order to raise funds to
help to meet some of the challenges of the peace
process, the Government is planning to organize an
international donors conference in two phases. Phase
one is intended to address emergency needs related to
the peace process, such as support for demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration activities, as well as the
repair of infrastructure, such as bridges and roads, to
allow access to the quartering areas and to those areas
where the family members of UNITA military forces
would be assembled. This first phase of the donor
conference is planned for October 2002. Phase two,
which would require a longer time for preparations, is
likely to take place some time in 2003.

On sanctions, there is an apparent consensus
within the country that, while the suspension of the
travel ban on UNITA officials would be in order, it is
premature at this point to talk about the lifting of other
sanctions, especially those associated with the military,
such as the arms embargo, fuel, diamond sales, funds
and bank accounts. Some of those consulted, however,
expressed the View that the maintenance of the travel
ban on UNITA officials is now difficult to justify,
especially after the National Assembly has offered a
general amnesty to all UNITA members and referred to
a period of 45 days within which they may wish to take
advantage of the amnesty.

Furthermore, UNITA would like the members of
its external mission to participate in the peace process
and in the process of the reunification of UNITA.
Indeed, some of the other stakeholders believe that the
lifting of the travel ban would contribute to increased
confidence in the peace process itself. In this regard,
Mr. Gato, on behalf of UNITA, has written a letter to
the President of the Security Council, which he has
asked me to deliver, arguing that the signing of the
Memorandum of Understanding and his party's full
participation in its implementation are grounds for the
lifting of sanctions against UNITA.

On its part, the Government of Angola accepts in
principle the lifting of the travel ban against UNITA
officials, but has expressed the view that great caution
is needed in implementing it and that, in this regard, a
case-by-case approach is to be preferred. The argument
here is that the international community must be
convinced beyond doubt that all UNITA members have
indeed abandoned the military option before lifting the
travel ban and that this would require time to evaluate
the actual behaviour of UNITA during the
implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding.

The humanitarian situation continues to be
critical. The number of internally displaced persons has
increased from 4.1 to 4.5 million. This increase reflects
especially the population flows from formerly
inaccessible areas. The humanitarian agencies in
Angola have also been requested to provide assistance
to an additional 300,000 people, the family members of
UNITA military forces. There is also an unspecified
number of refugees presently in Zambia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Namibia who
may wish to be repatriated, in addition to the need to
care for orphans and over 200,000 disabled people.

In this regard, the Government has requested
United Nations agencies, such as the World Food
Programme, to continue to render their support until
December 2002. Meanwhile, it should be noted that the
international community has subscribed to only 10 per
cent of the needs stated in the Consolidated Appeal
Process. The Council may therefore wish to appeal
again for continued assistance for the people of
Angola, especially in this critical phase of the peace
process. Meanwhile, the Government has authorized
the relevant minister to enter into negotiations with the
United Nations Resident Coordinator with a view to
reaching a framework agreement on humanitarian relief
efforts.

I should like to make the following concluding
remarks. It is clear from consultations held during my
mission to Angola that the United Nations is expected
to play a role in the present phase of the peace process,
including military observation of the quartering
process, provision of technical and managerial support
in quartering areas, demobilization and reintegration,
as well as humanitarian support. The United Nations is
also expected to chair the Joint Commission during the
second phase of the peace process under the Lusaka
Protocol.

The Government has also agreed in principle that
the mandate of the United Nations Office in Angola
(UNOA) needs adjustment in order to allow it to
support the present phase as well as the next phase of
the peace process. Therefore, the Secretary-General has
directed that I and my colleagues in the Secretariat
should begin critically to assess the areas where the
Government has expressed interest in obtaining the
support of the United Nations for the peace process and
also carefully to identify the tasks involved and the
implications in terms of human and financial resources.
Those tasks would determine the recommendations that
the Secretary-General may make to the Council with
regard to possible adjustment of UNOA's current
mandate, including the implications for the size of a
reconfigured mission and its duration. These are
expected to be contained in the Secretary-General's
next report to the Council on Angola, which should be
ready by next month.

Meanwhile, as a result of preliminary discussions
with the Angolan authorities and the United Nations
Country Team, as well as with the troika, United
Nations support to the peace process may be in the
following critical areas: first, military observation of
the quartering process and the collection and
destruction of weapons; secondly, civilian and human
rights observation in the assembly areas for the
families of UNITA military forces; thirdly, technical
assistance and mobilization of material resources for
the soldiers in the quartering areas and their families,
as well as for demobilization and reintegration;
fourthly, assistance in the preparation and mobilization
of resources through the proposed international donors
conference; fifthly, humanitarian assistance to the
families of UNITA military forces and internally
displaced persons, and in demining activities; sixthly,
with regard to electoral assistance, President Dos
Santos has admitted that the Secretary-General has in
fact given his consent in principle to assist Angola in
the proposed future national elections; and seventh,
assistance in the transition from war to peace in Angola
through the extension and consolidation of the
structures of State administration through development
programmes and national reconciliation programmes.

These issues would be further discussed within
the Secretariat with the aim of developing a
comprehensive United Nations strategy for Angola,
including the future role of UNOA, in consultation
with the Government of Angola.

