Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): I would like to join
colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Gambari for his briefing.

In the past month, we have again witnessed
widespread, deeply troubling changes in the Middle
East. It is urgently necessary to create conditions for a
cessation of Violence that will be sustainable and to lay
the foundations for a permanent solution to the
problems there.

With regard to the situation in Lebanon and
Israel, the Security Council, by adopting resolution
1701 (2006), has effected a cessation of hostilities and
created the political framework for a permanent
ceasefire and a long-term solution to the problems. In
general, the parties concerned have honoured the terms
of the resolution in that regard. There have also been
some encouraging steps towards the expansion of the
authority of the Lebanese Government over all of its
territory in this first week after the resolution was
adopted. These include the withdrawal of the Israeli
army from some of the positions inside Lebanese
territory and the start of the deployment of the
Lebanese armed forces. However, the situation remains
extremely fragile, as was demonstrated by the Israeli
military operation in eastern Lebanon on Saturday,
19 August.

Japan continues to call upon both parties to
exercise maximum restraint and to do their utmost to
ensure that the cessation of hostilities holds and that it
becomes a durable ceasefire. We support the proposals
and observations made in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2006/670) to that end. We attach particular
importance to three of them.

First, in order to ensure the early deployment of
the reinforced United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, Japan strongly hopes that Member States in a
position to do so will immediately make contributions.
Secondly, with respect to the humanitarian and
reconstruction activities that are needed to stabilize the
situation, we greatly appreciate the commitment and
dedication that the relevant United Nations and other
organizations have shown in difficult circumstances.
Japan, for its part, is giving consideration to providing
assistance to Lebanon so as to contribute to the best of
its ability to promoting stability there and in the region
as a whole.

Thirdly, on the subject of the political process,
Japan strongly urges the Government of Lebanon and
the Government of Israel to arrive at an agreement, as
stipulated in the resolution. We also request the
Secretariat to draw on its collective wisdom to present
a realistic implementation plan in the next report of the
Secretary-General, which is scheduled to be released in
September. We expect that the United Nations
delegation, comprising Mr. Nambiar and Mr. Roed-
Larsen, among others, will play an important role in
this regard.

Japan is deeply concerned about the continued
deterioration of conditions in Palestine - the central
issue in the Middle East - in particular since the
abduction of Israeli soldiers about two months ago.
Japan calls on Israel to exercise the utmost restraint
and to seek to avoid casualties among innocent
civilians and damage to civilian infrastructure.

We also urge that a number of steps be taken as a
matter of the highest priority. First, Israeli soldiers held
in Gaza and Lebanon should be returned unharmed.
Secondly, terrorist attacks against Israel must cease.
Thirdly, Israel should end its military operations and its
forces should withdraw from Gaza at an early date.
Fourthly, the detained Palestinian ministers and
parliamentarians should be released.

Japan has strong hopes for the early resolution of
these matters, which are of the highest priority,
following the resumption of cooperation with regard to
security and cultural engagement, both among
Palestinians and with Israel. To that end, it is more
necessary than ever that the Palestinian Authority
Cabinet, led by Hamas, engage in the peace process
through peaceful means based on existing international
agreements and obligations.

Furthermore, it is of vital importance that leaders
in the region and the international community continue
actively to engage in diplomatic efforts. Japan, for its
part, has conveyed to both parties on several occasions
its firm belief that there is no alternative but to work
together towards coexistence and mutual prosperity.
We have, therefore, called for Israel to exercise the
maximum restraint and for President Abbas to provide
the necessary leadership so that these goals can be
achieved.

Japan is also very concerned at the heavy toll in
innocent civilian lives in Palestine and Israel and at the
extreme deterioration of the humanitarian situation of
Palestinians. We believe it is essential that the
international community, including Israel, continue to
provide humanitarian assistance. I should like to note
that Prime Minister Koizumi, during his visit to the
region in July, expressed his support for President
Abbas and announced his decision to extend a total of
$25 million to help the Palestinian people.

In conclusion, Japan will continue to participate
actively in the discussions in the Security Council,
while also pursuing its own diplomatic efforts, in
cooperation with all concerned countries in the region,
with a View to defusing the crisis and restoring calm
and stability to the region.

