Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate on peacekeeping
reform and how we can maximize our collective
efforts to improve the performance of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Almost a year ago, the Council adopted resolution
2378 (2017), a landmark resolution on peacekeeping
reform, under the presidency of Ethiopia. Since then,
many efforts have been made to enhance peacekeeping,
but much more needs to be done.

We welcome today's discussion. It comes at a
time when our operations face significant challenges:
elusive political solutions, intra-State conflicts that
are intertwined with broader threats, including
international terrorist movements and organized crime,
large-scale violence against civilians, and the targeting
of our peacekeepers. Too many are making the ultimate
sacrifice. I want to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to them.

Improving peacekeeping is by its very essence a
collective endeavour. Ensuring that our missions are fit
for purpose and perform well requires action by all of
us and all of us working together. All stakeholders who,
in one form or another, take part in peacekeeping need
to improve our performance, and we all need to support
each other in doing so. That includes the Secretariat, as
well as the Member States, Security Council members,
troop- and police-contributing countries, host nations,
regional and subregional organizations and others. That
is why the Secretary-General launched the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative in March. Following intensive
consultations with all of our Member States, as well as
intergovernmental organizations, the Secretary-General
put forward the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations to all Member
States for their endorsement. The mutual commitments
that it proposes, including on performance, are key to
enhancing peacekeeping.

The Secretariat is committed to playing its full part
in responding to the challenges that Ijust highlighted.

First, we continue our efforts to enhance
performance, particularly by implementing the action
plan to strengthen the safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers. The action plan is ultimately
about performance, and it includes the requisite
elements to strengthen it. Through its implementation,
we are changing mindset, strengthening our
operational readiness and modifying our posture. We
are also enhancing the capacity of United Nations
peacekeeping by providing better-tailored training
and doing our utmost to make sure that peacekeepers
have the equipment they need. We are strengthening
accountability and ensuring that if an incident occurs,
our peacekeepers receive the best care possible as soon
as possible.

Much work remains to be done, but we are beginning
to see the effects of our collective efforts. From
15 January to 31 August, 17 peacekeepers lost their life
due to acts ofviolence. The number over the same period
last year was 26. This represents a significant decrease.
In mentioning these figures, I want to remain cautious
and modest because threats against our peacekeepers
remain very high. I want to emphasize that each and
every peacekeeper killed is one too many. We mourn
the lives of the fallen and are reminded that we must
collectively do more to strengthen the safety and
security of our peacekeepers. It is essential to enable
us to better execute our mandates in the countries in
which we serve.

The trend that I have described calls on us to
remain vigilant and fully mobilized to continue
this course of action. In many of our missions,
peacekeepers are carrying out more effective responses
to threats and attacks. I recently returned from Mali
and I can attest to the positive changes that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSCA) has made. Many of its
camps are better protected, including through more
advanced systems for detecting threats. I saw that our
peacekeepers in Aguelhok and Tessalit are proactively
patrolling, despite the significant threats that they
face. Last April, a large group of assailants carried
out a sophisticated, complex attack against one of
our bases in Timbuktu, resulting in the death of one
peacekeeper. In that case, the mindset and the degree of
preparedness of the troops helped to significantly limit
the number of casualties, as the attackers were met with
a robust response.

We see such evolutions in other missions as well. In
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
for instance, our peacekeepers are protecting civilians
more effectively through a more proactive posture.

First, we have put in place a robust structure
here at Headquarters and in the field to take forward
implementation of the action plan. I assigned the
Office for Peacekeeping Strategic Partnership with
overseeing implementation, in close collaboration
with the Office of Military Affairs and other relevant
offices. The Implementation Support Teams established
at Headquarters and in the five high-risk missions
continue to be very active in taking forward their
respective action plans to drive concrete change on
the ground.

Secondly, we have undertaken a series of
independently led reviews of peacekeeping missions.
We have been going back to square one to assess
these missions' mandates and whether we have the
appropriate strategies and resources to keep or restore
the peace. The recommendations of the reviews inform
the proposals and options that the Secretary-General
puts forward in his recommendations to the Security
Council. We are already beginning to learn lessons
from this series of reviews, and we intend to continue
to strengthen and refine this methodology.

Thirdly, we are taking forward the Secretary-
General's reforms of the peace and security architecture
in order to provide more integrated analysis and better
country and regional strategies. We are also preparing
to implement the Secretary-General's management
reform, which will empower our peace operations in the
field and enable us to become more reactive and nimble.

Fourthly, we continue strengthening cooperation
with our key partners, especially the African Union
(AU) and the European Union (EU), both of which
are with us today. That includes more triangular
cooperation between the United Nations, the AU and
the EU at the strategic and operational levels.

As part ofthis wide effort to enhance the efficiency
of peacekeeping, we are devoting considerable attention
to better assessing performance. We are putting in
place the policies and evaluation systems that will
enable all of us, collectively, to better tailor our efforts
to strengthen peacekeeping and better support all
peacekeepers, whether uniformed or civilian.

For our military personnel, we have established
a clear framework of performance standards and
assessments based on regular performance evaluations
of military units, including on command and control,
the protection of civilians, conduct and discipline, and
training. These assessments will inform our reporting
to the Council, in accordance with several recent
mandate resolutions, including resolution 2409 (2018),
mandating MONUSCO. We have also stepped up our
efforts to make sure that the units joining our missions
meet our operational readiness standards before they
are deployed, including through the development of
a new methodology for carrying out predeployment
evaluations. Since April, we have used it to assess
eight units from six troop-contributing countries.
The evaluations examine whether they have the basic
military know-how and the requisite skills to carry out
the mandated tasks of the Mission. They also assess
whether these units have the expertise needed for the
specific environment in which they will be deployed.
We are also developing more specific performance
assessment criteria for formed police units.

Further, we are also investing significant resources
and efforts in the development of the integrated
performance policy framework requested by the Special
Committee for Peacekeeping Operations and supported
by the Council. Through it, we aim to strengthen
and hold accountable all peacekeepers, civilian and
uniformed, at all levels and in equal measure, both in
the field and at Headquarters. Changing institutional
structures and individual behaviour requires us all
to rectify shortcomings, strengthen leadership and
accountability, and provide incentives for change. Our
goal is to maximize the effect we have on the ground as
we deliver on the Council's mandates.

Data collection and analysis are an integral
element of our approach. The new comprehensive
performance assessment system will enable us to assess
whole-of-mission performance, civilian and uniformed
components, staffand leadership through data collection
and analysis. By identifying bottlenecks or problems,
we aim to promote better-informed decisions by senior
leadership to refocus efforts and take corrective action.
This system will also help Member States to craft
more targeted mandates and direct resources towards
areas where we can make the biggest difference. We
are already starting with three pilot missions. We have
already conducted a visit to MINUSCA last month,
and will visit a further two missions by the end of this
year. We are planning for all missions to be using the
new system by July 2020. We will continue to engage
Member States proactively on this topic.

We also attach particular importance to leadership
across all mission components, and we have enhanced
and professionalized the assessment process for
selection, as well as support to our heads and deputy
heads of mission.

Finally, but most importantly, we have developed
mechanisms to enhance accountability for when we fall
short. We have decided to systematically commission
independent, ad hoc investigations to clarify the causes
and circumstances of incidents that indicate serious
shortfalls in mandate implementation. Through frank
and precise analysis, these investigations have fostered
constructive engagement with troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and police-contributing countries
(PCCs), as well as amongst ourselves. This has enabled
us to work together to find solutions for such shortfalls.
We have taken measures to change the way we work,
notably by enhancing our procedures and our collective
preparedness, as we did following the July 2016 incident
in Juba, South Sudan. Where necessary, we have also
instituted remedial measures, including in some cases
by preventing the redeployment of troop or police units

until we can confirm that they are able to meet relevant
standards and requirements.
Despite its full commitment to developing and
implementing these initiatives and tools, United Nations
peacekeeping cannot succeed without the engagement
and the mobilization of all stakeholders and, first and
foremost, the Member States.

Strengthening peacekeeping often requires
strengthening the capacities of those who provide its
men and women - the TCCs and PCCs. As has been
highlighted on many occasion in the Council and
other forums, it is an effort that involves not only the
Secretariat, but also fellow Member States. That is
precisely the goal of the light coordination mechanism,
which we established late last year. By identifying
specific needs for targeted training support, we can
facilitate training and capacity-building partnerships
among Member States. We therefore welcome the
development of triangular partnerships, whereby
Member States provide troop- and police-contributing
countries with training and equipment prior to
deployment. Such cooperation is an illustration of how
we can collectively respond to capacity challenges.

I encourage all Member States that have the
capacity to provide such training and equipment to
TCCs and PCCs to continue their efforts to respond to
the current needs so that our peacekeepers can operate
most efficiently in the challenging context in which
we are deployed. In that regard, I want to mention
the new action plan for training, for which we have
requested voluntary contributions. We are grateful
to those that have already provided support. I also
encourage all Member States to assess the evolution
of the performance of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, including by visiting operations on the
ground and sharing their conclusions with us.

I would also like to take this opportunity to call
on all Member States, particularly those with the most
advanced military capabilities, to contribute more
troops and police to United Nations peacekeeping.
We still have an ongoing need for critical capabilities,
including helicopters, capacities to counter improvised
explosive devices, rapid-reaction forces, situational
awareness and medical support. We welcome all
contributions in these areas.

The engagement of Member States is also key
to increasing the number of women who are part
of peacekeeping. More women in peacekeeping
simply makes peacekeeping more effective. We
need to significantly enhance the number of female
peacekeepers at all levels and within uniformed as
well as civilian components. We must also ensure that
they are able to meaningfully participate in our work.
Women make up only 21 per cent of our personnel. We
must do better.

I am pleased that, through our common work, we
have seen some improvements. Gender strategies for
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support, as well as within each of
our missions, and the uniformed gender parity strategy,
are starting to yield results. At Headquarters, women
officers now represent 18 per cent of all officers in
the Office of Military Affairs, and we are committed
to raising that proportion further. In the field, women
police officers represent 21 per cent of our individual
police officers and 7 per cent of our formed police
units. We intend to continue our efforts to increase the
number of female peacekeepers at Headquarters and in
the field, in line with resolution 2242 (2015).

The policies that we have promoted can be achieved
only through the active involvement of Members States.
I therefore welcome the efforts undertaken by a number
of Member States and call on all States to further those
initiatives and significantly increase their contributions
of women peacekeepers. Ensuring that all United
Nations personnel maintain the highest standards of
conduct must be at the heart of our collective efforts.
We fully share the Council's expectations in that regard
and will continue to place prevention at the forefront of
our efforts.

We have done more in recent years to strengthen
accountability, transparency, enforcement, awareness-
raising, advocacy and the provision of victim-centred
support. We have implemented greater transparency
in reporting, expanded the vetting of personnel,
improved investigation timelines and seen increased
responsiveness by Member States. The Secretariat now
vets all categories of personnel against a prior history
of misconduct while serving in the United Nations.

Last year, the Secretary-General appointed a
dedicated Victims' Rights Advocate, Ms. Jane Connors,
to ensure that victims of sexual exploitation and abuse
have access to the support they need, including urgent
assistance, the ability to file complaints safely and
reliably and access to timely information on the progress
of their case. Multiple channels exist to anonymously
report misconduct, including online and by phone.
Following the adoption of resolution 2272 (2016),
the Secretariat established a committee to consider
possible credible evidence of widespread or systemic
sexual exploitation and abuse, or instances where
Member States may not have taken appropriate steps to
investigate allegations, hold perpetrators accountable
or inform the Secretary-General of the outcome of
those processes. There is no one-size-fits-all approach
to this complex issue, but the 2272 Committee has not
shied away from engaging with Member States to take
preventive and corrective action, including repatriations
where required. We have removed or repatriated units
where we deemed it appropriate.

I am glad that we will shortly hear from
Ms. Sarah Blakemore, Chief Executive Officer of
the non-governmental organization (NGO) Keeping
Children Safe. One of the most critical partners for
our work in preventing sexual exploitation and abuse,
as well as for accountability and victim support, is the
network of NGOs and civil society partners operating
on the ground. Only by working together will the
United Nations, Member States and civil society end
that behaviour, which irreparably harms victims and
tarnishes the reputation of thousands of United Nations
personnel who serve with honour.

When, despite all our efforts, personnel violate
our standards of conduct, we must continue to work
to achieve accountability in partnership with Member
States, and we are strengthening our policies to do
so. United Nations investigative entities are required
to complete investigations into allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse within six months. Troop-
contributing countries have also been asked to
complete their investigations within that time frame. In
matters deemed particularly urgent, troop-contributing
countries are requested to complete investigations
within 90 days. Such measures have led to a decrease
in the average reaction time by Member States.

We must be unequivocally clear that it is Member

States that possess the authority to hold all categories of
personnel accountable for criminal conduct. In the case
of police and military personnel, they can also enact
administrative sanctions as appropriate. Such responses
are essential, and we are grateful to the 98 Member
States that have signed the voluntary compact with the
Secretary-General on the commitment to end sexual
exploitation and abuse. We share a joint responsibility
to end impunity, strengthen prevention and response,
respond rapidly and decisively to credible reports and
meet the needs of victims quickly and appropriately.
Drawing on all those efforts, the Secretariat is fully
committed to playing its part to enhance peacekeeping
performance. In that spirit, the Secretary-General
makes several concrete commitments, including on
performance, in the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, proposed
in the framework of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. We will spare no effort to deliver on those
commitments. We are very grateful for the willingness
shown by a large and growing number of Member
States and other stakeholders to also make such
commitments through their support for the Declaration.
I am happy to report that, as of today, 55 Member
States have endorsed the Declaration. The many troop-
and police-contributing countries that have done so
account for 65 per cent of all personnel contributions,
a number that is increasing every day. The broad and
cross-regional support for the Declaration reflects the
strong consensus around the key objectives that it lays
out. I want to express my thanks to all States that have
already endorsed the Declaration. We look forward
to a substantial number of additional endorsements
before the high-level event on Action for Peacekeeping
on 25 September. We also look forward to building
upon the Declaration to continue strengthening United
Nations peacekeeping.

Finallly, we are gratified to see the Security
Council's commitment to supporting our efforts to
improve peacekeeping. We hope to be able to count on
the continued support of all Council members for Action
for Peacekeeping and all our ongoing initiatives to foster
a culture of continuous improvement and adaptation.

