Mr. Liden (Sweden): The threat of war in the Balkans
is far from over. In spite of years of suffering and lost
opportunities there is still a belief prevailing in the region
that political goals can be achieved through the use of
force. In the United Nations, we talk a lot about preventive
action. In the Balkans, such action is needed. The positive
experience of more than five years of United Nations
preventive deployment in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia demonstrates that results that can be achieved
with relatively limited resources if action is taken early
enough.

The Security Council's decision of December 1992 to
send United Nations troops to the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia to prevent spillover from the
ongoing conflicts in other parts of the former Yugoslavia
was the right step at the right time. The subsequent
extensions of the mandate of the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) have also been highly
justified by developments in the region, as was the case last
year in Albania. Today the major threat to the stability of
Macedonia emanates from the escalating conflict in
neighbouring Kosovo. In the present situation, the
international support for the sovereignty, stability and peace
of Macedonia must be upheld and even strengthened.

As a strong supporter of UN PREDEP and a troop
contributor from the very beginning, Sweden welcomes the
Secretary-General's recommendations on the extension of
the mandate and the strengthening of UNPREDEP. Sweden
will continue to contribute to UNPREDEP.

The draft resolution before us today has our full
support. It will give UNPREDEP the additional capacity
needed to intensify its monitoring activities, especially
along the Kosovo stretch of the border. In this context,
and within the framework of the present mandate,
UNPREDEP will also be able to assist in the
implementation of the arms embargo recently imposed on
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

Sweden welcomes the intention stated in today's
draft resolution to consider further the recommendations
of the Secretary-General, including a modest but strongly
needed increase in the number of military observers and
Civilian Police in the mission. We look forward to the
Security Council's reverting to this question in the near
future.

Finally, let me just say that Sweden fully associates
itself with the statement just made by the Ambassador of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.

