Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers
today. I should like to congratulate Australia on the
adoption of the Security Council's first-ever resolution
on policing (resolution 2185 (2014)), and for holding this
inaugural briefing by heads of police components. It is
really a great idea. The United Kingdom looks forward
to this becoming at least an annual meeting, and to
hearing more from police components in the course of
our normal Security Council business. We think that
is an extremely important part of the work that we do.

This debate, we believe, is long overdue. The United
Nations first deployed police to the Congo in 1960. In
the past 20 years, there has been a significant increase
in demand. The United States set out the figures, which
represent an eightfold increase in 20 years. As we heard
from our briefers today, United Nations policemen and
policewomen are building the capacities of host-State
police, providing operational support, and in some
cases actually acting as interim police and protecting
civilians.

The need for effective United Nations police
is likely to continue to increase in the future. The
nature of conflict is changing. New challenges require
the Council to change how we respond. Deploying a
large number of military troops may not always be the
right approach to dealing with failing States. Instead,
an effective United Nations policing component can
sometimes be a more flexible and effective way to
support countries. This is especially true in contexts in
which the lines between political violence and criminal
violence have become blurred. I thought that came out
particularly clearly from Mr. Carrilho's briefing. In
that context I would like to ask just one question, which
is: In the Central African Republic, where we have put
a much stronger emphasis on policing in the mandate,
have we got the balance right, or is it not enough?
Moreover, as the military components of peacekeeping
missions start to draw down, such as in Haiti, United
Nations police could provide an important bridge. This
model of a "police-keeping mission" could become a
Security Council tool in future.

An effective United Nations policing response
to these new challenges requires that they place the
safety and security of civilians at the centre of all
their activities. Sir Robert Peel, the British Home
Secretary who established London's Metropolitan
Police in 1829, was the first to articulate the principles
of "policing by consent". Nearly 200 years later, these
Peelian principles remain the central tenet of British
policing and for many other countries around the world.
Nowhere are these principles more important than in
countries that have been ravaged by conflict. Stability
requires citizens to trust their police and to perceive
them as legitimate. We must work together to ensure
that United Nations policing has the tools and skills to
help build police forces that focus on the welfare and
security of citizens.
In order for the United Nations police components
to achieve this, we would suggest focusing on three
main areas, and I think that they have come out very
clearly from the briefings that we have heard this
morning.

First, we need reform at Headquarters and in the
field to strengthen international policing doctrine,
standards and training to ensure that the United
Nations police is ready to face future challenges. We
strongly support Australia's call for this today. There
are several promising initiatives under way, including
the development of the Strategic Guidance Framework,
which is a single policy to guide all United Nations
policing activity. Greg Hinds spoke to this in his
presentation, and it is important. But more needs to
be done. For example, there is still no standardized
approach to how training is delivered. We urge the
Secretary-General's high-level panel review on peace
operations to present us with bold and ambitious
recommendations on how we can take action to improve
United Nations policing.

Secondly, we must get the right people with the
right skills on the ground swiftly. We need to broaden
and deepen the pool of available expertise, including the
range of police-contributing countries. Fred Yiga made
that point very clearly in the presentation that he gave
on South Sudan earlier. We need more female police
officers, and we urge the Police Division to do more to
reach their 20 per cent target. I think, frankly, that we
all envy the statistics that Rwanda gave us about their
own police force earlier today. Formed police units
and individual police officers will remain critical, but
we also need to deploy specialized teams with niche
capabilities and skills such as the ability to deal with
sexual and gender-based crimes. We need civilian
policing experts who can work with development actors
to build the capacities and institutions of the host State's
police force.

Thirdly, we need to improve coordination within
the United Nations system and strengthen partnerships
with other actors. An effective United Nations policing
effort requires the better joining up of all of the United
Nations departments and agencies working on these
issues. We need a mission-planning process that takes
into account the comparative advantages of all the key
United Nations actors working in the rule-of-law sector
and sequences their activity accordingly. And we need
improved mechanisms to coordinate with international
financial institutions and regional organizations that

also operate in this area. The joint Department of
Peacekeeping Operations-United Nations Development
Programme global focal point for police, justice and
corrections is a welcome step towards this on internal
coordination, but more needs to be done.

The United Kingdom is committed to doing our
part to support United Nations policing. We have
United Kingdom officers deployed to Haiti, South
Sudan and Iraq. We want to increase this support,
especially through providing niche capabilities in
areas such as organized crime, community policing,
and sexual and gender-based violence. We are also at
the forefront of donor efforts, working in 14 conflict-
affected countries, spending $80 million on security
and justice programmes in 2013 and providing more
than 10 million women with improved access to security
andjustice services.

I have two other questions that I wanted to put to
our briefers now that we have this opportunity. The
first is the fact that they all raised the need for more
specific mandates to help effective policing. We need
more specific detail from the field of key challenges,
and I think, again, that that has come through very
clearly from other members of the Security Council
today. So my question is: what is their View - because
we have, I think, begun to express ours - on the best
way to achieve this?

The second question for all of them is how they
would measure success. We clearly need effective
benchmarks to tell whether we are succeeding or
failing in transitioning to host State police forces, but
how would they achieve that?

Finally, I do not want to lose this opportunity
today to pay tribute to all of the men and women
serving in United Nations police components across
the world. As we discuss the challenges and reforms
required to improve United Nations policing, we must
never forget the risks that they take every single day to
make our world a safer place. Today's debate is also an
opportunity for me, on behalf of my Government, to
say thank you.

