Mr. Ging: I provide this update to the Security
Council today on behalf of Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

After three years of conflict, conditions in Yemen
are catastrophic. A record 22.2 million people need
humanitarian assistance or protection, including
8.4 million people who are severely food-insecure.
About 400,000 children under the age of 5 are so
severely malnourished that they are 10 times likelier
to die without treatment than their healthy peers.
Approximately 2 million people remain displaced,
90 per cent of whom fled their homes more than a year
ago. Nearly 1.1 million are suspected of having cholera.
That has been reported since April 2017, in what
experts have called the world's worst cholera outbreak.
An estimated 3 million women and girls are at risk of
gender-based violence.

Those figures represent an urgent call to action that
humanitarian workers, the vast majority of whom are
Yemeni citizens, are striving to answer. Working with
nearly 200 partners, the United Nations-coordinated
response is making a tremendous difference for millions
of people across the country. In 2017, we progressively
increased the number of people receiving emergency
food assistance every month, from 3 million to more
than 7 million. We delivered enough medicine to health
facilities to treat 3.2 million people and conducted
1.5 million medical consultations. By maintaining
public water networks, we ensured access to drinking
water for 2 million people, in addition to trucking water
directly to nearly 1 million more of the most vulnerable
in December alone. The Famine Early Warning Systems
Network estimates that nine of Yemen's 22 governorates
would be one step closer to famine, or worse, without
humanitarian assistance.

And yet people's lives have continued to unravel.
Conflict has escalated significantly since November,
driving an estimated 100,000 people from their homes,
according to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. More people are going
hungry, and famine remains a real threat. Although
cholera cases are in decline, the disease is not yet beaten
and is likely to rebound in the upcoming rainy season.
In the meantime, a diphtheria outbreak has emerged,
the first since 1982. Those are the consequences of a
man-made crisis that only a political solution can bring
to an end.

The most urgent task for all parties is to cease
hostilities and engage meaningfully with the United
Nations to achieve a lasting political settlement. In the
meantime, as noted by the Under-Secretary-General
and Emergency Relief Coordinator to the Council in
November, there are other areas where we need to see
immediate progress. Those priorities were conveyed to
the Governments of Yemen and Saudi Arabia, as well
as to the authorities in Sana'a, with assurances from
all parties that they would swiftly be implemented.
Therefore, allow me to update members on where
we stand.

The first issue concerns the resources needed for
an effective response. In January, the United Nations
and partners released the 2018 Yemen humanitarian
response plan, which requires $2.96 billion to assist
13.1 million people. Securing full funding for the plan
is a top priority, which is why the Emergency Relief
Coordinator allocated $50 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund at the beginning of the
year - the largest single allocation in its history. Later
in January, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
announceda generous j ointpledge of $1 billion forYemen,
including $930 million for the humanitarian response
plan. They also committed to raising $500 million from
other donors in the region. In discussions this month,
the Saudi and Emirati Governments confirmed that they
would transfer $930 million by 31 March and outlined
grant management terms very much in keeping with the
spirit of the "grand bargain". Other donors have also
stepped forward. But even with the support announced
to date, the humanitarian response plan would remain
only about one-third funded. On 3 April, the Secretary-
General will convene a pledging conference in Geneva,
hosted by Sweden and Switzerland, where all donors
will have an opportunity to work together to provide
the resources needed for the response.

The second issue is humanitarian access into and
within the country, which all parties are required to
allow and facilitate under international humanitarian
law. Such access must be safe, rapid and unimpeded.
Access within Yemen - particularly in areas
controlled by the Sana'a authorities - has deteriorated.
Authorities in Sana'a continue to delay humanitarian
movements and to impose bureaucratic impediments
that interfere with humanitarian action. They include
long delays in customs clearance for essential supplies,
such as diphtheria treatment and fuel, ad hoc restrictions
on movements of humanitarian partners and refusal to
authorize humanitarian assessments. In recent weeks,
humanitarian staff have also been temporarily detained
without justification and their equipment confiscated
at checkpoints. In practice, those restrictions are often
eventually resolved through dialogue, but the time
lost represents an unacceptable delay for people who
need assistance. While the restrictions appear to have
intensified in recent months, we remain optimistic that
the Sana'a authorities may still honour the assurances
given to the Emergency Relief Coordinator during his
visit in October.

Access into Yemen has improved after the blockade
imposed by the Coalition came to an end in December.
United Nations flights and vessels have been travelling
as scheduled since 26 November, and regular
humanitarian staff rotations and cargo shipments have
mostly resumed. We have also received assurances that
there will be no further disruption to those services.
Today our main challenge in entering Yemen is the
Coalition policy to divert containerized cargo to
Aden, including relief items shipped in containers
aboard commercial vessels, which is often the most
cost-effective option. That policy creates delays and
higher operating costs. Sana'a airport remains closed
to commercial traffic, thereby preventing thousands of
patients from travelling abroad to seek medical care.
We are hopeful that solutions can be found shortly.

The third issue is related to commercial imports.
Even before the crisis, Yemen imported about 90 per
cent of its staple food and nearly all medicine and
fuel. Maintaining the flow of commercial imports
through all ports is essential to people's survival.
Most imports have historically arrived via Hudaydah,
which is the closest port to 70 per cent of people in
need. Disruptions to commercial import flows have
immediate consequences, including in food prices,
which are increasing, against the backdrop of the risk of
famine. In January 2018, a food basket was on average
55 per cent more expensive than before the escalation
of conflict in 2015.

Commercial food and fuel imports have only
partially recovered. One factor appears to be the lack
of confidence among commercial shippers. The number
of vessels seeking clearance to enter Hudaydah and
Saleef ports has halved since the blockade. The United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mission is an
effective system for screening imports bound for those
ports, and there have recently been efforts to strengthen
it further. Vessels cleared by that mechanism should
be able to proceed directly to port without additional
delays. Fuel imports are crucial for Yemen, including
for the operation of public water networks and medical
facilities. In January, United Nations agencies received
175,000 litres of fuel, provided by the Coalition, and
distributed it to 16 health centres and water networks
in the north and south. Such imports, which increase
the commercial and humanitarian fuel supply, as well
as other goods, must continue. For that to happen,
Hudaydah and Saleef ports must remain open without
time limits or other restrictions that may discourage
commercial shipping companies from serving them.

The last major issue where we had hoped to see
immediate progress relates to civil servant salary
payments. Since August 2016, 1.2 million public
employees and their families, or one quarter of the
entire population, have not received regular salaries.
Non-payment of salaries, including for approximately
30,000 health workers and 193,000 teachers, has
accelerated the decline in public services, as workers
seek alternative livelihoods. That has left families
struggling to make ends meet. The resulting collapse
in basic services has become a major driver of the
humanitarian crisis. The United Nations and its
partners cannot replace the public sector and, While
some salaries have reportedly been paid in the south,
regular salary payments must quickly resume across
the country.

Finally, it remains important to emphasize that
protection concerns remain at the centre of the response.
As mentioned, conflict has recently escalated, putting
civilians at even greater risk. All parties to the conflict
are obliged to take constant care to spare civilians and
civilian infrastructure in military operations. Yet we
continue to see civilian harm. Houthi-affiliated forces
continue to shell populated areas, often resulting in
civilian casualties. On 26 December, a Coalition air
strike on a market in Taizz killed at least 60 civilians,
including eight children, and wounded 32, including
six children.

There are many such examples on all sides of the
conflict. I call on all parties to uphold their obligations
and responsibilities under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Likewise, I
urge Member States to take all possible steps to ensure
that the parties to the conflict comply with the law and
to support accountability for violations.

