We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. As always, we would like to begin by reiterating our commitment to taking the necessary steps to build sustainable peace in the Middle East and to sending a message of solidarity with the people affected by so many years of conflict and mistrust between warring parties. It is precisely due to the protracted nature of the conflict that the coronavirus disease pandemic has a very different manifestation in contexts such as Syria, Yemen, Lebanon or Gaza. At this juncture, it is necessary to avoid any obstacle to achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. It is not enough to come here and express our views; that does not absolve us from the central responsibility entrusted to the Security Council for the maintenance of world peace and security, the achievement of which requires firm and effective action to complement our position. That said, we strongly support ongoing efforts to create conditions conducive to peace, while highlighting the most recent normalization agreements between Israel, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, mediated by the United States. By deepening regional cooperation and dialogue, this positive transformation could well increase stability, prosperity and security in the region. We applaud that. At the same time, we encourage all parties to immediately cease all actions that hamper peace and to build a prosperous and just future for the peoples of the Middle East. With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian situation, we support the initiative to hold an international peace conference in early 2021, the format of which must be discussed and agreed without delay, following an approach that favours concrete and inclusive action. We recommend that such a dialogue have - as its starting point - mutual respect, international law, United Nations resolutions and the face- to-face participation of both Israel and Palestine so as to address the aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis to live in peace. The complex humanitarian situation in Gaza remains critical and is exacerbated by an alarming environmental situation, with limited access to drinking water and the corresponding adverse impact on health, food security and development, in addition to widespread insecurity, an electricity crisis and a lack of opportunities. Meeting the deep needs of the Palestinian population and working to pave the path for development in order to alleviate them is therefore an essential aspect to be addressed in the peace talks. In addition, we commend the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to help nearly 2 million refugees, and call on donors to increase their contributions to enable UNRWA to meet the growing needs of the population. Turning to Lebanon, the economic situation, compounded by the coronavirus disease pandemic, continues to deteriorate. Much remains to be done to strengthen governance and institutional reforms in Lebanon. Our solidarity is more important than ever. As for the Golan Heights, although generally calm, the situation remains volatile, with continued violations of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement. We therefore urge the parties to exercise maximum restraint and not to violate the ceasefire or the area of separation in order to prevent escalation. In conclusion, with a view to achieving a negotiated peace between Israel and Palestine, the Dominican Republic lends its impartial support to real and sustainable solutions on the basis of international consensus that the only way forward is for Palestinians and Israelis to negotiate a two-State solution.
