Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): We thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, for the excellent briefing he
has just given the Council on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/888) on the situation in
Timor-Leste, which in general is positive. We listened
with interest to his personal report on the firm progress
of this young nation on the path towards the
consolidation of its institutions and economic and
social recovery.

Benin welcomes the numerous advances achieved
by the Government and the people of Timor-Leste.
That progress demonstrates that they are making good
use of the support of the international community. In
particular, we welcome their praiseworthy efforts for
the normalization of the situation in the country and for
strengthening stability throughout the Timorese
territory, the establishment of political institutions, the
consolidation of the foundations of public
administration, the continued strengthening of the
national police and improved relations with the other
countries of the region, in particular Indonesia and
Australia. We also welcome the bold measures taken
by Timor-Leste to deal with structural problems, inter
alia, by adopting laws on the private sector. Such
measures will help ensure a smooth transition from the
phase of emergency assistance to that of laying the
foundations for sustainable development.

We take note of the continuing efforts of the
World Bank, United Nations Development Programme
and other United Nations institutions aimed at
strengthening institutions in the socio-economic fabric
of the country.

Nevertheless, we cannot say that the targets set
have been achieved in all areas. Activities under way
certainly deserve to be pursued and consolidated,
because the report of the Secretary-General shows that
much remains to be done to ensure that these
achievements are well rooted, in particular the
strengthening of professionalism and discipline within
the police force and the strengthening of the justice
sector.

Similarly, we are perplexed by the fact that the
expected progress in the maritime and land border
demarcation of Timor-Leste is taking a long time. We,
therefore, urge the countries concerned to move this
process forward in the interest of peace, stability and
integrated development throughout the region.

Overall, we share the view of the Secretary-
General, who states in paragraph 65 of his report that
the situation on the ground does not warrant any
modification of the tasks of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET).
Therefore, we support the current size of the
UNMISET staff in the consolidation phase. We also
agree with the draft resolution submitted by Brazil. The
adoption of this procedural draft resolution, which
conforms with the letter and the spirit of Security
Council resolution 1543(2004), will reaffirm the
Council's will, already expressed, to renew the
UNMISET mandate for another six months - that is,
until 20 May 2005. The international community must
remain committed to this young nation in its
development. It is important as well for the activities
of the international community to take into account the
vision of the leaders of Timor-Leste as to the future of
their country.

The exit strategy of UNMISET must depend on
the support that United Nations funds and programmes
can offer, which should continue to assist Timor-Leste
until it becomes fully self-sufficient and can draw on
its own economic strengths. We must not lose sight of
the fact that Timor-Leste is one of the least developed
countries; therefore, it requires substantial support in
official development assistance in order to set up basic
infrastructures to deal with structural weaknesses so
that rapid economic development of the country can be
ensured.

