Mr. Jurica (Croatia): In my capacity as the
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to

resolution 1373 (2001), known as the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, it is my honour to brief the
Security Council on the work of the Committee in the
past six months. Before entering into the core of the
presentation, I would like to extend the Committee's
gratitude to Mr. Mike Smith, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), and his team for their valuable assistance. I
also appreciate the continuous support of the
Secretariat, as well as the constructive atmosphere in
the Committee, which greatly contributes to the
fulfilment of its mandate.

Transparency is one of the basic principles of our
work. Therefore, together with the Executive Director,
I continued the practice of informing the wider United
Nations membership on the work of the Committee and
the CTED at an informal briefing held on 6 November
2008.

At the outset, I am pleased to report that since my
last briefing to the Security Council, on 6 May 2008,
the Committee has pursued its activities according to
programmes of work and has accomplished several key
initiatives.

In May this year, the Committee adopted a
document entitled "Survey of the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)" (see S/2008/379), and submitted it to the Security Council.
The report was prepared on the basis of evaluations
contained in the preliminary implementation
assessments (PIAs). It provides an assessment of the
implementation of the resolution in regions and
subregions and draws conclusions about progress in the
implementation of the resolution in key thematic areas.
The report also contains priority recommendations for
the Committee's future action.

The survey was discussed at informal
consultations of the Security Council, during which it
received positive reviews by Council members. I
would like to emphasize that it is the first report of its
kind adopted since the establishment of the Committee.

The Committee has continued to analyze the
preliminary implementation assessments. Thus far, the
Committee has adopted some 188 PIAs, and the
remaining 5 should be formally approved by the
Committee in the forthcoming months. While receiving
their assessments, Member States were also given time
to respond. As the first deadlines for responses have
expired, the Committee has recently endorsed a

proposal on how to conduct the stocktaking of each
Member State's implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). That process has already started and will be
carried out in stages at the subcommittee and
Committee levels, while particular emphasis will be
given to regular dialogue with Member States.

The reorganization plan of the CTED mandated
the establishment of five cross-cutting technical
working groups, covering major areas of
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), as well as
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). The groups
have already presented to the Committee first results of
their work, aimed at revising and harmonizing criteria
for technical judgments of elements of resolution 1373
(2001), and they are working towards the completion
of a document that will assist the CTED in that task.

The Committee has continued organizing visits to
Member States, which constitute a fundamental
component of its activities to effectively monitor and
promote the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Throughout the period the Committee has been
carrying out visits that were approved at the end of
2006, always with the consent of the countries
involved. Since our last briefing, the Committee has
concluded successful full-fledged on-site visits to
Cambodia, the Lao People's Democratic Republic,
South Africa and Egypt and a focused visit to
Madagascar. As we speak, the Committee is engaged in
a follow-up visit to Kenya and will immediately
afterwards visit to Uganda and to the United Kingdom.

Moreover, as the new organizational plan of the
CTED contains a provision for more flexible and
targeted visits, the Committee approved a new list of
visits for the period until the end of 2010. Member
States have been contacted by the Executive
Directorate in that regard, and many of them have
already provided their consent to a visit.

In addition, and in order to promote transparency
in the Committee's work, I am pleased to report that,
on the basis of a recent decision of the Committee,
Member States to be visited will be invited, on a
voluntary basis, to meet with the members of the
Committee in an informal setting before the
consideration of the final visit report, in order to
present their views on the visit and its outcome.
Regarding the facilitation of technical assistance,
along with its regular activities - which include
ongoing dialogue with Member States, donors and
beneficiaries - the Committee is engaged in ensuring
follow-up to its fifth special meeting with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
held in Nairobi in 2007. The Committee also maintains
the technical assistance matrix and a directory of
assistance programmes on its website.

In its dialogue with Member States, the
Committee continued to remind them that they must
ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism
must comply with all their obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law.

With respect to the implementation of resolution
1624 (2005), the Committee held a discussion to
explore the technical assistance needs of States to
implement that resolution, as well as to facilitate the
provision of such assistance. The Committee continues
to encourage those States that have not yet reported to
do so. The Committee also continues to encourage
Member States to become party to and implement the
16 international counter-terrorism instruments.

The Committee continues to play its part in the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, and the CTED is participating
actively in the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (CTITF) through contributing to the work of
several working groups. The Committee has held a
discussion on the issue of its participation in the
Strategy and is also regularly assisting Member States
to implement those provisions of the Strategy that fall
within its mandate. In that respect, it is worth noting
that the Committee's recent visit to Madagascar was
organized with the participation of representatives of
the CTITF.

The Committee, mostly through its experts and in
line with resolution 1805 (2008), cooperates and
coordinates its activities with the two other Security
Council subsidiary bodies that deal with counter-
terrorism - the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004). One tangible
example of that cooperation is the organizing, together
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, of
subregional workshops on the preparation of responses
to the Security Council committees dealing with
counter-terrorism. The third such workshop will be
held in Nairobi, Kenya.

Moreover, as part of its cooperation and exchange
of information with counter-terrorism partners during
its meetings in New York, the Committee heard several
briefings by representatives of relevant organizations
and United Nations bodies.

Various activities in the past six months have
shown that the Committee is a useful tool in combating
terrorism. In the forthcoming period, our work will be
focused on the stocktaking exercise, as well as on
preparing for an interim review of the CTED by 30
June 2009, as mandated by resolution 1805 (2008). The
Committee is also expecting to receive a new revision
of the survey of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States, and to pursue with enhanced
vigour contacts with relevant countries to facilitate the
delivery of technical assistance. I believe that with an
inclusive but pragmatic approach by all members, that
collaborative effort will bear fruit and will meet the
expectations of the Security Council.

