Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, I would like to express, through our colleague
Ambassador Skoog, the sincere condolences and
sympathy of the Senegalese delegation to the people
and the Government of Sweden in connection with the
tragic attack this morning.

We welcome the holding of this morning's
emergency meeting, under the same format in which
we gathered on 5 April (see S/PV.7915 ). But like on
that day, with regard to late yesterday afternoon, we
are today seeing a deep divide in the Security Council
when it comes to the Syrian crisis - which, with the
use of chemical weapons, the proliferation of terrorist
groups and with the unprecedented catastrophic
repercussions - is one that constitutes the most serious
of our day. What image are we sending out to the
international community? Above all, what message are
we sending out to the Syrian people, who are lacerated
and disoriented? That we have lost our direction? What
other ambiguous message are we sending out to the
terrorists who are proliferating in Syria.

Nothing can justify an atrocity such as the use
of chemical weapons against civilians, even during
a conflict. As a party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, Senegal reiterates its firm condemnation
of the use of all kinds of weapons of mass destruction,
including chemical weapons. My delegation would
like to further encourage the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in its work,
particularly in connection with its Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic, and commends its effort
to bring together and analyse all the information from
every available source in order to determine who is
responsible for what.

Last September, in this very Chamber, the President
of the Republic of Senegal, Mr. Macky Sall, stated
that there could be no military solution to this crisis
(see S/PV.7774). That is why my delegation reaffirms
its strong conviction that only a negotiated solution,
on the basis of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015), will make it possible
to find a final outcome to this conflict. We must not
forget that this agreement needs to cover the four
following aspects: political, security, humanitarian and
non-proliferation.

In that regard, my delegation wishes every success
to the fifth round of the Geneva talks, which opened
on 23 March, with the hope that, with the praiseworthy
efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. De Mistura, who is going to brief us here next week,
these talks will lead to substantial conclusions. The
fourth meeting had made it possible for the first time
to address substantial issues, such as constitutional
reform, the political transition and the holding of
elections under the observation of the United Nations.

