Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My Government has taken note of the forty-
sixth monthly report of the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs. We note that the report includes
improvements, including its recognition of the fact that
the United Nations has managed to get humanitarian
aid to thousands of people in need in Syria, thanks to
the assistance of the Syrian Government and Syrian
agencies.

However, Syria believes that the current report
requires yet further balance and objectivity. In both word
and deed, the report should reiterate the commitment to
the implementation of the United Nations resolutions,
in particularly respect for Syrian sovereignty, and to
providing humanitarian aid to those who are in need in
Syria, without selectivity or politicization. Yesterday,
we sent an official letter to the Secretary-General and
to the President of the Security Council, setting out the
position of the Syrian Government on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/1057) under consideration
today. However, I would like to make the following
main points.

The authors of these periodic reports are incapable
ofresolving a serious professional shortcoming, namely,
the fact that they are relying on politicized and other
open sources that lack credibility, while continuing to
ignore the Syrian Government's reliable sources. The
Syrian Government regrets that the authors of the report
speak about what they administrative impediments and
deliberate restrictions that they claim limit the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to unstable areas.

In that regard, Syria reiterates that it provides
every possible facilitation to ensure the delivery of that
assistance when it is genuinely directed to those Syrian
citizens who truly deserve it and when it is arranged
in accordance with the agreed mechanisms that respect
the applicable Syrian laws and regulations.

As Security Council members will recall, the
Syrian Government has approved the proposal of the
Resident Coordinator to set up a tripartite mechanism
because it is open to any measure that would strengthen
humanitarian work in Syria. The mechanism has met
five times to date - contrary to the sugegstion of the
authors of the report that it is ineffective and that its
meetings are few and far between.

With regard to cross-border deliveries of
humanitarian assistance, I would like to make the
following points.

First, Syria still believes that there is currently no
practical justification for the cross-border delivery of
such assistance, in particular given the options created
by the agreements for the establishment of de-escalation
zones in order to deliver humanitarian assistance to
those in need from within the country.

Secondly, the parties in charge at the Office for the
Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs are still either
unable or unwilling to offer the necessary guarantees
that assistance reaches those who deserve it, and not
armed terrorist groups, as has been the case so far. In that
connection, my Government is bewildered by the vague
ideas contained in paragraph 29 of the report regarding
partners or independent third-party companies that
were contracted to ascertain the delivery of assistance
to the warehouses and to those who are eligible for such
aid. I would add that, to date, no United Nations official
has proposed such ideas to the Syrian Government
even though the Syrian Government is the main party
concerned. The Syrian Government therefore requests
that the United Nations provide the names and reports
of the United Nations partners who are allegedly able to
verify this essential information.

Thirdly, the Syrian Government, in cooperation
with its allies, has liberated most Syrian territories from
Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other affiliated terrorist
groups. Those groups have prevented humanitarian aid
from reaching civilians in those areas. That requires
us today to agree on mechanisms to deliver assistance
from within Syria and in cooperation and coordination
with the Syrian Government.

Fourthly, those who prepared the report did not
mention the refusal of the United States and Jordan to
allow aid to reach the Al-Rukban camp, or of Turkey to
open the Nassibine crossing points, which is a flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law and further
evidence of the double standards and politicization of
cross-border assistance.

My Government reiterates the need for United
Nations personnel in Syria to refrain from dealing
with any separatist entities, the illegal so-called local
councils or unlicensed civil society organizations. We
warn that most of those entities have close ties to or
affiliations with armed terrorist groups.

My Government regrets the continuous use by the

authors of the report of the term "besieged zones" when
talking about the situation in eastern Ghouta, while they
constantly and deliberately ignore the fact that citizens
in eastern Ghouta are under internal siege by armed
terrorist organizations there. Those organizations use
citizens as human shields and seize, monopolize and
distribute humanitarian assistance to their supporters,
but sell it at exorbitant prices to those in need, as was the
case in eastern Aleppo. Independent media have aired
audio and video footage of the suffering of besieged
civilians and exposed the practices of terrorist groups
that steal humanitarian aid and deprive it to those in
need of that aid.

My country's Government continues to call on the
authors of the report to be transparent and credible by
clearly mentioning the deeply negative impacts of the
unilateral economic coercive measures imposed on
Syria by the United States of America, the European
Union and other States. Those measures have an
impact on all basic sectors of life and affect even the
activities of the United Nations entities and foreign
non-governmental organizations in Syria.

As Council members are aware, the eighth round
of the Geneva talks took place immediately following
the so-called Riyadh conference for the Syrian
opposition, which was attended by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General after having been postponed
for three months. Members are also well aware that
the outcome of the Riyadh conference is a deliberate
violation of the relevant United Nations resolutions on
the Syrian crisis, in particular resolution 2254 (2015).
The statement issued by that conference contained
preconditions on key issues that eliminate any potential
for a Syrian national dialogue led by the Syrians
themselves, without foreign interference.

The Special Envoy, who was present at the Riyadh
meetings, ignored the fact that the so-called Riyadh
2 document was a flagrant attempt to undermine
the Geneva track and prevent a political solution to
the Syrian crisis. Therefore, the Syrian Government
position was clear and firm in rejecting the goals of the
Ryiadh 2 grouping, namely, to waste time and prolong
the crisis in an act of submission to the injunctions of
their employers in Saudi Arabia and Western States.

Resolution 2254 (2015) stipulates that all
preconditions should be rejected and that the dialogue
should be inter-Syrian and led by Syrians without
foreign interference. However, the Special Envoy,
who attended the Riyadh 2 meeting, decided to laud
its outcome and adopt it in a provocative manner, in
violation of the United Nations resolution. He adopted
an unbalanced position and sided with the so-called
opposition groups that are still imposing preconditions.
He also began to promote the dangerous outcome of the
Riyadh 2 meeting and tried to justify it to the extent
that he became party to the exacerbation of the crisis,
rather than a facilitator.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
strictly respects the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of international
humanitarian law, which are the basis of the United
Nations role and its credibility. We reject the misuse
of United Nations mechanisms by certain influential
States. We condemn the hostile and irresponsible
statements of certain States that have employed
terrorist armed groups in Syria. As usual, those States
have exploited the position of the Special Envoy in the
media so as to justify the preconditions imposed by
the opposition groups in order to obstruct the Geneva
process and thwart any possible solution to the crisis.

In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic has
participated in 15 rounds oftalks in Geneva and Astana
and two rounds of talks in Moscow, and expects to
participate effectively in the inter-Syrian national
dialogue conference in Sochi. The position of my
Government is clear. No one can alter or manipulate
it, or weaken Syria's resolve to respond to any sincere
effort to end the bloodbath in Syria and to meet the
aspirations of the Syrian people. That is why we urge
the Secretary-General to convince States that sponsor
the opposition groups to invalidate the so-called Riyadh
2 statement and pave the way for serious progress in the
talks on Syria.

