The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns with the
utmost firmness the massacre of refugees from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo which
occurred on the territory of Burundi, in Gatumba,
on 13 August 2004.

"The Security Council requests the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Burundi, in close contact with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to establish
the facts and report on them to the Council as
quickly as possible.

"The Security Council calls upon the
authorities of Burundi and of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to cooperate actively so
that the perpetrators and those responsible for
these crimes be brought to justice without delay.

"The Security Council calls upon all States
in the region to ensure that the territorial integrity
of their neighbours is respected. It recalls in this
respect the Declaration of Principles on Good-
Neighbourly Relations and Cooperation, adopted
in New York on 25 September 2003. It
encourages them to redouble their efforts in order
to provide security for the civilian populations on
their territory, including for the foreigners to
whom they grant refuge.

"The Security Council requests the United
Nations Operation in Burundi and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to offer their assistance to
the Burundian and Congolese authorities with a
view to facilitating the investigation and to
strengthening the security of vulnerable
populations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/30.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.40 17.171.
