Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank today's briefers. I would also like to congratulate Belgium, a fellow European Union member, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We are very proud to see you, Madam President, in that role. Ireland very strongly supports the Security Council's recognition of the importance of transitional justice in efforts to sustain peace. That is an issue close to our hearts because we have lived it. Our understanding of transitional justice is shaped most profoundly by our own peace process, founded on the 1998 Good Friday Agreement, which brought to an end some 30 years of violence in Northern Ireland and inwhich the work of protecting the peace and furthering reconciliation continues to this day. We have approached that in many ways, politically and economically. One successful example was the establishment of the Remembrance Commission, which worked from 2003 to 2008 to administer a scheme of assistance and remembrance for victims and their families. The Commission made funding available to individual victims and survivors in acknowledgement of their suffering and economic hardship. While much progress has been made on our island, more remains to be done. In addressing the legacy of the conflict, as a co-guarantor of the Good Friday Agreement, we recognize that, in order to definitively deal with the past and to deepen reconciliation, we must continue to work every day. For that reason, in the context of the recent agreement reached in January on power-sharing in Northern Ireland, both the Irish and United Kingdom Governments have affirmed their commitment to moving ahead to establish a framework of legacy institutions. That comprehensive framework is founded on principles that include promoting reconciliation, upholding the rule of law, acknowledging and addressing the suffering of victims and survivors, facilitating the pursuit of justice and information recovery and complying with human rights requirements. An implementation and reconciliation group will also be established. We recognize that this comprehensive framework is vital to provide justice and truth for victims and survivors. It will also bolster other ongoing peacebuilding efforts, and it will enable politics, policing and the wider society in Northern Ireland to move on from the past and fully harness the benefits of peace. As this debate demonstrates today, transitional justice is complex and part of a much wider tapestry of actions necessary to sustain peace. Ireland has been, and will continue to be, eager to learn from others on similar journeys and to share our own experience. We are proud of our continued support to the transitional justice processes in Colombia, Sierra Leone, Syria and elsewhere. Ireland welcomes recent progress within United Nations missions to recognize and incorporate elements of transitional justice in their work. We support the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund's increased focus on transitional justice, including, most recently, helping to develop a comprehensive national strategy for transitional justice in the Gambia. It is often stated that all wars are fought twice: the first time on the battlefield and the second time in memory. In our support for transitional justice, we must never forget our overall aim, that is, to build and sustain peace and reconciliation. As an aspiring member of the Council for the term 2021 to 2022, my country, Ireland, believes that transitional justice must be aspirational: first, in seeking to maximize peace and justice and, secondly, in being practical by incorporating the local context and focusing on what is required by communities emerging from violence. That also includes special efforts to ensure the inclusion of women. The participation of, and consultation with, victims in the design, implementation and monitoring of transitional justice policies is absolutely key. Only then can a society begin to make the transformational journey that reconciliation demands, and sustained peace requires.
