Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the briefings presented in their
respective capacities by Ms. Coninsx, Mr. Voronkov
and Ambassador Umarov.

The evolution of the terrorist phenomenon-
and especially the growing role of foreign terrorist
fighters - causes us deep concern. In recent times,
indiscriminate terrorist attacks have been increasing,
committed by individuals who use vehicles, knives
or homemade explosives against innocent civilians,
resulting in tragic deaths and injuries. When we witness
such atrocities, we are seized with a mixture of feelings
of consternation, defencelessness and incomprehension:
consternation at the pain caused by the loss of so many
innocent lives; defencelessness as we see the cruel
truth that no one is safe from the risk of terrorism; and
incomprehension, as it is difficult to understand how,
despite the many efforts and actions taken to combat
terrorist groups, their members and followers manage
so often to carry out such acts of destruction.

We welcome the dedicated work of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee of the Security Council and its
Executive Directorate in helping States fight against
terrorism. During our membership in the Security
Council, we have had the opportunity to appreciate
at first hand the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate, and we value
their expertise reflected in numerous areas of thematic
analysis. Its recommendations and identification of
good practices are highly useful, and the Committee's
role in facilitating technical assistance is of crucial to
States that need and request such assistance.

We have also appreciated the dedicated efforts of
the sanctions committees - especially the important
work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL, Al-Qaida, and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)
concerning the Taliban - on the listing and delisting
of persons or entities. Furthermore, the reports and
recommendations prepared by the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team of those Committees
have become an important and very useful source
of information for States. All of those actions have
helped raise awareness of the threat of terrorism,
which is growing thanks largely to its geographic
mobility and its ability to adapt its modus operandi to
new circumstances.

Mention has been made of terrorists increasingly
using the Internet and turning to the so-called dark web
to carry out transnational criminal activities, including
trafficking in arms, false identity documents, money
and drugs. Passenger and border controls and the
implementation of systems such as Advance Passenger
Information and Passenger Name Records remain
important to that end. We recognize the importance of
those instruments, as well as the need for checks at all
borders. Uruguay is therefore devoting its utmost efforts
to making the technical adaptations required to meet to
the current demands of the international context.

Facts show, however, that adopting security
measures has proven insufficient to the challenge of
preventing acts of terrorism. We can take steps to stem
the flow of recruitment, prevent travel or cut off financial
support, but all of that, it seems, is not enough. Recent
attacks have revealed that many of the individuals
involved have no criminal background and, as citizens
or legal residents of the countries they attack, they can
carry out their acts with little in the way of resources and
preparation. Against that backdrop, we underscore the
importance of designing and implementing prevention
strategies aimed at stopping the propagation of violent
extremism and avoiding radicalization.

The preamble of the UNESCO Constitution
proclaims that "since wars begin in the minds of men,
it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace
must be constructed". That task takes on all the more
importance in the light of the recent announcement
by recognized experts that the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant has undergone a transformation from
a geographically-based terrorist group into a global
terrorist ideology.

We understand that beyond all of the international
cooperation and United Nations assistance, it is States
that bear the primary responsibility for preventing the
emergence of extremist ideologies that may lead to the
fomenting or commission of acts of terrorism, and for
combating domestic complicity with terrorist groups,
wherever it may exist. Religious leaders also have an
important role to play in that regard: they have the
knowledge and the ability to ensure that faith is not
exploited for spurious ends. Strengthening democracy
and the institutions of States, reinforcing the rule of
law, respecting human rights, promoting religious
tolerance and peaceful coexistence, maintaining open
dialogue with civil society and prioritizing education
are further key elements for ending intolerance and
violent extremism.

Fighting global terrorism calls for sincere
commitment on the part of all members of the
international community, without ambiguities. Only in
that way, in solidarity and with full respect for the rule
of law, international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, will we be able to better navigate the multiple
challenges that the threat of terrorism poses every day.

