Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to take the floor on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. The acceding country Croatia,
the candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia, the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

Let me begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and the German presidency for organizing this very
important debate and for the leadership you have
constantly shown on this issue. The European Union
is very grateful for Germany's efforts, initiatives and
continuous endeavours, including in the Security
Council Working Group that you, Sir, chair.

Allow me to use this opportunity to express our
appreciation to former Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Radhika Coomaraswamy for
her highly esteemed work. Her relentless effort has
contributed immensely to the progress we witnessed
during her mandate. I would also like to warmly
welcome the new Special Representative, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, and to assure her of the full support of the
European Union.

The annual report of the Secretary General on
children and armed conflict (S/2012/261) reminds us
of the importance of the Security Council's work on
that issue, which we highly appreciate. We have seen
continuous progress in many aspects and different
regions - for example, through the conclusion of several
action plans leading to the release and subsequent
reintegration of children. Still, we have also witnessed
deterioration in other places, such as Syria, where many
children are among the victims of egregious crimes and
where the tremendous suffering of girls and boys has
been going on for much too long. As long as children
still suffer from armed conflict, we are reminded that
we have to further intensify our work.

It is of special significance to us that for the first
time the Secretary-General included attacks on schools
and hospitals in his annual report, in accordance with
the expanded list of triggers from last year's ground-
breaking resolution 1998 (2011). That expansion of
triggers and their effective implementation means
concrete progress for the instruments at the disposal
of the Security Council's Working Group, thereby
contributing effectively to improving the situation for
the children concerned.

The reports of the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict also illustrate the severe
problem of persistent perpetrators - an issue that
increasingly needs our particular attention. While it
is essential to continuously name the relevant conflict
parties, the Security Council also has to look for
effective ways to take action, combat impunity and
prove that the 32 persistent perpetrators currently listed
will eventually be held accountable for their heinous
crimes, including by imposing targeted sanctions. Let
us not accept impunity. Encouraging steps have been
taken by the International Criminal Court, for example
by the recent judgment in the Lubanga trial on the war
crime of conscripting and enlisting children under
the age of 15 and making them participate actively in
hostilities.

The recommendations of the former Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations,
Ambassador De la Sabliere, upon the request of the
Special Representative, provide interesting food for
thought in this context. The toolbox of the Security
Council's Working Group needs to be applied, with
effective links between the Working Group, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the existing sanctions committees. Especially when
establishing or renewing the mandate of relevant
sanctions regimes, it should be considered to include
provisions against parties to armed conflict that engage
in activities in violation of applicable international law
relating to the rights and protection of children in armed
conflict. Dialogue and increased political pressure and
cooperation with national and international courts will
also be important. Furthermore, we encourage the
Council to regularly invite the Special Representative
to provide briefings on situations of armed conflict that
affect children.

The implementation of existing commitments
is crucial. Let me update the Council on some of the
steps taken by the European Union to contribute to our
common goal. High Representative Ashton has named
the rights of the child as one of the three priorities in her
joint communication on human rights. Consequently,
the EU is systematically including child protection
issues in all EU foreign policy missions, operations
and training ,and has committed to further step up
its implementation. The European Union has spent
€200 million in 2009-2012 on assistance to children and
armed conflict in the countries listed in the Secretary-
General's report. To cite just one example, the EU's
police mission in Afghanistan provided training on
child protection, and in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo the European Union has cooperated with the
United Nations and local police in child protection and
juvenile justice projects.

The humanitarian work of the EU also aims at
protecting children in conflict-affected areas. We
continue to strongly support the universal ratification of
the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and the sale of children, child prostitution and
child pornography. Those are just some of the examples
of our dedication in this field.

Far too many children in too many parts of the
world still suffer every day from the effects of armed
conflict or are directly involved as child soldiers.
Children should attend school, play with their peers and
be able to enjoy their childhood without suffering from
the effects of war and armed conflict. Let us do our
outmost to further improve their lives by intensifying
the use ofthe instruments at the disposal ofthe Security
Council.

