Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank His Excellency President Sleiman of
Lebanon, as well as the delegation of Lebanon, for
organizing this high-level meeting of the Security
Council. I would also like to thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his insightful
remarks.

The topic we are discussing today represents one
of the most important issues for determining the further
course of action of the United Nations pertaining to the
prevention of conflict. Today, we are seeing a
significant number of crises and new global challenges
that have the potential to pull entire regions into
violence and consequently become a challenge to
international peace and security. In such a fragile
security environment, conflict prevention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, as the founding
purposes of the United Nations and pillars of its
Charter, represent the main tools at our disposal.

The United Nations was founded as an
Organization that would act not only to prevent
conflicts between nations and avert future wars, but
also to strengthen cooperation among its Members.
Entrusted with the responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, the Security Council
needs to optimize the use of its preventive diplomacy
tools.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has shared the
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security through its membership in the
Security Council. We will stay fully committed to this
course. There is no doubt that in recent times, the
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
have recognized the crucial importance of preventive
diplomacy. The question is: Can we make
improvements in this regard? I think that we can and
that we should.

I will echo the words that I said exactly two years
ago after the election of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
Security Council. We believe that, based on the case of
my country, Bosnia and Herzegovina is going to be a
strong voice for preventive diplomacy and try to follow
up early warning signs anywhere in the world with the
utmost sensitivity. This approach is more important
today than it was two years ago, and today's debate is a
clear evidence of that.

Reacting after a crisis has already started is
always a less efficient and less cost-effective method
for preserving peace and security. However, we have to
keep in mind that there is no universal solution that can
be applied to all crises; rather, each particular case
requires our full attention.

A number of regional and subregional
organizations have become more active in their role as
partner to the United Nations in the area of preventive
diplomacy. This reflects a growing conviction that
emerging crises should be addressed in appropriate
international forums. The development and
improvement of early warning systems, creating
mechanisms for rapid response, the establishment of
prevention structures and the use of the Secretary-
General's special envoys, groups of friends and fact-
finding missions all have crucial roles to play in
preventive diplomacy capacities. We support the
strengthening of the strategic dialogue between United
Nations and regional organizations and a more regular
exchange of views and information in order to enable
the Council to make adequate decisions. Regional
organizations are often better informed than their
international counterparts for the early detection of
crises.
Despite of all the efforts and readiness of the
international community to assist in conflict
prevention, I wish to underline that the willingness of
the stakeholders involved in political processes in the

field to preserve peace remains the most crucial
element. The durability of peace agreements can be
achieved only by assisting national counterparts in
building the foundations for sustainable peace and
addressing the root causes of conflict, as well as
developing nationally owned institutions that can
prevent conflict through dialogue.

Today, I want to reaffirm my county's
commitment to strengthening the international capacity
for preventive diplomacy in the interest of peace,
security and development. Bosnia and Herzegovina
stands ready to support those efforts.

