Mr. Serry: Thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the floor. Let me acknowledge the presence of both
Ambassador Mansour at this table - I think we met a
few weeks ago in Jerusalem - and of the new Israeli
Ambassador, Mr. Prosor. I had the privilege of meeting
him yesterday.

The political process to resolve the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is in profound and persistent
deadlock. Efforts to find the necessary common ground
for resumed negotiations have proven extremely
difficult, given the differences and lack of trust
between the parties. Political leaders on both sides are
frustrated, as are their publics. This is particularly
acute on the Palestinian side in the absence of a
credible political horizon for ending the occupation
that began in 1967. Israel remains concerned about
achieving lasting security and an end to the conflict.

The Quartet has engaged throughout this year to
promote meaningful negotiations. Most recently, the
Secretary-General joined Quartet partners in
Washington, DC, on 11 July. The Quartet sought to
translate the important speech of President Obama on
19 May, in which he laid out parameters on borders
and security as what he termed a "foundation for
negotiations", into an internationally agreed framework
for the parties to resume talks. The Secretary-General
appreciated the substantive discussion in Washington,
DC. The Quartet did not issue a statement to help
chart the way forward, but its efforts continue.

Both President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu continue to reiterate their desire to
negotiate. However, in the absence of a framework for
meaningful talks, and with Israeli settlement activity
continuing, the Palestinians are actively exploring
approaching the United Nations. President Abbas states
that he remains committed to negotiations and that
efforts in the United Nations would help to preserve
the two-State solution. Israel opposes this course of
action, stating that it will make negotiations for a two-
State solution more difficult to achieve. The
Palestinians are consulting closely with the Arab
11-43003
League on this issue, and both parties are intensively
engaging members of the international community.

We hope that the international community can be
united in forums of collective decision-making - now,
in September, and after September too - and shape a
legitimate and balanced way forward that will help the
parties to overcome their differences and ultimately
return to negotiations. We will continue to work with
Quartet partners to seek urgent action in this regard.
We also note the prerogatives and responsibilities of
the Security Council and the General Assembly.

We must not lose sight of what is at stake. The
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and my
own Office, the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator in the Occupied Territories (UNSCO),
have all acknowledged the unprecedented
achievements of the Palestinian Authority in the West
Bank. The Palestinian Authority has, in key areas,
reached a level of institutional performance sufficient
for a functioning State. The Palestinian Authority is
ready to assume the responsibilities of statehood at any
point in the near future.

Real security and economic gains have been
made, benefiting both peoples. Better governance,
increased investment, improvements in movement and
access, and donor engagement have strengthened the
West Bank economy in a difficult global environment
over the past two years. The training and deployment
of thousands of Palestinian security officers and
intensified security coordination have seen terrorist
cells dismantled and extremist incitement combated.
Palestinians have seen law and order return to the main
cities, and Israelis have faced comparatively few acts
of violence from the West Bank.

However, as we have often warned, this agenda
will soon reach the limits of achievement without more
political and physical space. This requires Israeli steps
to roll back measures of occupation and continuous
donor support. For example, we have repeatedly called
on Israel to allow the expansion of Palestinian urban
centres to accommodate population growth and
industrial activity, which would necessitate including
some parts of Area C. While steps of enablement were
made in the past, bold measures have been lacking in
recent times, and the implementation of those measures
that have been announced, including the February 2011
package agreed with Quartet Representative Blair, has
been slow. Indeed, we have seen many negative actions
11-43003
in Area C. The demolition of Palestinian structures has
surged. This year, 700 people have been displaced as
approximately 370 structures have been demolished -
the highest number since 2006. Water and sanitation
systems have been targeted in particular.

Settlement activities continue in many of the
most sensitive areas of East Jerusalem and Area C. In
the past month, 40 units were approved in Karnei
Shomron in the northern West Bank. I am particularly
concerned that on 26 June 2011, for the first time in
several years, Israel confiscated 19 hectares of private
Palestinian land in the village of Karyut, also in the
northern West Bank. An outpost, illegal even under
Israeli law, has been placed on that land. This departs
from Israeli public undertakings not to build new
settlements or set aside land for new settlements, and
sets a worrying precedent for the future legalization of
outposts, which, under the Road Map, should be
removed. Settlements are illegal under international
law and prejudge final status discussions, and
settlement activity must cease.

Issues on which we report regularly to the
Council, including settler violence, incursions citing
security concerns, movement and access limitations,
and the route of the barrier, continue to be sources of
friction between the parties. I note that on 23 June the
Israeli authorities, as ordered by the Israeli Supreme
Court, began re-routing a section of the barrier near
Bil'in, a village where there are weekly protests, thus
giving residents access to an additional 1,020 dunums
of agricultural land, although they are still deprived of
another 1,280 dunums.

There are now growing calls from civil society
groups and political figures for intensified peaceful
protests against the status quo and calls for action to
realize the Palestinian right of self-determination.
Meanwhile, precisely at the time when the State-
building plan was meant to reach fruition, the
Palestinian Authority has faced setbacks owing to its
fiscal position and shortages in donor funding, forcing
it to cut back on security expenditures and only pay
half-salaries in June.

I urge donors, including members of the Arab
League, who are meeting on this issue today in Cairo,
to ensure that the Palestinian Authority can pay salaries
and meet its other financial obligations. I urge Israel to
do more to empower its moderate, committed and
peaceful Palestinian partner.
3

Security Council resolutions 1850 (2008) and
1860 (2009) and the framework of international law
continue to guide United Nations policy on Gaza. We
are concerned that the calm between Israel and Gaza,
which was restored in early April, has been challenged
by the firing of some 18 rockets into Israel since
23 June. During the same period, Israel conducted
three incursions and 16 air strikes, killing two and
injuring eight Palestinian militants, but also killing one
Palestinian civilian and injuring 14 others. One Israeli
soldier was injured during an incursion, and an Israeli
civilian contractor was lightly injured by gunfire from
Gaza. Militants' firing of indiscriminate rockets
towards civilian areas is unacceptable and must cease.
Israel must also show restraint. Tensions have subsided
in recent days. My office remains active in promoting a
full restoration of calm, which remains a cornerstone
for any broader achievements in Gaza.

A nascent recovery is under way in Gaza, with
real GDP growth of 15.1 per cent in 2010 and 17.9 per
cent in the first quarter of 2011. However, this rebound
starts from a very low base and is driven in part by
public expenditures, donor aid, tunnel traffic, increased
imports from Israel and limited exports. Imports are
only about a third of the volume before the closure.
Unemployment in Gaza is very high, at 31 per cent;
54 per cent of households remain food insecure; and
38 per cent live in poverty.

Israel's June 2010 policy change from a list of
permitted items to a list of prohibited ones has
contributed to an increase in consumer good imports. A
limited range and volume of agricultural products has
also been exported since Israel's December 2010
decision to allow them.

The level of United Nations projects approved for
Gaza to date, pursuant to Israel's policy, totals
$265 million - a significant start towards addressing
Gaza's vast basic needs including in education,
housing and sanitation.

The Rafah crossing for people now operates six
days a week between Gaza and Egypt.

Together with our Quartet partners, we urge Israel
to allow aggregate, iron bar and cement for use by
Gaza's private sector. The ongoing illicit tunnel trade
in these essential building materials empowers those
who control smuggling at the expense of the legitimate
commercial sector. Exports to foreign countries and the
West Bank should also be further enabled. The much

freer movement of people to and from the Strip is vital
if Gazans are to enjoy basic rights, normal interaction
with the outside world, and human dignity. We
continue to seek the full reopening of all legitimate
crossings. We urge continued vigilance to combat
smuggling of weapons into the Strip.

Most of the vessels involved in a recent flotilla
did not receive authorizations from maritime
authorities from countries in the region to sail towards
Gaza. On 19 July, Israeli naval forces intercepted a
small boat carrying approximately 10 activists who
intended to sail to Gaza, and directed it to the Israeli
port of Ashdod. Unnecessary confrontations at sea
were avoided, as urged by the Quartet.

In Gaza, the Hamas interior ministry closed the
local Sharek Youth Forum on unspecified accusations
of immoral behaviour. The authorities are also seeking
to audit international non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) with on-site inspections. We urge full respect
for the free and independent exercise of the functions
of those organizations. We also urge full respect for the
work of United Nations agencies, some of whose
activities in support of Palestinian beneficiaries have
been misrepresented recently.

We are also very concerned that a bomb was
detonated near the UNSCO compound in Gaza on
25 June causing material damage to the perimeter wall,
which underlines the continued challenging security
environment facing the United Nations in the Strip.

I also draw your attention to the fact that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) faces an
unprecedented funding shortfall of $61.4 million for its
core programmes and operations, as well as for its
emergency food and employment operations. I urge
donors to provide decisive and speedy support to
UNRWA, without which support to Gazans could be
significantly curtailed come October.

The Secretary-General joined the Director-
General of the International Red Cross in expressing
his grave concern at the continuing captivity of Israeli
Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit on the fifth anniversary of
his detention, and called on Hamas to protect his life,
treat him humanely and present a proof of life. We also
continue to call for his release and for the conclusion
of prisoner exchange negotiations, which would also
enable the release of a significant number of
Palestinian prisoners. We note with concern reports of
steps taken to harden the conditions of detention of
some of these prisoners during the reporting period.

Implementation of the May reconciliation accord
is stalled amid disputes over the composition and
programme of a new Government. The longer
reconciliation is delayed, the more that developments
on the ground will push the West Bank and Gaza
further apart, with grave consequences for prospects
for a viable Palestinian State. The United Nations
continues to promote reconciliation within the
framework of the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the positions of the Quartet
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

There has been no movement on the regional
tracks of the peace process. Popular protests and
political change have become part of the regional
dynamic and affect the way the parties perceive their
security and political strength. Uncertainty in the
region should be cause for the parties to redouble
efforts to address stability. Progress towards peace is
more urgent than ever.

I will not brief on Lebanon given that the Special
Coordinator for Lebanon briefed you last week.

In conclusion, after nearly 20 years of
inconclusive peace negotiations since the Madrid
Conference, yet again we are reaching a point where
the parties fail to meet an agreed timeline for a
permanent status agreement. I can only describe the
current situation, whereby the process of Palestinian
State-building in the West Bank has matured but the
political track has failed to converge, as dramatic.

We continue to urge the parties to find a way
forward at this sensitive and important time. We hope
that the international community can help by shaping a
legitimate and balanced framework. Without a credible
political path forward, accompanied by more far-
reaching steps on the ground, the viability of the
Palestinian Authority and its State-building agenda -
and, I fear, of the two-State solution itself - cannot be
taken for granted.

This agenda should be advanced within the
framework of Security Council resolutions and
international law, the agreements and obligations of the
parties and the Arab Peace Initiative.

