I thank Special Adviser Karim Khan for his briefing. Since the new Government was sworn in in May, Iraq has made positive progress in moving forward its domestic political processes, tackling economic and social challenges and developing peaceful and friendly foreign relations, among others. At the same time, terrorism remains a threat to peace and stability in Iraq. The international community should continue to support Iraq to combat terrorism, bring the terrorists to justice and consolidate the hard-won achievements in countering terrorism. The work of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) should be conducive to achieving that goal. China takes note of the fifth report (see S/2020/1107) submitted by UNITAD and appreciates UNITAD's active implementation of its mandate, despite the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease. The support of the Iraqi Government and the trust of the Iraqi people are essential to the work of UNITAD. We hope that UNITAD will maintain its independence and impartiality and fulfil its duties in strict accordance with its mandate. Pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017), Iraq is the main recipient of the collected evidence. Therefore, UNITAD should hand over the evidence to Iraq in a timely and comprehensive manner. The prior consent of Iraq should be obtained before information can be shared with other Member States and the principles of transparency and non-discrimination should be followed. The international community should genuinely respect Iraq's sovereignty and jurisdiction over crimes committed on Iraqi territory and support Iraq in bringing the terrorists to justice in accordance with domestic laws. We welcome Iraq's legislative efforts to promote the accountability of former Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant terrorists and we hope that these efforts will produce results as soon as possible. The parties concerned and the United Nations should also support Iraq in addressing the issue of foreign terrorist fighters and the Secretariat should closely monitor developments and effectively gather information, while the Member States concerned should shoulder their respective responsibilities. Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind and knows no borders. All countries must uphold multilateralism, strengthen international cooperation, fight against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and resolutely crackdown on all terrorist groups designated by the Security Council, without practicing double standards. China will continue working closely with Council members to promote international cooperation on counter-terrorism.
