Mr. Khan (Pakistan): We thank you,
Ambassador Churkin, for convening this important
debate and for consulting with the troop-contributing
countries during its preparation. Thanks also for giving
us a substantive concept note (S/2014/384, annex) and
for your leadership on peacekeeping.

Peacekeeping is the mainstay of the United Nations
in its continuing effort to maintain international peace
and security. Contemporary conflicts have become
much more complex, chronic and lethal. It is our
collective responsibility to forge common ground as
peacekeeping policy and practice evolve. That requires
a genuine partnership between the Security Council,
the troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
Resolution 2086 (2013) of January 2013 took important
decisions to consolidate the work on multidimensional
peacekeeping.

Pakistan is one of the top troop-contributing
countries, having contributed over 150,000 personnel
to 41 United Nations peacekeeping operations,
including traditional and complex missions, since
1960. Our men and women have served with distinction
and professionalism in some of the most difficult and
demanding environments. We have been associated
with peacekeeping throughout its journey of evolution.
It is with that experience and record that we contribute
to this debate.

The concept of a robust mandate has been invoked
and applied in the recent past to deal with what
looked like an usually complex conflict situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The decision
to do so was taken with two caveats - it should not
constitute a precedent and it should be without prejudice
to the basic principles of peacekeeping. We believe that
robust peacekeeping and peace enforcement should
not be conflated conceptually or operationally. The
United Nations peacekeeping missions have used
robust peacekeeping successfully in the past whenever
the need arose. In that sense, it is not a new trend.
Authorizations for such operations have conformed to
the basic principles of peacekeeping: impartiality, the
consent of the parties and the non-use of force except in
self-defence or in defence of the authorized mandates.
That must continue.

The United Nations keeps the peace. It does not
seek military solutions. That is why measures agreed
on an exceptional basis should not be replicated. United
Nations peacekeeping missions should not be caught up
in asymmetric warfare, become combatants, be seen as
partisan, become an arm of the national defence forces
or take actions that would be subject to condemnation
under international humanitarian law.

The use ofnew technology is a new trend. Missions
are using sensors, radars, global positioning systems,
night-vision devices and high-tech avionics to enhance
their operational effectiveness. Recently, an unarmed
unmanned aerial system was introduced in the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on a trial basis
to provide early warning and improve situational
awareness, which will assist the Mission in protecting
and increasing the safety and security of peacekeepers.
That technology is now becoming a growth industry.
We believe that its deployment should not be industry-
driven, but demand-driven. In deploying that
technology, we need to be selective and fully sensitive
to the concerns of the host country and neighbouring
States. The use of technology should be tailored to
specific environments and structures and be consistent
with the basic peacekeeping principles.

Inter-mission cooperation is an interim stopgap
arrangement in the regional context. Sudden and large
movements of troops from one theatre to another are
neither feasible nor desirable. The consent of the host
Government and the troop-contributing countries
is important in that context. There is also a need
to devise standard operating procedures, including
built-in provisions for the optimal utilization of the
International Medical Corps. It is now time to discard
the current thinking about reserves. We should go for
uncommitted, dedicated reserves in the mission area.
That will be a critical investment.

We should also continue to strengthen regional
cooperation, which brings complementarity to United
Nations peacekeeping efforts and enhances regional
ownership. We need a more holistic approach to
peacekeeping that integrates the political and security
aspects with national reconciliation, transitional
criminal justice, capacity-building and economic
and development enablers, which are critical for
peacebuilding and the prevention of relapse. Where
required, such multi-pronged efforts will need to
assume a broader regional dimension, such as in the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

For effective implementation, mandates need to be
matched with adequate resources. Priority should be
given to the core function of peacekeeping, which is
the provision of a safe and secure environment. That is
why sufficient military and police capacities, meeting
United Nations standards, remain so crucial in mission
configurations and must not be compromised solely for
the purposes of cost-cutting.

Effective implementation of complex mandates
also entails close coordination and engagement with
troop- and police-contributing countries. Decisions on
the design and modification of mandates, as well as on
the renewal, transition and drawdown of missions, must
be made with prior and substantive consultations with
the troop-contributing countries.

While tackling new trends, we must also earnestly
address one of the long outstanding issues confronting
peacekeeping - the revision of troop costs.
Considerable investment has gone into that exercise,
including recently by the Senior Advisory Group on
rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries
and related issues, which has now recommended an
empirically established figure for cost reimbursement.
The stage is set to take the next logical step for the
upward revision of troop costs and a permanent
mechanism for its periodic review. An ad hoc, interim
or phased increase would not address the problem. It
is a question of political will, which we hope Member
States will be able to muster in the interest ofpeace and
peacekeeping.

