Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank the
presidency for convening this meeting, and I thank Mark
Lowcock for his sobering briefing. I will address the
following three points: first, the escalation of violence
in eastern Ghouta, secondly, international humanitarian
law, and, thirdly, action by the Security Council.

First, with regard to the escalation of violence in
eastern Ghouta, we are meeting at a moment of grave
distress for the people in eastern Ghouta and elsewhere
in Syria. We have seen the extreme escalation of
violence in Idlib and eastern Ghouta, which was
initiated a few weeks ago by the Syrian regime and its
allies. That has severely intensified over the past several
days and continues without pause, as Mark Lowcock
clearly described. We condemn all indiscriminate
attacks directed against civilians. Communities in
eastern Ghouta have experienced the most intense
bombardments since the beginning of the siege in 2012.
Mortars are also being fired into Damascus. Families
do not have a safe place to hide. Women and children
are dying. Last Monday, the United Nations reported,
over a period ofjust 13 hours, at least, 92 civilian deaths
in eastern Ghouta, and the total death toll since Monday
appears to stand now at approximately 300.

We continue to receive reports of attacks on
hospitals and of the renewed use of chemical weapons,
thereby leading to the inhumane suffering of civilians
and those who try to help them. We pay tribute to the
humanitarian efforts of the White Helmets. We condemn
targeted attacks against them. While the indiscriminate
bombardment of civilian-populated areas continues,
desperately needed humanitarian aid, including
medical aid, for the people of eastern Ghouta cannot
be delivered. We condemn the incessant violence and
the barbaric tactics of besiegement. We have seen those
tactics before. If we think back to Aleppo in December
2016, the same scenario took place. The regime turned
that city into an unlivable hell where civilians were
imprisoned, constantly targeted from the air and cut off
from any form of aid. The Council should not stand by
and watch a repetition of such events in eastern Ghouta.

Secondly, concerning the erosion of international
humanitarian law, in witnessing the sheer disregard for
human life, we must ask ourselves: What has become
of the hard-won gains in the area of international
humanitarian law? The lack of compliance with the
Geneva Conventions by parties to the Syrian conflict
erodes the very norms enshrined therein. It also erodes
the rules-based international order. We cannot let that
happen. The carnage in Syria must stop. The Council
must take effective, credible and decisive action today.
The world is watching. We call upon all parties to the
Syrian conflict, in particular the Syrian regime and
its allies, to stop the targeting of civilians, stop the
attacks on hospitals and facilitate immediate access for
humanitarian organizations to deliver much needed aid.

That brings me to my third point, which is action
by the Council on the cessation of hostilities. We thank
penholders Kuwait and Sweden for negotiating a draft
resolution during the past two weeks that addresses the
dire situation in Syria. We pay tribute to the prudent,
inclusive manner in which Sweden and Kuwait have
organized negotiations on the draft resolution. We
wholeheartedly support the Swedish-Kuwaiti appeal to
support their text.

The draft resolution includes clear and implementable
measures. We fully support an immediate cessation of
hostilities in Syria to enable aid convoys to deliver food
and medicines to all those in need, and the safe medical
evacuation of the critically ill and wounded. That
must happen as soon as possible. Parties to the Syrian
conflict and those with influence on them have a heavy
responsibility to assure the safety of humanitarian
operations and to ensure that no forced evacuations of
civilians take place.

In conclusion, some Council members say that the
draft resolution cannot be implemented because it is not
realistic. But with sufficient political will on the part of
the parties involved in Syria, the cessation of hostilities
can become a most urgently needed reality. The Council
showed forceful action when it adopted resolution 2393
(2017) in December 2017 to alleviate the suffering in
Syria by allowing for vital cross-border humanitarian
aid. Let us again show forceful action. Let us prove to

the world that we can agree to put the safety of civilians
first, throughout Syria.
The human suffering in Syria, in particular in
Ghouta, must end. We need a cessation of hostilities
now. We call on the Russian Federation in particular to
use its influence, do its utmost to achieve that objective
and allow the Council to act effectively. Let us adopt
the realistic, clear and balanced draft resolution
as it stands, end the violence and allow access for
humanitarian assistance.

