The Deputy Secretary-General: We have gathered
this evening to mourn irreplaceable colleagues. Maitre
Alioune Blondin Beye and seven members of his team paid
the highest price possible for peace in Angola. We are here
to remember them all: Maitre Beye, Koffi Adjoyi,
Beadengar Dessande, Amadou Moctar Gueye, Ibikunle
Williams, Alvaro Costa, Jason Hunter and Andrew
McCurrach. But we are also here to pray that their mission
of peace was not in vain.

Warm, tenacious, full of energy, full of enthusiasm,
Maitre Beye was a man totally dedicated to his Mission in
Angola, a Mission which he had nursed since its inception
five years ago.

He literally gave the Mission all the hours God gave
him. He would regularly telephone Headquarters at 2 am.
his time. He would spend seven hours in one session
negotiating with one side. If - as happened more than
once - one of the parties chose to break an impasse in
negotiations by introducing a new document at 11.30 pm.
on a Saturday night, Maitre Beye would not wait until the
next morning. Everybody would get to work there and
then.

There would always be those who said the Mission
was not making enough progress - that the Lusaka
Protocol should have been implemented in full by now.
To them, Maitre Beye would simply recall the alternative:
that when the process started, Angola's war took more
than 1,000 lives every day.

It was the cruellest of ironies that death took Maitre
Beye at a time when he had just fully recovered from
extensive heart surgery; when he was looking forward to
a well-earned vacation this summer; when he was
contemplating the time he could rightly look back upon
his work as a duty accomplished.

His legacy and his name will live on in Angola.
Recently, he used the funds of a prize awarded to him by
Germany to endow a school in Malange province. The
school now bears his name.

Those who knew him well will remember his
favourite phrase when things were going well - his
trademark, if you like: "On va boucler" - "We're going
to wrap it up".

Let that optimism become his legacy. No one can
replace Maitre Beye, but his work can and must be
carried on. There could be no more fitting conclusion to
his life than a timely completion of the Lusaka
Protocol - a realization of his dream of a reconciled
Angola. The suffering has gone on long enough, the
hopes have been vanquished too many times. Today, I
hope the parties in Angola will join us in humanity's
greatest prayer: that which asks not for victory but for
peace.

Expression of sympathy in connection with the deaths
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Angola and his colleagues in the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola

