Mr. Amorim (Brazil): I would like to commend
President Giil and the Turkish delegation for their
initiative to hold this high-level meeting.

Sixty-five years ago, the United Nations was
founded to prevent another war of great proportions.
For many, however, real peace has never come about.
Millions still live in a world where conflict and poverty
nurture each other. International efforts to promote
stability have been hindered by a narrow view, in
which peace was only seen as the absence of armed
conflict.

Today it is clear that peace, security,
development, human rights and the rule of law are
interrelated. Peace can never flourish where there is
hunger and poverty. As much as an exit strategy,
peacekeeping operations must have a strategy of
sustainability, a strategy that will deliver the real
dividends of peace: stability, development and strong
national institutions.

Peacekeeping and peacebuilding should, to the
extent possible, go hand in hand. Let me be clear: we
are not advocating that the Security Council be given a
mandate to promote development. But, in most cases,
the Security Council would benefit from the advice of
the Peacebuilding Commission. Other bodies of the
United Nations system must also be involved. The
coordination between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council foreseen in Article 65 of
the United Nations Charter should be fully exercised.

Let me give a couple of examples.

In Haiti, where Brazil is proud to have
contributed to the United Nations-led stabilization
efforts, it is clear that there will be no lasting peace if
extreme poverty and deprivation are not adequately
addressed 4 and that was true even before the
earthquake. Real stability will prevail only if the
window of opportunity created by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti is seized to strengthen
institutions and to improve the living conditions of the
Haitian people. This will require deep involvement of
various bodies dealing with economic and social
matters, as well as of the international financial
institutions, all under appropriate coordination by the
United Nations.

Guinea-Bissau presents another situation in
which poverty and institutional instability hamper
peace. The reforms needed by that country, especially
reform of its armed forces, will require courageous
decisions on the part of its authorities. But it cannot
dispense with substantial international cooperation.
And in order to achieve these combined goals, proper
attention by the Security Council may be needed.

Interaction with other United Nations bodies and
the ability to cope with complex situations are
indispensable to make the Security Council more
effective. But that is not enough. It needs to be more
representative and legitimate. Its working methods
must become more transparent. Security issues that
concern the whole of the international community
cannot be dealt with as the private domain of a limited
number of Powers.

Improving the effectiveness of the Security
Council depends also on the role of non-permanent
members. They must fully participate in the decision-
making process. Non-permanent members can bring a
diversity of views and regional experiences to the
Council. It is not appropriate to call upon them only to
ratify decisions already taken by the permanent
members.

It is also impossible to discuss the Council's
effectiveness without addressing the question of the
veto. We are realistic. We are not proposing to abolish
the veto. However, imaginative formulas that make its
use more difficult or encourage self-restraint are
necessary.

All of the measures I have set out - a holistic
approach to crises, the reform of the Council's
composition, increasing the role of the non-permanent
members and restraining the use of the veto - should
contribute to making the international community more
engaged in the Council's decisions.

Finally, let me say a word on sanctions.
Sanctions, in particular economic sanctions, are
foreseen in the United Nations Charter for special
intractable situations. Therefore, there should be
nothing illegitimate about them in principle. But, more
often than not, the imposition of sanctions brings about
unintended effects and has a negative impact on the
civilian population, especially on its more vulnerable
sectors. So, sanctions constitute an instrument to be
used with great caution and only when all avenues of
dialogue and understanding have been exhausted.
