The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the Security Council.

I thank the Secretary-General, in my capacity as
President of the Security Council, for the frankness,
clarity and sense of urgency with which he set forth his
thinking, as well as that of his envoys, on the situation
in the Middle East. One thing that we all share with

him is that we repudiate Violence - it resolves
nothing. We regret the vicious circle and spiral of
aggression and death in the Middle East - in

S/PV.4474

 

Palestine, Israel and the occupied territories. We share
his View that the situation is intolerable and entails
serious risks for international security. We deplore the
suffering of the civilian population, the loss of human
life and the destruction. All of us want to do something
to bring it to an end. We support the United Nations
presence in the conflict scenario. We support the
efforts of the Secretary-General, and we are concerned
about the safety of personnel deployed throughout the
region. The concern and dedication that the Secretary-
General brings to his work does honour to the
Organization.

This meeting, at which we heard from the
Secretary-General about the serious situation in the
Middle East, is part of a process. Not without
difficulty, the members of the Security Council reached
agreement on holding periodic consultations as to the
situation in the Middle East, based upon information
and points of View afforded us by the Secretariat. We
have already met informally on two occasions. We are
now meeting publicly, as a preamble to the debate that
we have agreed to hold shortly.

That is why the members of the Council have
preferred not to speak on the situation in Palestine or
on the role that the Security Council might play. We
look forward to that debate. The effort that we can
make to contribute to peace, to resolve the conflict and
to halt the bloodshed will be an essential part of our
deliberations. The delegation of Palestine and the
Group of Arab States have asked us urgently to

convene a meeting to discuss and consider their
proposals. We will do so as soon as those proposals are
ready.

Meanwhile, the members of the Council welcome
the words of the Secretary-General. We shall analyse
his opinions and consider his suggestions. On that
basis, and in consultation with our capitals, we shall
prepare to argue our positions and, above all, to
propose new initiatives. We will make a great effort to
resolve our differences. We all want to give the
Organization and the Security Council the opportunity
to become part of the solution as of today.

As we explore, together with the Secretary-
General, new ways for the United Nations to become
active in the Middle East, we share the conviction of
the Secretary-General and of Secretariat officials that
essential elements of peace-building are the political
will of the parties, confidence-building between them,
prudence and mutual consideration. Without these, any
international effort will prove futile. In doing our
utmost to achieve such understanding, we will be
living up to our own responsibilities and fulfilling our
Organization's mandate.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I intend to adjourn
the meeting now and will convene the next meeting on
this item after further consultations with members of
the Security Council.

The meeting rose at 3.30 pm.
