Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
meeting on the Central African region. Thanks also go
to Mr. Kalomoh for presenting the interim report of the
multidisciplinary assessment mission to the Central
African subregion (S/2003/1077), which took place in
June.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the representative of Italy,
speaking on behalf of the European Union. Therefore, I
shall confine myself to a few brief additional
comments.

We agree with the analysis made in the report
regarding identification of the principal challenges
faced by the region. The challenges to peace and
security, the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, the lack of development, HIV/AIDS, the
human rights situation and the precariousness of the
humanitarian situation are the most urgent of those
challenges. A comprehensive and effective response to
all of those issues requires an integrated subregional
approach.

In that connection, we support the review of the
United Nations programmes in the region, mentioned
in the report's introduction, as a way to improve the
consistency and effectiveness of the Organization's
activities in Central Africa. We hope to receive
subsequent information from the Secretariat on that
point. We agree with the report that the United Nations
has structures in the region at its disposal, and
therefore it is preferable to make effective and
coordinated use of the existing structures before
considering the possibility of establishing new ones.

I shall refer briefly to a number of the elements
identified in the report of the Secretary-General -
specifically, some of the principal challenges to peace
and security; the effective implementation of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes that take the subregional dimension into
account; the importance of the reform of security
structures; the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons; and finally, the issue of human rights.

With regard to the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants, it is essential that
national programmes be strengthened through
initiatives at the subregional level. Therefore, we are
pleased to observe that progress has been made in
implementing the Multicountry Demobilization and
Reintegration Programme in the Great Lakes region for
the period 2002-2006. At the same time, we believe the
report of the Secretary-General contains interesting
recommendations concerning the possible
establishment of joint DDR programmes in border
zones and with respect to an integrated approach - at
the level of the whole United Nations system and in
cooperation with other humanitarian and development
agencies - aimed at facing the challenges of DDR.

Secondly, with regard to security sector reform
and the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
we again emphasize the importance of a subregional
approach in achieving effective security reform and
reducing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and the movement of armed elements among
the countries of the region.

Finally, regarding the human rights situation, the
report contains a series of recommendations that merit
consideration, including, for example, those concerning
the fight against impunity and the link between reform
of the judicial system and human rights issues.

