The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Malaysia.

I join other members in thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his comprehensive
and extremely useful briefing. We agree that there have
been a number of significant developments in Kosovo
since the Council last considered this agenda item, in
mid-July.

We are gratified that the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) have made serious efforts to lay a
solid foundation for democratic self-government in
Kosovo in line with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). We reaffirm our strong support for the ongoing
efforts of Mr. Kouchner and UNMIK, as well as those
of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and other international
organizations actively engaged in Kosovo, and express
our appreciation for the achievements made thus far. In
particular, we note with satisfaction the continuing
close and constructive cooperation between UNMIK
and KFOR, the two main pillars of international
support for Kosovo in the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).

We further note that a number of important
regulations have been signed into law, and that
Kosovo's interim democratic institutions continue to be
consolidated. We are pleased to see the relatively
smooth functioning of the Joint Interim Administrative
Structure, the Interim Administrative Council and the
Kosovo Transitional Council. Efforts are also being
made to further enhance the Kosovo Protection Corps.
We once again urge the active participation of the Serb
community in those joint administrative organs.

We welcome the successful conclusion of the
registration process on 19 July in preparation for the
municipal elections that have now been set for
Saturday, 28 October 2000. We look forward to the
successful conduct of the elections, which will lay a
viable foundation for the future of Kosovo. We had
urged the participation of all communities in the
registration process. We regret the continued boycott
by the Kosovo Serb community, which is clearly not in
their interests. It isolates and marginalizes that
community from the international efforts to establish
democracy and multi-ethnicity in that territory.

We are deeply dismayed at the continuing acts of
violence in Kosovo, whether ethnically or politically
motivated. We deplore those acts, which overshadow
the progress made in the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999). Clearly, those acts are the work of
irresponsible elements who are out to sabotage the
process. The bomb attack at Pristina last Friday on the
building of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) was a clear
manifestation of this. We are also alarmed by the
reported increase in attacks and acts of harassment
against UNMIK and KFOR personnel.

All of those acts must be condemned. Certainly
the continued precarious security situation, such as that
which exists in northern Mitrovica and in other parts of
Kosovo, is a matter of continuing concern to the
international community. We continue to support the
ongoing efforts by both UNMIK and KFOR to tackle
the security problem. While the two missions still need
the strong and continued support of the international
community, their success will ultimately depend on the
strong commitment, political will and full cooperation
of all leaders of Kosovo's different ethnic
communities. The leaders, and people at every level,
should constructively play their part to fight extremism
and promote ethnic civility and coexistence.

We recall the signing of joint declarations by
leaders of different ethnic communities in Pristina and
anilane in June, as well as the landmark agreement
called the "pact against violence" following the
conference at Airlie House, in Virginia, late last month.
These important developments in the context of inter-
ethnic relations should be seriously followed up with
the involvement of communities at the village level.

The issues of missing persons and continued
detentions of Kosovo Albanians in jails in Serbia
remain matters of serious concern to the international
community. We support the ongoing work of the
Victim Recovery and Identification Commission of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia to deal with the issue of missing persons.
We earnestly hope that concrete actions will be taken in
that regard.

We have repeatedly talked in the past of the need
for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces to
cooperate with UNMIK in resolving this problem in a
humane and responsible manner. The lives of
thousands of human beings, those in detention as well
as their relatives in Kosovo, must not be exploited for
political reasons.

Many members of the Council, including
Malaysia, had strongly supported the proposed
appointment of a special envoy for missing persons,
detainees and prisoners. We would appreciate it if
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi can update the
Council on this important proposal. We would also
appreciate hearing any information that he may have on
the ongoing work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia with respect to its
forensic activities and indictment of perpetrators of war
crimes in Kosovo.

In conclusion, my delegation appreciates the
explanation given by Mr. Annabi on the decisions
taken by UNMIK, in close coordination with KFOR, to
assume responsibility for the smelter and improve
management of the Trepca complex in northern
Mitrovica for reasons of environmental and economic
viability of this important industry to Kosovo.

We support the decision taken by UNMIK as an
appropriate and necessary measure. We should note the
assurances given by UNMIK that workers employed at
the smelter will not lose their jobs. To my delegation,
this is proof enough that the action taken was prompted
by the reasons given by UNMIK and by no other
reason. We regret the way the issue has been
politicized.

Finally, we join other Council members who
expressed concern at the detention of United Kingdom
and Canadian nationals who were involved in
important international activities in Kosovo.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Annabi to
respond to comments and questions raised.

