Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his detailed briefing
on developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
particular on the conduct of the general elections held
on 11 November. The smooth conduct of these
elections and the fact that they proceeded without
incident demonstrate the level of engagement of the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and their
commitment to the development of their country. We
see these elections as a positive step forward for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the further
consolidation of democracy.

Every effort must now be made to focus on the
building of the country and its institutions and on
creating a society based on peaceful, multi-ethnic
coexistence. Those in authority must bear this in mind
in addition to the focus on the imperatives of economic
reconstruction and on sustained economic and social
development.

On 26 October, the High Representative, Mr.
Wolfgang Petritsch, briefed the Council. At that time,
my delegation mentioned a number of priority areas
which we believe are of critical importance to the
process under way in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
points which we stressed in that briefing remain
relevant, particularly in the light of the recent general
elections. Taken together with the recent positive
political developments in the region, they augur well
for the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We maintain that the following must be taken into
consideration as the various administrations take up
their duties: first, the full implementation of the New
York Declaration; secondly, the return of refugees and
further work on refugee-related matters, including
documentation, employment, education, pensions and
access to utilities; thirdly, judicial reform, which we
see as critical for the creation of a democratic society;
fourthly, the creation of a multi-ethnic society with
multi-ethnic institutions; fifthly, the importance to the
peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina of the
activities related to the Stability Pact for South-Eastern
Europe, which provides a broad regional framework for
further progress, and in this regard, we emphasize the
need for continued international support for institution-
building in Bosnia and Herzegovina; and last but by no
means least, the full involvement of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in charting their own future.

My delegation hopes that the outcome of the
recent general elections will serve as a springboard for
the consolidation of the gains made over recent years
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and will ensure its
functioning as an integrated and multi-ethnic State.

