President Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
greet all members of the Security Council and your
presidency, Sir, and we thank you for having given us
this opportunity to speak.

The Security Council knows how much the
Somali people are suffering from terrorist groups. The
Somali Government has, as far as possible, tried to
reconcile with those groups. However, the support that
they receive from the Eritrean regime has prevented
reconciliation.

The Council is also aware of our previous
relations with President Afwerki. We know that he has
no desire to promote calm in the region until he has
fulfilled his own expectations and ambitions.
Al-Shabaab and Al-Qaida receive political, logistical
and financial support from the Eritrean Government.
Such support arrives by sea and air. It is known that
Hassan Dahir Aweys himself was in Asmara. He then
moved to Somalia by aeroplane. That shows that the
Eritrean regime has the ability to deliver assistance that
is used by Al-Shabaab directly from Asmara to
Somalia. It is also well known that Somalia has no
direct borders with Eritrea, and has not had bad
relations with Eritrea in the past. In the current
circumstances, however, we are suffering from the
activities of Al-Shabaab and Al-Qaida and of those
providing them with material support from Eritrea. I
recall that, on 22 May 2009, Hassan Dahir Aweys
himself took to the media to thank the Republic of
Eritrea for its direct support.

The Afwerki regime is the only one that does not
recognize this Government. The Eritrean Minister of
information has declared that he has no objection to
this Government. We have tried to resolve our
problems with Eritrea by reaching out to some of its
friends, including the late Muammar Al-Qadhafi, who
called on Eritrea repeatedly to leave Somalia alone and
to encourage Al-Shabaab and Hassan Dahir Awey's
group to seek reconciliation with the Government so
that the situation can calm down. His appeal was
explicitly rejected. We have also sought to meet with
Eritrea in the context of a conference of the Sahel
countries, but Eritrea failed to attend.

When I was elected in 2009, I contacted
Muammar Al-Qadhafi and asked him to mediate in
order to suppress incipient problems and to convince
the President of Eritrea not to intervene in my country.
Mr. Al-Qadhafi informed me that his efforts had been
3
rebuffed, and that the Eritrean President told him
clearly that reconciliation with my country was
impossible. Furthermore, our embassies in Kenya and
elsewhere became aware of certain financial
transactions and that military advisers were being
dispatched frequently to Somalia to train terrorist
elements. They provided these elements with maps and
logistical support, and engaged in attacks on the
Transitional Federal Government and the African
Union forces in my country.

Somalia has no problem whatsoever with Eritrea,
but the Eritrean regime insists on terrorizing my
people. We have repeatedly tried to overcome the
problem through diplomacy and dialogue, which have
been rejected. I do not believe that any State in the
world besides Eritrea has declared its support for those
terrorist organizations. We truly regret the plight of the
Eritrean people, but the interests of my country and our
neighbours are being harmed by the Eritrean regime.
We have therefore joined others in this gathering today,
despite the fact that members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development do not usually meet in the
absence of a member unless the situation is especially
dire. It is my hope that a strong decision will now be
taken against the Eritrean regime.

