Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to express my satisfaction and
that of the delegation of Gabon at seeing you, Sir, preside
over this meeting of the Security Council on Angola, a
country that has suffered through almost 30 years of war.

 

Your presence here at this Council meeting attests to the
importance that you and your country, Canada, attach to the
restoration of peace and security in Angola. I should like
also to thank your predecessor, Mr. Anwarul Karim
Chowdhury, the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
for his excellent work as President last month.
The Gabonese authorities have long been greatly
concerned over the conflict situation in the sister Republic
of Angola. In 1988 and 1989, President Omar Bongo
himself deployed every effort in support of peace and
national reconciliation in Angola. At that time, he and his
peers - Mr. Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, Mr. Kenneth
Kaunda of Zambia, Mr. Dos Santos of Angola, Mr. Sassou
Nguesso of Congo, the late Mr. Mobutu of the former
Zaire, Mr. Chissano of Mozambique and Mr. Pinto da
Costa of Sao Tome and Principe - were seeking together
a solution to the Angolan conflict.

In that spirit, and in seeking implementation of the
Bicesse peace Accords, the Lusaka Protocol and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the President of the
Republic of Angola, Mr. Jose Eduardo dos Santos, and Mr.
Jonas Savimbi met on 10 August 1995 in Franceville and
then on 1 March 1996 in Libreville. Those two meetings
were organized following agreement with the Angolan
authorities and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General at the time, the late Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye.
May his soul rest in peace.

Following UNITA's refusal to comply with the
commitments entered into, including those in the Lusaka
Protocol, the Gabonese and Angolan authorities agreed to
work together closely to encourage UNITA to comply with
its obligations under all relevant agreements.

I should also like to recall that, within the context of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, in 1993 a non-
aggression pact was signed among countries of the
subregion. Under the terms of that pact, and as a matter of
principle, Gabon does not allow or encourage any
destabilizing actions against other States, least of all from
its own territory.

It is thus clear that Gabon has always supported, and
will continue to support, the efforts of the Government of
Angola to restore a lasting peace there.

The report of the Panel of Experts of 10 March 2000,
contained in document S/2000/203, refers to sanctions
violations in the area of weapons, military equipment,
diamonds, UNITA's material and financial assets and
petroleum and petroleum products, as well as travel and
representation abroad by UNITA members.

According to the Panel of Experts, Gabon delivered
150,000 litres of fuel to UNITA, aircraft coming from
UNITA-controlled areas often refuelled in Libreville
before returning to Eastern Europe, and UNITA had
"unofficial" representation in Gabon, headed by a certain
Francisco Camalata who was active on UNITA's behalf
but kept a low profile.

Following the publication of the report of the Panel
of Experts on 15 March 2000, upon instructions from my
Government, I sent a letter to the President of the
Security Council and the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 864 (1993). In that letter, we requested
information about, for example, the precise dates and the
type and registration of the aircraft in question. We also
inquired by what means - by air or by sea- the
150,000 litres of fuel were supposedly delivered to
UNITA, given that the State of Gabon does not have such
transport facilities available to it.

It is regrettable that the Panel of Experts, which
supposedly had information about the accusations made
against us - the delivery of 150,000 litres of fuel to
UNITA, the refuelling of aircraft coming from UNITA-
controlled areas and the hosting in Gabon of an unofficial
UNITA representative - not only failed to provide any
tangible evidence, but did not even reply to our letter.

It is also regrettable that the Panel of Experts did not
take the trouble to visit Gabon. According to paragraph
6 (a) of resolution 1237 (1999), which was adopted by
the Security Council under the Gabonese presidency, the
mandate of the Panel of Experts is

"To collect information and investigate reports,
including through visits to the countries concerned,
relating to the violation of the measures imposed
against UNITA".

Is it sufficient for the Security Council or its
committees simply to make a statement of fact without
providing any evidence or for the parties accused to be
held responsible for the actions alleged? Were such a
practice to continue, would it not risk destroying the
credibility and authority of this important United Nations
body? Does not this represent a lack of transparency?

 

Gabon has nothing to be ashamed of. Nevertheless, we
carried out initial investigations, working with the Angolan
Embassy in Libreville, in an attempt to locate
Mr. Francisco Camalata. Our initial investigations have not
been conclusive, but we shall continue to pursue them. My
Government has sent the Council a detailed report to this
effect. Pursuant to paragraph 6 (a) of resolution
1237 (1999), we would like to be able to count on the
cooperation of the Panel of Experts in helping us to identify
those who might be responsible for such actions, in case we
have missed them, so that we can not only punish those
responsible, but prevent any recurrence of such actions.

