Mr. Boulakhov (spoke in Russian): First, allow
me to thank the organizers of today's debate. We
believe that this discussion is of the greatest
importance and significance because it aims, above all,
at strengthening the coordinating role of the United
Nations in stabilization processes and in the
organization of interaction with regional organizations.
There are several points I cannot fail to mention.

As a regional organization, the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) is undertaking concrete steps
for the settlement of conflicts existing in the territory
of its member States. Those activities are founded on a
clear and comprehensive basis of law, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. For
us, that chapter is the foundation for interaction and for
the division of labour between the United Nations and
our regional organization. The legal basis of conflict
settlement within the framework of the CIS also
includes the Charter of our organization. The CIS
possesses another document of relevance, the Concept
for prevention and settlement of conflicts in the
territory of States members of the CIS, which was
adopted by our countries' leadership in 1996.

The framework of the Concept relates to the
generalized, unfortunate experience we in the CIS have
had in conflict prevention and settlement - as is well
known to the participants in this debate - following
the collapse of the Soviet Union and the formation in
its political space of newly independent States. During
the process of the formation and development of those
States, long-latent conflicts became armed
confrontations. That was especially dramatic in the
Republics of Tajikistan, Georgia and Moldova, as well
as in the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan in
Nagorny Karabakh.

The CIS is still establishing a system for the
prevention and settlement of conflicts, post-conflict
peace-building and the strengthening of stabilization
processes. Nevertheless, through the efforts of the CIS
countries - first and foremost those of the Russian
Federation - and in interaction with, and with the
assistance of, the relevant bodies of the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, all armed conflicts existing in the territory of
the CIS have entered the stage of political dialogue and
the search for compromise and solutions.

We must note in particular the outstanding
example - unfortunately not very characteristic of the
situation at the end of the twentieth century - of
United Nations interaction with interested States and
the CIS in the settlement of the bloody conflict in
Tajikistan. I would recall that a full settlement of the
conflict in Tajikistan was reached in 2000; the CIS
peacekeeping forces were disbanded, and the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan ceased its
activities, having played a significant role in the inter-
Tajik settlement. At the present time, the next stage of
post-conflict peace-building is under way, and the CIS
is in working contact with the United Nations and its
representatives in Tajikistan.

Many participants in today's debate have rightly
noted that stabilization is not limited to the post-
conflict situation. Stabilization processes include a
considerably broader area of activity, including
combating terrorism, crime, the drug trade and drug
production, illegal financial flows and many other
elements. In many of those areas, the States of the CIS
are successfully developing their cooperation. In
particular, we have undertaken specific steps for the
development of interaction with the United Nations
system. In 2002, at a meeting of the Council of the
Heads of the State of the CIS, a report was presented
by the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Antonio Maria Costa. The
Presidents of the CIS countries acknowledged the
positive experience of interaction between the CIS and
the Office on Drugs and Crime and suggested that it
continue.

Allow me next to put forward a few proposals for
the strengthening of interaction, conflict prevention
and post-conflict peace-building. As I have already
noted, the CIS has drawn up a Concept for settling
conflicts on the territory of, and between members of,
the CIS. We understand that other international
organizations have prepared and are implementing such
documents as well. I believe it would be useful to
undertake, under United Nations auspices, a
comparative analysis of such documents so that
regional organizations can exchange experiences and
perhaps improve their legal basis for such activities.

With respect to interaction between the CIS and
the United Nations, I would like to make a proposal
regarding peacekeeping efforts conducted in the
territory of the CIS. While retaining, of course, the
international elements of United Nations missions in
conflict zones within the CIS, in our view, those
missions should offer a significant role to, and be
composed in large part by, personnel from the CIS
States that are not participants in the conflict or
neighbours of parties to the conflict. In this, we can
make use of the mechanisms and experience of the CIS
to avoid creating parallel missions or duplicating
efforts. To do so would be an excellent thing.

We believe that it is very important for the United
Nations, at least partially, to provide material and
financial support for peacekeeping operations in those
regions where operations are being carried out under
the United Nations Charter by forces of regional
organizations. That particularly affects the CIS, where
financial and material resources for peacekeeping
operations have been virtually shouldered by one
country, the Russian Federation, since the other States
of the CIS are not in a position to provide financing for
peacekeeping activities.

It is not coincidence that I raised the issue of
drugs, as the drug trade and drug addiction pose a
threat to all humankind. As well, they have a great
impact on the creation and continuation of conflict
situations in various regions and hinder stabilization
efforts. There is a need to take joint action to locate
hotbeds of drug production and to close the channels of
drug processing and circulation. In that, the United
Nations could provide effective financial assistance
and support to regional organizations to coordinate
their efforts in that campaign.

Also of great use would be seminars and
conferences held under United Nations auspices, not
only for high-level officials but also for specialists
directly involved in peacekeeping and peace-building
issues.

I have listened carefully and with great interest to
the statements of colleagues from other regional
organizations. I can say that for me this was a unique
exchange of experiences. That in itself constitutes a
genuinely positive outcome of today's debate.

