Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I should like at the outset to sincerely thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing and for the
work that he and his team are doing. I should like also
to welcome the presence here today of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia.

As this is my first statement on this item as a member
of the Council, I should like to underscore a number of
points that are of vital importance to my country.

Belgium sees no option other than a negotiated

solution based on the coexistence of two States, with
the city of Jerusalem as their future capital, in line with
agreed international parameters, all of which must be
respected. International law and the relevant Council
resolutions must be the basis for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace plan. Belgium believes that all
credible diplomatic initiatives must be based on these
parameters, which enjoy international consensus.

My statement today will focus on international
efforts to facilitate the two-State solution - the only
solution that could realize in a lasting manner the
legitimate aspirations of both Israelis and Palestinians.
However, Belgium believes that such a solution will
requires a more peaceful international and regional
environment - a far cry from the current one given the
developments that have taken place recently, on which
Belgium and the other members of the Security Council
will have to express their views shortly.

The year 2018 reaffirmed the trend that started in
2017 of a relentless pursuit of the settlement policy,
including in the heart of the West Bank, in areas
that are strategic to the territorial continuity of a
future Palestinian State. Belgium is also concerned
about the fact that ongoing settlement activity on
the ground is accompanied by legislative initiatives
aimed at facilitating further such activity. In line with
resolution 2334 (2016), we are resolutely opposed to
that settlement policy and to the measures taken in this
context, including forced displacement, evictions and
demolitions, which also increased in 2018, in particular
in East Jerusalem.

Settlement activity is illegal in the eyes of
international law, undermines the establishment of the
trust necessary to any peace process and contributes
to fuelling tensions. We urge the Israeli authorities
to reconsider and to rescind their decisions on that
issue. Furthermore, we note with concern that there
has been an increase in the use of violence not only
by settlers, but also against them. We reiterate our
firm condemnation of all use of violence, regardless of
the perpetrators. These developments bring us closer
to a point of no return for the two-State solution; the
only diminish the already fragile prospects for peace
between the two parties.

The situation in the Gaza Strip continues to
command our full attention. Demonstrations intensified
in recent weeks, with violent incidents. While we

recognize the right of Israel to ensure its own security,
we condemn the disproportionate and indiscriminate
use of force. We urge Israel to respect the right of the
Palestinians to demonstrate peacefully and to abide by
its legal obligations to protect civilians.

However, irresponsibly inciting the inhabitants
of Gaza to cross the perimeter fence into Israel and
cause damage cannot be tolerated either. We condemn
all acts of provocation and incitement to violence.
Demonstrations must remain strictly non-violent and
not be exploited for other purposes. We firmly condemn
the rocket fire towards Israeli territory and urge all
stakeholders to demonstrate restraint in order to avert a
fresh cycle of violence.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to the
fate of the most vulnerable in this conflict. In 2018,
57 children were killed, most of them in the context
of the Great March of Return in Gaza. In no case
did there seem to be any imminent threat that could
have justified the use of live fire. We are concerned
by this number, which is much higher than in 2017.
Belgium urges Israeli leaders to strengthen oversight
and accountability mechanisms, which should include
in-depth, independent investigations into each case
involving the death ofa child.

The humanitarian and socioeconomic situation in
the Gaza Strip must be urgently improved. We support
the Special Coordinator's efforts to that end as well as
the activities of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

But a humanitarian response alone is not enough;
a fundamental change in the situation in Gaza is
necessary, one that would include a lifting of the
blockade and the full opening of crossing points, while
taking into consideration Israel's legitimate concerns
regarding its own security. A political solution to the
crisis also requires that control of the territory be
returned to the Palestinian Authority.

We deplore the fact that intra-Palestinian
reconciliation talks appear to be deadlocked and
urge all parties to invest in dialogue and, to that end,
commend the efforts made by Egypt. We take note of
the dissolution of the Palestinian Legislative Council
and express our concern at this development, since
it is an elected body of the Palestinian Authority. We
encourage Palestinian leaders to strive to build strong,
inclusive, responsible and democratic institutions that
are based on respect for the rule of law and human
rights. We urge the Palestinian Authority to work
towards credible democratic elections.

I would like to conclude by repeating the fact that
there can be no alternative to a two-State solution.
A just and lasting peace can be realized only by
responding to the legitimate aspirations of all the
parties. Recent developments clearly show that the
current situation is untenable. It is no longer the status
quo. It is deteriorating and creating instability that the
region definitely does not need. We should continue
to work on the issue together with our Palestinian and
Israeli friends.

