Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court for the sixteenth report to the Security Council
and for today's briefing.

The International Criminal Court is meant to
make an important contribution to the effort to bring
to justice perpetrators of the most serious crimes
committed during the conflict in Darfur. Its efforts in
that area complement the activities of national judicial
institutions in the matter of fighting impunity.

The Court is called on to objectively assess
unlawful actions by all parties involved in a situation.
Its reputation, and consequently States' relations with
it, depend on how effectively it is able to do that. In
the context of Darfur, that means that a scrupulous
and impartial investigation must be carried out both in
cases involving Sudanese officials and those involving
leaders of insurgent groups that have committed serious
violations meriting the attention of the Court. We are
pleased with the balanced approach of the Prosecutor
in that regard.

In the seven years since the Council adopted
resolution 1593 (2005), the International Criminal
Court has achieved clear results in investigations of
Sudanese cases. In some cases it has reached the stage
when further proceedings are not possible without
the accused appearing personally in The Hague. That
situation requires that thought be given to the Court's
next steps and that new approaches to the issue of
fighting impunity be explored. In that context, we note
the importance of the implementation by States of their
relevant obligations regarding cooperation with the
Court, while complying with the norms of international
law in the matter of the immunity of senior State
officials.

We welcome the Prosecutor's steps to bring to
justice persons who committed the attacks against
African Union peacekeepers in Haskanita in 2007.
Considerable work has been put into the case of the
insurgent leaders Banda and Jerbo. It is important not
to lose momentum in those cases and to avoid them
going on too long for reasons that are not objective. We
trust that in administering justice in matters relating to
Darfur, the Court will continue to work harmoniously
with the process of post-conflict recovery.

