Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation did not prevent the
adoption of resolution 2252 (2015), on the extension
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. Our
decision was informed by the need to continue active
international efforts to find a peaceful settlement
to the armed conflict and by our understanding of
the important role of the Mission in that process.
Nevertheless, we could not vote in favour of that
document because, as was the case with resolution 2241
(2015), its sponsors did not take into consideration a
number of serious concerns on the part of the Russian
delegation and some other Council delegations.

In particular, we believe that the wording
formulated as an ultimatum with regard to sanctions
against South Sudan is counterproductive. That has
no place in this resolution, whose main purpose is
to extend the mandate of this peacekeeping Mission
and strengthen it with the task of assisting the peace
process - and all the more so given the progress made
in resolving the conflict, including the overall decrease
in the intensity of hostilities, the withdrawal of the
Ugandan troops from South Sudan, the withdrawal of
Government troops from Juba and the agreement on the
est in the capital and other cities of the joint integrated
police. Moreover, we reject in principle situations in
which some colleagues prefer to arbitrarily use Council
sanctions instead of holding a serious political and
diplomatic discussion.

Similarly, we cannot agree with the language
pertaining to the intention of the Security Council to
evaluate the work of the future hybrid court in South
Sudan, for, in line with the peace agreement and the
decisions of the African Union, the establishment and
work of that judicial body is the exclusive purview of
the African Union Commission.

Some Council delegations have already warned on a
number of occasions of the unacceptability of attempts
to deploy unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) over the
objections of the Government of South Sudan. As we
have seen in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
added value of using UAVs is in doubt.

Moreover, there are new, problematic provisions
in the text, including an arbitrary interpretation of
violations of international humanitarian law and the
devaluation of the United Nations guiding principles
with regard to emergency humanitarian assistance.

We also have serious questions with regard to the
working methods used by some of our colleagues in the
Security Council, who abuse the practice of penholding
by inconsiderately pushing through their national
priorities and neglecting the red lines drawn by other
delegations. That undermines Council unity and could
have a negative impact on the effectiveness of its work.

