Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): Mr. President, I would
like to begin by congratulating you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August. Your presence here underscores the
important role that Colombia has been playing in
leading the international effort to meet the challenge of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. Your
initiative in arranging today's debate is timely, as this
meeting takes place against the backdrop of the
recently concluded United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. I must mention here that we had an
opportunity to work very closely with your delegation
before and during the Conference, and I can assure you
that we will work very closely with your delegation
even as we pursue its follow-up.

The Conference adopted a Programme of Action
which clearly identifies the responsibilities of States at
the national, regional and global levels. The contents of
the Programme of Action are now being analysed and
examined by Member States for the requisite follow-up
measures on their part.

We welcome this opportunity which you have
provided us, Mr. President, by convening today's
meeting to examine how the Security Council can play
its role in addressing the problem of small arms.

First of all, I must compliment you,
Mr. President, for encapsulating nearly 40 statements
in today's meeting. We appreciate your patience. In
contrast, nearly 150 statements were made during the
three or four days of general debate in the Conference.
All these statements should give us enough food for
thought and soul searching, certainly not ammunition
to create smoke screens to cover the realities.

Undoubtedly, the easy availability of small arms
and light weapons has exacerbated the situation in
many trouble spots around the world. The abundance
of small arms in conflict situations has also made
United Nations peacekeeping efforts more difficult and
hazardous. Indeed, disarmament of warring factions is
increasingly becoming a linchpin of peacekeeping
operations. Pakistan, as a major participant in United
Nations peacekeeping efforts, is playing its part in
implementing such programmes in conflict areas,
particularly, if I may mention, in Sierra Leone.

While disarmament programmes and restrictions
on the flow of illicit arms help to address the problem,
they are not the real and definitive solution. Conflicts
attract arms, whether legal or illegal. For every
demand, there is a commensurate supply - and this is
applicable to every commodity, including arms. Arms
will continue to find their way to wherever conflicts
exist. The flow of arms, illicit or otherwise, cannot be
completely stemmed. What can be controlled, however,
or resolved or even prevented, is not the flow of arms,
but the conflicts themselves. That is where the role of
the Security Council lies, and where the primary
responsibility of the Council lies. Let there be no
detraction from the Charter obligations which this body
has towards the pacific settlement of disputes and the
prevention of armed conflicts. As the old adage goes,
an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.

Mr. President, you have raised some valid points
in your letter of 25 July which was circulated as a
document of the Security Council. We agree that the
accumulation and circulation of and the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons pose a global threat to
peace and security. Addressing this issue, however, is
the responsibility of Member States in accordance with
the provisions of the Programme of Action adopted by
the recent Conference. The Security Council, for its
part, must play its role as a facilitator of that process
by focusing on its own Charter obligations. The
Council's concern should not be so much with the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons as with
conflict prevention and dispute resolution. The Council
must not allow a situation to arise in the first place that
entails the use of arms, small or big, or their
proliferation.

In fact, somebody once asked Einstein, ifI may
recall, what weapons would be used in a third world
war. He said that he did not know what would be used
in a third world war, but he knew that only rocks and
stones would be used in the fourth world war. So,
whatever it may be, even rocks can become a means to
kill each other. Therefore, the best thing is to prevent
the situations that necessitate men killing each other.
That is the imperative.

It is not the ready availability of small arms alone
which contributes to the intensification of armed
conflicts and to increased levels of violence. A culture
of peace cannot be created simply by eradicating small
arms and light weapons. The problem is not so much
the weapons; it is the conflicts themselves. As long as
armed conflicts continue to afflict our planet, the
means of violence will always be available. Trying to
deal with the means of violence is merely to put on a
bandage rather than going into the malaise and treating
the disease.

In many cases, violence is generated by denial of
justice, and conflicts intensify because of the denial of
the inalienable right of self-determination and the
continuation of foreign occupation. It is this and not
the easy access to small arms which is an impediment
to negotiations and the realization of lasting peace.
Nobody can deny legitimacy to freedom struggles
wherever they are waged and with whatever means
they are waged. People do and will fight back when
their homeland is occupied and when their intrinsic
rights are trampled. The examples of Kashmir and
Palestine are clear for all to see. The Council's
obligations in such cases are clear: to implement its
own resolutions and to take the necessary steps to
resolve disputes and restore peace, particularly by
implementing its own resolutions and decisions. There
can be no deviation from this basic requirement.

We fully share your View, Mr. President, that the
initiatives taken to address the problem of small arms
lie outside the competence of the Security Council. You
have clearly defined the parameters of today's meeting
by acknowledging that this public debate is not meant
to establish new definitions or understandings on the
question of small arms, nor is it to introduce new
norms and codes of conduct. This is a subject on which
efforts at the global, regional, subregional and national
levels are already in progress.

In our view, the first objective stipulated in your
document, which is follow-up action by the Council on
the question of small arms, can begin to be addressed
through decisive actions by the Council on conflict
prevention. The Council can also address the second
objective by its fulfilling its obligation to resolve
disputes in all conflicts, without exception or
selectivity. Chapter VI of the Charter provides the
framework.

The Security Council is obliged not only to keep
peace, but also to make peace, to build peace. The third
objective, regarding the active participation of States,
has already been addressed at length in the recent
Conference. Member States are fully cognizant of their
responsibilities, and any further debate on this issue
will not add anything of value. In this regard, the
elements identified in your document as issues for
consideration therefore also become somewhat
redundant. What remains here, however, is the need to
underscore the Security Council's Charter obligations.

We believe that the best contribution the Council
could make would be to fulfil its Charter obligations on
preventing armed conflicts and resolving disputes. The
only answer to all the questions raised in your
document is for this world body to eliminate the root
causes of conflicts, resolve disputes, make and build
peace. In addition, necessary concerted action has to be
taken to promote sustainable development and
economic well-being in all parts of the world. Peace
and development are inextricably linked.
The Security Council's mandate is clearly
defined. While there may be an urge in the Council to
expand its role in all directions, it must not lose sight
of its basic functions and obligations. Trying to take on
tasks beyond the Council's mandate may be an
ambitious exercise; it is also self-defeating. There is a
wise ancient saying that he who tries to do everything
ends up doing nothing.

That is why the Council must not lose sight of,
nor indeed its focus on, its Charter obligations and
must try to fulfil them completely and without
selectivity. If the Council wants to make a genuine
contribution to the question of small arms, then it must
focus on the areas that are directly within its
competence and jurisdiction. These are, I repeat at the
risk of repetition, the peaceful resolution of disputes
and the prevention of armed conflicts. We need a
resolute but non-discriminatory approach rather than
mere rhetoric through public debates.

Pakistan is fully cognizant of its obligations
under the Programme of Action adopted by the recent
Small Arms Conference. All Member States are
conscious of their responsibilities. The question is
whether the Security Council is willing and able to
play its role in accordance with its obligations, as
enshrined in the Charter. This is where the
effectiveness and the credibility of the Council, and
that of the United Nations, will be tested. The only way
for the Council to tackle the issue of the supply of
small arms is to end the demand for them by preventing
conflicts and resolving disputes. The Council will,
therefore, do justice to itself and indeed to the
international community by focusing on its Charter
obligations and fulfilling them completely and without
selectivity or discrimination.

