Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (Spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the holding of this
Security Council meeting on the situation in the Chad
Lake basin, exactly six months after our visit to the
region and following the adoption of the resolution 2349
(2017), which was devoted to this topic. My delegation
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman for providing clarity in his presentation
on the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/764), which
informs us of progress made and challenges yet to be
met. We would also like to convey our gratitude to
Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam, Director of the Network of
Civil Society Organizations in Borno state, for having
so kindly shared with us her experience in the field.

In adopting resolution 2349 (2017) following our
Visit to Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria and Chad, the
Security Council again focused on the humanitarian
and security crisis raging in the Lake Chad basin as a
key priority of the international community. Following
the visit, international mobilization in support of the
region has considerably increased with the successive
visits by representatives of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union and by staff of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa. Along the same
lines, a regional conference will be held in N'Djamena
from 3 to 5 October on the issue of stabilizing the
region. It will be the first meeting ofa set ofthree aimed
at determining a regional strategy to stabilize affected
regions. 1 am sure that such international mobilization
has contributed to the retaking of territory by the Joint
Multinational Task Force, and I pay tribute to the
courage and devotion of its contingents. The retaking
of areas formerly controlled by Boko Haram has led to
an improvement in the security situation in those areas,
the freeing of hostages and, of course, the surrender
or arrest of many of the group's combatants. On the
humanitarian level, we should note the growing access
of the civilian population to health care, sanitation
and food.

However, as important as it is, all of that progress
should not mask the difficult situation experienced by
millions of women and children in the Lake Chad Basin
region - as seen in the growing number of terrorist
attacks in the past few months. Once again, on behalf
of my country, I condemn those attacks in the firmest
possible terms.

According to the Secretary-General's report, 245
attacks were carried out, most of those by female
suicide bombers, during the months of June, July and
August - in the north-east of Nigeria, in the north of
Cameroon and in the Chad border regions, resulting in
225 casualties. While those attacks clearly bear witness
to the ability of Boko Haram to continue its terrorist
activities, the fact that the group is now increasingly
resorting to asymmetrical tactics is undeniable proof
that it is now in an unfavourable position. Nevertheless,
we continue to deplore the lack of logistical resources
available to the countries in the region in their fight
against those asymmetric threats. All of that clearly
shows the pressing need to bolster the capabilities of the
States of the region in terms of early warning and rapid
response sytems when faced with suicide attacks. That
requires the involvement of the population to develop a
community police force.

Similarly, regional and subregional cooperation
remains crucial to securing borders in order to
effectively combat trans-national organized crime,
such as arms-smuggling and human trafficking, which,
we must remember, are at heart of the crisis. There is
also a need to step-up international support to meet the
needs set out in the humanitarian appeal launched by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
which calls for the mobilization of $1.5 billion - of
which, unfortunately, to date has been funded only the
level of 30.9 per cent.

We should not make any mistake about it:
development must be part of the solution, especially
since poverty is most rife in the areas severely impacted
by Boko Haram in the four countries concerned. That
is why my delegation welcomes the meeting of the Oslo
contact group - made up of Germany, Nigeria, Norway,
Cameroon and Chad - scheduled for 6 September on
the issues of prevention and stabilizing the region,
which aims to identify ways to tackle the deep-rooted
causes of the crisis.

In that regard, in order to make it possible for the
countries concerned to effectively take the steps needed
on the security and humanitarian fronts in order to meet
the most difficult challenge - stabilizing the region
and ensuring development - Senegal believes that the
following important areas merit particular attention.

First, there is a need to foster private investment,
which is essential to creatingjobs, especially for young
people, who remain the primary target of terrorist
recruiters. We must also promote private investment so
as to reduce the heightened dependence of the region's
population on agriculture, livestock rearing and fishing.

Secondly, there is also a need for particular attention
to addressing environmental challenges, for example,
the drying up of Lake Chad, which, as we all know, has
a very negative effect on agriculture in the region.
Thirdly, it is important to bear in mind the need
to empower women both in the economic and political
fields, with a View to reducing their vulnterability and
augmenting their contribution to development.

Lastly, reducing the high level of dependence of the
affected countries on oil and other mineral resources
remains a priority. This step is necessary to avoid
adverse budgetary consequences as a result of the drop
in oil prices.

In conclusion, I would like to underline the urgent
need to bolster the coordination of local, national,
regional and international efforts in order to ensure
the effectiveness of our collective action against
Boko Haram. I pledge the full support of Senegal
in that endeavour - one of the most important for
the continent.

