Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes
to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Bintou Keita, for the
informative briefing that she delivered to the Security
Council today.

Once again, we must voice our concern regarding
the precariousness of the situation in South Sudan. The
humanitarian, security and economic crises show no
signs of visible improvement to date and are driving
hundreds of South Sudanese to leave their homes on a
daily basis, thereby generating internal displacements
that only exacerbate the crisis.

On 23 March, the Council called for compliance
with the ceasefire declared by the Government
(see S/PV.7906); that has, however, been ignored to
date. Throughout all this time, confrontations have
persisted, meaning that the necessary conditions for
establishing a real dialogue never materialized. It is
therefore impossible to speak of real progress, if such
confrontations between the parties do not cease. We
believe that the lack of political determination and
leadership is still evident.

Bolivia reaffirms that a sustainable solution to
the conflict in South Sudan lies in a credible political
process and inclusive dialogue that will pave the
way for full compliance with the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan of 2015. The efforts spearheaded by regional
organizations are vital and require the support of the
international community, as well as, first and foremost,
the commitment of the Government and all opposition
groups in South Sudan.

In that regard, my delegation believes that the
need to ensure support for the steps being taken by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
are be indisputable. The high-level revitalization forum
is the only existing concrete initiative, for which we
appreciate the efforts of and express our support to
both IGAD and the African Union. As mentioned by
the representative of Ethiopia, the fact that IGAD has
held consultations with all of the stakeholders is a good
sign. It is often said that, in order to advance the political
process in South Sudan, inclusivity must be one of its
pillars. IGAD has demonstrated its determination to
deliver on that principle.

We welcome the news of the participation and
support of the stakeholders in the process. We urge
all parties to continue constructively engaging with
the forum. That represents a unique opportunity for
the South Sudanese people to establish a dialogue that
allows for the restoration of a permanent ceasefire,
the implementation of the peace agreement and
the development of a realistic timeline for holding
democratic elections at the end of the transition period.
All eyes will be on the upcoming extraordinary session
of the IGAD Council of Ministers so that we can learn
more about the forum and its modalities, structure
and organization.

With regard to the Regional Protection Force, we
welcome the progress made in the deployment of the
main body of its battalions. We note an improvement
in terms of Government cooperation, and we consider
it essential to work in partnership with the Government
in order to meet the deadlines for the deployment of
the regional protection force and to enable its proper
functioning. Its presence will allow the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to extend its
presence to other areas of conflict where the protection
of civilians and humanitarian assistance are so urgently
required at this time.

In conclusion, we express our thanks to the United
Nations country team and to UNMISS for the work that
they have been carrying out in South Sudan. We call
on the parties to ensure unhindered and safe access for
UNMISS and the humanitarian personnel so that they
can provide the people affected by the conflict with the
necessary assistance.

