Ms. Stener (Norway): The Ebola epidemic is
having a catastrophic impact on the affected countries
and the wider region. What began as a health crisis now
has serious political, social, economic, humanitarian
and security dimensions. Norway therefore welcomes
the initiative by the United States to hold this very
important meeting.

Despite the persistent efforts, the virus continues
to spread fast. We all underestimated the severity of
the Ebola outbreak. Now we all need to step up our
response. We need to do more, and we need to do it
faster. Local communities, national health personnel
and humanitarian workers carry out the majority of the
work. They are under immense pressure, and they need
our support. That includes ensuring their safety. The
same applies to the international field personnel and
health personnel.

Me'decins Sans Frontieres deserves praise for
their quick and flexible response. Clear leadership
and coordinated efforts are important. We support the
priorities set out in the World Health Organization road
map. Norway welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-
General to establish a new United Nations mission
for the Ebola response. We also welcome the active
engagement of the African Union. We reiterate the calls
from the Governments of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra
Leone on the importance of ensuring open trade and air
transportation with the affected areas.

Furthermore, we must recognize that women are
especially at risk in their role as caregivers in homes
and in hospitals. Up to two thirds of the victims are
women. As we combat Ebola, we must prioritize
protecting women and children.

The Governments of the region and the United
Nations have called for immediate action. Norway has
responded to that call by tripling our contribution. Our
total contribution is now more than $13 million. Those
funds will support the efforts of the United Nations,
the African Union and several non-governmental
organizations.

In conclusion, as we are discussing Ebola here
today, people are dying on the ground. We have the
means to stop this epidemic from spreading even
further. We must live up to that responsibility. The time
to act is now.

