Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation is pleased to see you, Madam,
preside personally, in your capacity as Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, over today's open debate, which your
country judiciously chose to devote the important
subject of respect for the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations as a key element for the
maintenance of international peace and security

The Senegalese delegation also welcomes the
participation of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon as a
further demonstration of the importance of a theme being
explored yet again by the Security Council, following
its consideration under the Chinese presidency almost a
year ago (see S/PV.7389).

My delegation associates itself with the statements
to be made by the representatives of Pakistan on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Kuwait on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

In addressing the seventieth session of the General
Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Macky Sall, President of
the Republic of Senegal, said:

"Seventy years after the creation of our
Organization, we are walking in the footsteps of
the founding fathers to renew our collective faith
in the ideals of peace, security, development and
respect for human rights. Those values inspire the
principal mission of the Organization ofpreserving
the world from the scourge of war, creating the
conditions necessary to the maintenance ofjustice,
promoting social progress and ensuring a better
standard ofliving in greater freedom." (A/70/PV.]5, 
p. 17)

These words of President Sall are the clearest
possible reflection of the renewed commitment
of Senegal to strict respect for the principles and
purposes of the United Nations. It goes without saying
that the perpetual quest for peace and security on
our planet - which is one of the raison d'etre of our
Organization - challenges us all and requires each
Member State a high awareness of the need to respect
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations, which is the world's constitution.

We must keep in mind that coercive actions are
only a means and not an end in themselves. Thus, the
success of the Organization lies more in its ability to
resort to Chapter VI, on the peaceful settlement of
disputes, than to Chapter VII, which is more difficult
and even more costly to enforce. Senegal, a strong
supporter of preventive diplomacy, therefore favours
peace operations that combine these two Chapters in
this their most essential meanings. Our main challenge
is to adapt to a complex international environment that
is constantly changing due to, among other things, the
changing nature ofconflict, the presence ofincreasingly
assertive regional organizations, the proliferation of
non- State armed groups and even the emergence of new,
asymmetric threats such as terrorism and international
health crises. This state of things requires us to make
a renewed commitment to respecting the principles
and purposes that governed the creation of the United
Nations, which are the sovereign equality of States,
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States, the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and non-resort to the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State.

Recognition of the political and legal value
of the principles contained in the Charter and the
strengthening of inclusive multilateralism are
prerequisites for maintaining peace and international
security. It is therefore important to promote the
maintenance of peace through partnership to place the
action of regional organizations at the heart of peace
efforts. Indeed, given the strong regional dimension
of most conflicts and in view of the vital role to be
played by neighbouring States in any peace process, the
positive engagement of regional actors is increasingly
encouraged by the United Nations, in accordance with
paragraph 1, Article 52, of Chapter VIII of the Charter.

In this regard, the Security Council should
further strengthen its cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, which, in addition to
being already present on the ground, can contribute
to ensuring respect for the sovereignty of States while
promoting a preventive approach to achieving peaceful
and negotiated solutions of crises. With respect to the
African continent in particular, the strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, particularly the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States, can help develop rapid response capabilities in
the early hours of crises in order to avoid an escalation
of violence.

The successes in Cote D'Ivoire, Liberia, the Comoros
and Guinea Bissau speak for themselves of the essential
contribution that regional organizations can make, even
ifthe issue of funding remains a serious problem. While
it is true that peace is priceless, it certainly comes at a
price. States, international organizations - first and
foremost the United Nations - and the private sector
must contribute further to finding ways to finance
peace missions throughout the world in a timely and
sustainable manner.

The review of the principles and purposes of the
Charter in terms of peacekeeping also leads us to the
burning question of reforming the primary United
Nations organ entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council,
in order to make it more legitimate in its composition
and more credible and effectiveness in its action.

In another vein, we believe that multilingualism
is an important element of of the multilateral system
that must continue to be respected in all activities of
the United Nations system, in particular those aimed at
maintaining peace and security. Indeed, multilingualism
ensures the equal dignity of all cultures, contributes to
the effectiveness of the principle of the legal equality
of States and strengthens the democratization of global
governance, of which the quest for peace is a primary
directive.

I am pleased to affirm that the best guarantee ofthe
success of our efforts to counter the multiple threats to
international peace and security lies in the synergy of
the actions of all sectors of the international community
and the full respect of all for the principles and purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
we believe that the effective implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), the Paris agreement on
climate change and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
on financing for development will be of criticial
importance. This underscores the judiciousness of
the choice of theme for today's debate made by the
outstanding Venezuelan presidency of the Security
Council this month.

