Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom):
Madam President, your presence honours the Council
and testifies to Tanzania's commitment to security,
peace and development in the Great Lakes region.

I should like to associate the United Kingdom
fully with the statement delivered earlier in this debate
by my Austrian colleague on behalf of the current
presidency of the European Union.

I should also like to convey the sincere
condolences of the British Government to the families
of the Guatemalan peacekeepers killed in action on
23 January. We wish those who were injured a speedy
and full recovery and express our admiration and
gratitude to the Government and the people of
Guatemala for the service, in most difficult
circumstances, that their armed forces are performing
on behalf of the United Nations and in the pursuit of
peace and stability for the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Those responsible for the
peacekeepers' deaths must be tracked down and
brought to justice.

The brutality and chaos that illegal armed groups
such as the Lord's Resistance Army, the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda and the Forces
nationales de liberation have inflicted on innocent
civilians in the Great Lakes region must be stopped.
We strongly support the robust role being played by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in support
of the Congolese armed forces in operations against
those armed groups.

Military operations need to be accompanied by
close cooperation among the Governments concerned
to cope with armed groups, which respect no borders.
We urge those Governments to work together, and to
work with the United Nations, to take the steps
necessary to better protect their own civilians,
including by disarming the militias, by bringing those
responsible for violence and human rights abuses to
justice and by improving border security to prevent the
illegal flow of the arms and natural resources that are
the lifeblood of those armed groups.

The international community has an important
supportive part to play. The British Government is
fully committed to working with the Governments of
the region towards long-term peace and stability in the
Great Lakes region. Bilaterally and through the
European Union, we are providing assistance for
humanitarian relief and security-sector reform, and in
those areas where peace has taken root we are
providing support for social and economic
development.

The international community can also help to
neutralize the activities of the armed groups by
enforcing the Democratic Republic of the Congo arms
embargo and the targeted measures imposed on those
that Violate the embargo. We look forward, therefore,
to the integrated and comprehensive strategy that the
Secretary-General has been asked to prepare, in
consultation with the Governments concerned and with
other key stakeholders, on all aspects of resolving the
issue of illegal armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The deaths of the Guatemalan peacekeepers have
tragically highlighted the devastating influence that the
Lord's Resistance Army continues to have on the Great
Lakes region. Its activities illustrate the
interconnectedness of the problem: a brutal insurgency
launched in one country spreads across borders and
infects two neighbouring countries. In each case,
countless innocent civilians are killed, abducted or
displaced: there are 1.2 million displaced persons
today. It is right that we, the international community,
should do whatever we can to help the Governments
concerned - the Government of Uganda, but also the
Governments of the Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - to protect their civilians and
to deal with a threat that is undermining regional peace
and security. The United Nations missions in the region
and entities such as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs have an important role to play, a
role which we believe should be reinforced: first by
identifying ways in which the international community
can assist, and secondly by providing that assistance
wherever possible. We therefore welcome the request
to the Secretary-General in the draft resolution
(S/2006/51) to be adopted at the end of this meeting to
make recommendations to the Security Council in that
regard.

Dealing with the activities of illegal armed
groups is one challenge to the transition process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. There are, of
course, others. The positive results of the constitutional
referendum in December declared and showed the
desire of the Congolese people to complete the
transition to full democratic government. We urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to rise to the expectations of its people, to maintain the
momentum of the political process and to ensure that
the envisaged timetable for elections before 30 June
2006 can be met. In parallel, faster progress is needed
to reform the security sector and to bring an end to
corruption and impunity. The international community
stands ready to assist.

Today is also an occasion to salute the
achievement of the Burundian people in successfully
completing their transition. We stand ready to support
the new Government of Burundi as it establishes itself
and develops its policies. Our shared interests are best
served, we believe, if the disengagement and
drawdown of the United Nations Operation in Burundi
(ONUB) are gradual. We welcome the detailed work
that is being done on that by ONUB in consultation
with the Government of Burundi, and we recommend
drawing on experience gained, for example, in the
successful transitions under way, and being achieved,
in East Timor and Sierra Leone.

Finally, we note the relevance to today's
discussion of the recently established Peacebuilding
Commission, and we salute the central role that
Tanzania and Denmark both played in the
establishment of the Commission and that they will
both play as founding members of the Peacebuilding
Commission, selected by the Security Council. The
Commission will have an important role to play in
providing advice on how States in the Great Lakes
region and beyond can complete the transition from
peacekeeping to sustainable reconstruction, institution-
building, the rule of law and development.

We very much welcome the text of the draft
resolution, which the United Kingdom will be proud to
support.

