Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Mr. President,
my delegation would like to thank you for convening
this meeting. We appreciate the excellent work you are
doing in steering the affairs of this body.

This meeting has become necessary because of
the continuation of violence in Israel and in the
occupied Palestinian territory, in particular the recent
rocket attacks against Israel from Gaza and the
escalation of Israeli military operations in Gaza. The
appalling suicide bombing that occurred in Tel Aviv
today, claiming innocent lives, clearly demonstrates the
futility of the recourse to violence by both sides in
place of a negotiated settlement of the Palestinian
question. My delegation deplores the mounting death
toll on both sides and takes this opportunity to reiterate
its condemnation of all acts of violence and
destruction.
We recognize the urgent need for Palestine and
Israel to exercise maximum restraint and to refrain
from violence, which means that both sides should not
resort to unilateral measures that exacerbate tensions
and undermine efforts to achieve peace in the region.
The great human suffering resulting directly from this
cycle of violence is intolerable, and we think it is now
more imperative than ever that the international
community, particularly the Quartet, assist in bringing
the two sides back to the negotiation table. We would
continue to encourage the Quartet to remain actively
engaged in the search for peace in the region and to
assist Palestine and Israel to pursue the path that would
lead them to seek a just and lasting solution to their
conflict.

Recently, my delegation had the occasion to state
before the Security Council that this organ should be
informed by its own decisions on this conflict, which,
over the years, have consistently affirmed the rights
and interests of both Palestine and Israel. We wish to
reiterate that the Palestinians have a right to their own
independent State, one that guarantees the freedom of
movement of its citizens, with real prospects for
sustainable development, while the Israelis equally
have the right to their own State within well-defined
and secure borders.

While Hamas is being encouraged to rethink its
position on Israel and to commit its Government to
respect all existing agreements, including maintenance
of the ceasefire between Palestine and Israel, we note
with concern reports of the stoppage of aid to the
Palestinian Authority, which is led by President
Mahmoud Abbas. Those who suffer from this cut-off
are the Palestinian workers who are denied salaries to
take care of their families. We urge that greater care be
taken not to cause undue economic hardships to
Palestinians, many of whom, through no fault of their
own, are already being deprived of some of the basic
necessities of life.

The Hamas Administration would also do a great
service to itself and the Palestinian people if it would
pursue policies that would advance the peace process.
In so doing, it would earn the goodwill of all
Governments and people eager for peace in the Middle
East and would negate the need for economic sanctions
that its people have painfully begun to bear.

We wish to conclude by prevailing upon the
Governments of Israel and Hamas to endeavour to
work towards a just, lasting and comprehensive final
solution to the Middle East conflict. The Security
Council, as well as the Quartet, should play a
supportive role in assisting the two parties to work
assiduously towards this goal.

