Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing and welcome her
back to the Security Council Chamber. We have taken
note of the sixth report of the ICC Prosecutor to the
Security Council. We commend Ms. Fatou Bensouda
for her hard work and commitment to the international
criminal justice system.

Libya continues to face serious challenges in the
consolidation of its democratic system. The best way
for the international community to assist Libya in
overcoming those challenges is to help it strengthen
the capacity of Libyan institutions. Justice and security
institutions alike need to be supported in enhancing
their capacity and effectiveness. We call on armed
groups in Libya to lay down their arms and engage in
the democratic process and dialogue to resolve their
differences and grievances.

We welcome the memorandum of understanding
on burden-sharing in regard to further investigations
and prosecutions signed by the Government of Libya
and the Office of the Prosecutor this month. Libya is
cooperating with the ICC, in accordance with resolution
1970 (2011). The memorandum of understanding, as
recognized by the ICC, is a sign of the commitment
of the Libyan Government to ending impunity and to
providing justice to victims. We call upon the Libyan
Government to maintain its constructive engagement
with the Court.

We welcome the Pre-Trial Chamber's decision on
the inadmissibility of the Abdullah Al-Senussi case,
in accordance with the principle of complementarity
enshrined in the Rome Statute. On the basis of that
principle, a case in The Hague is a matter of last resort.
We appreciate the determination of the International
Criminal Court that Libya is willing and able to carry
out its proceedings against Abdullah Al-Senussi.

The Court's evaluation that the general security
situation in Libya has not affected the capacity of Libyan
institutions to obtain evidence and testimony and to
conduct proceedings in the specific case ofAl-Senussi is
heartening. It is important that the Libyan Government
maintain the quality of evidence, testimony, witness
protection and fairness in the proceedings against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and provide convincing additional
information to the Appeals Chamber in that regard.

The Prosecutor's Office is in the process of
collecting evidence against other individuals of the
previous regime outside Libya who might be responsible
for serious crimes. The Council would appreciate
receiving additional information on such investigations.

As regards the investigation of other alleged crimes
committed in Libya, we underline the need to conduct
thorough and impartial investigations regardless
of which side has perpetrated the crime. We also
encourage NATO to fully cooperate with the Court and
with Libya's national efforts to investigate the civilian
casualties during the conflict.

The formation of a democratically elected
Government is leading to positive results in Libya.
We welcome the adoption of Libya's new transitional
justice law. We hope that that law will be used to
ensure due process for all detainees. The country has
now entered the important phase of implementation
of the transitional laws. That is critical to a stable and
prosperous Libya.

The international criminal justice system has
demonstrated that national judicial mechanisms can
ultimately be more efficient and cost-effective in
dealing with such serious crimes. The International
Criminal Court and other international tribunals have
succeed in dealing with only a handful of cases. For the
bulk of the cases, greater reliance on national judicial
systems will continue to produce more salutary results.
The strengthening of the Libyan judicial system is
therefore essential to address the crimes that occurred
in that country. The Libyan Government must continue
to formulate and to implement a comprehensive strategy
to address those crimes.

The international community should extend its
full support to Libya to achieve that objective. In the
long run, the promotion of reconciliation is essential
to fostering national unity and to bridging the fissures
caused by conflicts. The success ofthe Fact-finding and
Reconciliation Commission is important for promoting
unity in the country. Achieving a balance between the
imperatives of justice and peace is always a difficult
challenge. That can best be achieved through national
mechanisms and institutions.

Finally, we underscore Pakistan's fullest support
for the well-being and prosperity of the people of Libya.
We wish them success in their quest for reconciliation,
stability and institution-building.

