Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his thorough
presentation.

Argentina notes with satisfaction that the parties
are generally complying with the cessation of
hostilities called for in resolution 1701 (2006).
However, the incidents that occurred on 19 August
demonstrate that the situation continues to be
extremely fragile and underscore the need for the
parties to exercise maximum restraint and to refrain
from taking measures that could affect the delicate
balance achieved after intensive negotiations.

As the Secretary-General has said, the Israeli
operation in the Bekaa valley last Saturday constitutes
a violation of the cessation of hostilities. Regrettably,
Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace continue, in
contravention of the provisions of resolution 1701
(2006) and other decisions of the Security Council.

We would like to recall that all States, and in
particular the neighbours of Lebanon, have an
obligation to fully comply with the arms embargo
established in resolution 1701 (2006). Any transfer of
arms not authorized by the Government of Lebanon is
a clear Violation of the obligations set out by the
Security Council.
My country welcomes the fact that the Lebanese
armed forces began to deploy in the south of the
country following the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
some sectors. The priority for the forthcoming days
will be to keep up and intensify that dynamic so as to
attain the objective set out in paragraph 2 of the
resolution: that all Israeli forces should withdraw from
southern Lebanon and that the Government of Lebanon
should fully fulfil its responsibilities between the
Litani river and the Blue Line.

The assistance of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in that process is essential.
We are grateful to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for its efforts in recent weeks to accelerate
the deployment of additional troops. We hope that after
the circulation of the draft rules of engagement and
concept of operations of UNIFIL it will be possible to
ensure that substantive contributions to the force are
made.

We should also continue to work to achieve the
immediate and unconditional release of the Israeli
soldiers kidnapped by Hizbollah and to find a
satisfactory solution to the problem of the Lebanese
prisoners.

Looking beyond these issues, it is essential to
establish foundations for a lasting solution to this
conflict on the basis of the principles mentioned in
resolution 1701 (2006), in particular with regard to the
disarmament of Hizbollah and other militias,
compliance with the arms embargo and resolving the
outstanding territorial problems, especially in respect
to the Sheba'a Farms. In this connection, we support
the mission undertaken by Mr. Nambiar and Mr. Roed-
Larsen and look forward to having a comprehensive
report by mid-September.

With regard to the humanitarian situation in
Lebanon, we express our appreciation for the efforts of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the humanitarian agencies. In the current
circumstances, the priority is to secure access to the
affected population in southern Lebanon and to assist
persons who are returning to their homes. The presence
of a great number of unexploded munitions creates an
additional challenge for these activities.

In relation to the aforementioned, it is essential
that Israel lift the maritime and aerial blockades and
suspend the restrictions imposed on the Lebanese land
crossings. The Lebanese authorities, on their part,
should assume their responsibilities with a View to
ensuring that the lifting of these restrictions does not
affect the implementation of paragraphs 14 and 15 of
resolution 1701 (2006).

The tragic events during the last month between
Lebanon and Israel should not distract us from what is
happening in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
Argentina is extremely concerned by the humanitarian
crisis affecting the Palestinian people and by the death
of innocent civilians as a result of the violence and the
Israeli excessive use of force and Palestinian extremist
activities.

We continue to attach importance to the
immediate and unconditional liberation of the Israeli
soldier and to the fulfilment by the Government of the
Palestinian Authority of the principles set out by the
Quartet. Likewise, we believe that Israel should
immediately and unconditionally release all Palestinian
officials and legislators, end military activities in Gaza
and take urgent measures to contribute to the
improvement of the humanitarian situation in that
territory. Unilateral Israeli measures in the West Bank
must immediately stop, as must any other practices that
contravene international law.

The parallel crises in Lebanon and Gaza have
demonstrated once again that there is no military
solution to this conflict. Only negotiated political
solutions will be sustainable in the long term.
Argentina will continue to support a just solution to the
problems of the Middle East, based on the resolutions
of this Security Council, the Madrid terms of reference
and the principle of land for peace.

