I commend the presidency of the Dominican Republic for highlighting the important role of young people in the maintenance of international peace and security. My delegation not only thanks the Secretary-General but fully endorses his detailed and insightful report of 2 March (S/2020/167) on the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) and recommendations for the future. Kazakhstan fully supports both those resolutions. We were honoured to actually be fully involved in the substantive negotiations on resolution 2419 (2018) during our term as an elected member of the Security Council. The theme of this meeting is most relevant in the light of numerous violent conflicts raging in several regions of the world, the unprecedented coronavirus disease pandemic and the threats of climate change that we encounter today. We therefore need young people, who are the drivers of change with their openness to new experiences, creativity, innovation, enduring energy and commitment to building partnerships as world citizens. Youth constitute a quarter of the global population, of whom 500 million are living in conflict zones, which is also a cause of concern. The international community must therefore address the socioeconomic, cultural and political factors that lead young people to violence. Likewise, every country must also launch its own youth, peace and security agenda with a view to realizing its young people's potential. To counter terrorist and extremist ideas, investment must be made in the youth's health, education, employment opportunities, and go beyond policies to concrete measures to address inequalities and boost all kinds of opportunities for young people. We need to move from remedial responses to genuine prevention efforts, investing in young people and the fight against racism and ensuring that both age and gender remain integral to peace and security discussions. We are therefore called on to support and protect young agents of peace and youth human rights defenders. It is important to turn away from the myopic perspective that focuses on youth as a problem and involve them in charting policy frameworks, adopting legislation, participating in national parliaments and commissioning national road maps for peace and security. Mission mandates, in particular, must also focus on youth capacity-building and leadership, with greater investment in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, as well. Firm action must also be taken against perpetrators who threaten the security of young people, including young women, and ethnic minorities deprived of access to power, resources and political participation. Young people are vital to truth and reconciliation processes and should have a seat at the negotiation table. Young people must be made to feel that their votes count and that they are key actors in democratization, elections, institution-building, disaster risk reduction and the fight against corruption. Furthermore, we must envision the role of young people in making the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development an effective tool for conflict prevention and mitigation. The huge amounts of money spent globally on military action should instead be spent on advancing the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. Young people must be considered as partners and leaders in addressing their own marginalization. However, that will be possible only if States invest in building young people's capacities and leadership at the national, regional and global levels through dialogue and consultation platforms. To achieve the youth, peace and security agenda, action is critical at the national level in order to have an impact globally. Kazakhstan therefore believes that young people are key players in democratization, elections, institution-building, the fight against corruption and disaster risk reduction. Voicing support for the proposal to allocate $1.8 billion by 2025 - the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), we propose that the international community develop a comprehensive framework relating to youth and the global security-development nexus. My country focuses on poverty eradication, employment and education opportunities, and has introduced the countering religious extremism and terrorism programme, which continues even now. The young in Kazakhstan today make up almost half of the total population, which is nearly 9 million people aged under 29. The critical importance of young people to Kazakhstan's future is one of the reasons why 2019 was declared the Year of Youth, with the aim of identifying gaps where improvements are needed in order to fully optimize our demographic trends. To develop favourable conditions for volunteer activities, the Government of Kazakhstan declared 2020 as the Year of the Volunteer. In order to increase the inclusive representation of youth in decision-making at all levels, the President of Kazakhstan, Mr. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, introduced a major project to attract qualified young personnel to the civil service by providing the most talented young people with the opportunity to take leading positions in public administration and the quasi-public sector. Some 300 young professionals were selected on a competitive basis for the presidential cadre reserve out of nearly 3,000 applicants. Starting early this year, many of them have already been appointed to decision-making posts and have started to contribute to the development of our nation. Kazakhstan also strongly focuses on prevention by eradicating poverty, educating youth and creating employment opportunities to support their dynamic ideas and aspirations. Our country has adopted various national schemes and a comprehensive set of policies to provide free education, vocational training, intensive job creation and entrepreneurship. Kazakhstan's Bolashak Scholarship, or Future Generation Scholarship, which was launched in 1993, provides the opportunity for hundreds of Kazakh young men and women annually to study in leading foreign higher education institutions. It has been recognized as among the best academic mobility programmes in the world. We also dissuade young people from using violence that serves extremist causes by implementing comprehensive development programmes. In particular, we have successfully completed the national programme on countering religious extremism and terrorism, allocating hundreds of millions of dollars for preventive measures for the entire youth population. Finally, this year, the United Nations family marks its seventy-fifth anniversary. That is an important milestone, which represents a unique opportunity to take a critical look at the problems and challenges that confront us. My country has always supported young people in using their potential as the most valuable asset for sustaining peace and security, and will continue to do so.
