Mr. Alasania (Georgia): At the outset,
Mr. President, allow me to express my appreciation to
the members of the Security Council for providing us
with the opportunity to address this high forum.

The delegation of Georgia fully associates itself
with the statement made by the Slovenian presidency
of the European Union.

Protection of children affected by armed conflicts
has been one of the main priorities of the United
Nations community. During the past decade, the
international community has tried to place the issue
firmly on its agenda. Since 1998, when the first Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict began
his work and the Security Council held its first meeting
on this issue, the matter has gained greater visibility.

Over the past several years, the Security Council
has made good efforts in order to assist children
affected by armed conflict and thereby to protect the
most vulnerable, particularly through the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005), which provided the basis for
the establishment of the Working Group of the Security
Council on Children and Armed Conflict.

We welcome the latest report of the Secretary-
General on the issue of children and armed conflict
(S/2007/757), and we fully share his observation that,
despite some progress with respect to the protection of
children in several areas, new areas of concern require
immediate attention by the international community.
Georgia welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the mandates of all future
peacekeeping and relevant political missions should
include child protection advisers. Such a change will
increase the effectiveness of monitoring and provide
timely and accurate information with respect to the
protection of children affected by conflicts.

We agree with Council members who have
previously spoken that the Council must move forward
and start responding to the challenges upon us. We
firmly believe that every form or category of the grave
violations against children must be given equal
priority.

For 15 years, my country has been dealing with
the consequences of ethnic conflicts, which have
yielded tragic results. Besides causing a generation of
youth to lose their lives during the civil war, those
conflicts have produced a generation that was forced
by ethnic cleansing into exile. The Government of
Georgia is making its best efforts to support refugee
and internally displaced children, who have been
deprived of their most fundamental right to return to
their places of origin. Among other support, those
children need special care to cope with their post-war
psychological traumas. Although central authorities, in
cooperation with international donor organizations, are
able to provide special rehabilitation, education and
leisure programmes to some of these children, the vast
majority are still beyond the reach of such
programmes.

We would like to draw the Council's attention to
the intolerable situation of children living in the areas
of protracted conflicts within the territory of Georgia.
It is heartbreaking to see how children of all ethnic
origins are becoming victims of physical and
psychological violence on a daily basis. Lack of a
secure environment in these areas prevents children
from having a chance to become integrated members of
civil society.

Here, let me note in particular the situation of
Georgian-speaking children in Abkhazia, Georgia.
They are deprived of one of their most fundamental
rights, namely to study in their mother tongue, since
the de facto regime has prohibited Georgian as a
language of instruction in schools in the Gali district,
which is populated mostly by Georgians.

The Secretary-General's latest report on the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia (S/2007/588) suggests
that the language of instruction in Gali district schools
remains a concern. It is highly unlikely that anyone
opposing education of children in their mother tongue
is thinking of reconciliation. The prohibition of
education in the Georgian language in breakaway
regions is intended to increasingly separate the
generations brought up apart. Unfortunately, all this is
a continuation of the policy of systematic cleansing of
Georgians from Abkhazia, Georgia. It is ironic that
oppression on the basis of language continues to take
place in 2008 - the year the United Nations declared
to be the International Year of Languages.

Another matter of concern to us is the problem of
mines left after past military operations. Just recently,
in one village in Abkhazia, Georgia a boy was killed by
an anti-personnel mine that he had found on the bank
of a river.

The international community must make better
efforts to assist those children who have been deprived

of normal life conditions. The need for action is
obvious because the impact of conflict and violence on
children will have consequences for the formation of
their values, identity and beliefs.

The circle of violence and hatred can only be
stopped through joint international efforts. In this
regard, the Government of Georgia has provided
channels for international organizations to be involved
in the most critical confidence-building measure -
bringing children from both sides of a war-torn society
together, helping them to restore their faith in peaceful
coexistence with each other.

Mr. President, I want to thank you again for
giving me this opportunity to address you today on this
matter that is very important for all of us.

