Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, my delegation wishes most warmly to
congratulate Ambassador Greenstock on his excellent
work at the helm of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and to express the hope that he will continue in
that position for a further six months. We also thank
the Chairmen of the three sub-committees and express
our appreciation to the experts and the Secretariat staff
who have been working with Ambassador Greenstock.

The establishment of the CTC was an innovative
response of the international community to problems
relating to peace and security. It was an expression of
the readiness of States to implement Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), which was unprecedented in its
requirements upon all States Members of the United
Nations. The CTC is thus a tool for implementing such
requirements and represents progress in strengthening
international security law and the United Nations
special role in the struggle against terrorism. The
Committee's performance will determine not only the
success of this vital struggle of our times, but also the
progress and consolidation of international law as a
civilizing factor.

We feel that the Committee must continue to
ensure cooperation, transparency and objectivity in its
work and at all costs avoid any politicization of its
activities. My delegation believes that there are five
premises that must guide the work of the Committee
and the United Nations.

First, it must continue to enjoy the political
support and resolve of Member States to comply with
obligations emanating from resolution 1373 (2001) and
commitments contained in existing international
treaties and agreements.

Secondly, the determination of States to combat
terrorism must be strengthened within the context of
multilateral agreements, efforts and actions undertaken
in the context of international law, in contrast to
unilateral activities.

Thirdly, the ability of the United Nations and of
the Security Council to ensure the implementation of
their own resolutions must be maintained. Hence the
importance of the Committee's work and of the support
that all must give it.

Fourthly, my country believes that credibility and
transparency are fundamental because they ensure the
international community's confidence in the role of the
United Nations and in the effectiveness of its
resolutions and instruments. The Committee's
credibility in the effective fight against terrorism
constitutes crucial support for our multilateral legal and
institutional actions. Today's open meeting strengthens
the credibility and transparency of the Committee's
work. That is why the Committee must continue - as
it has done so far - to act on the basis of trust through
dialogue among it's members and with all Member
States. So far, this has been achieved through the very
instructive informal meetings that Ambassador
Greenstock has organized with Member States.

Fifthly, we consider full respect for human rights
and the observance of international law to be essential
for the Committee's work. Mexico considers that the
international community's measures to combat
terrorism must not jeopardize the protection of human
rights and the rights of genuine refugees. Otherwise,
the legitimacy of all our efforts to eradicate terrorism
will be diminished and be in significant conflict with
the principles that must govern our action.

The challenge in the fight against terrorism is to
find a balance between the universal protection of
human rights and the ability to respond to terrorism.
The universal system for the protection of human rights
is based on the Charter of the United Nations and on
other legal instruments. As a result, Members States
always and in all circumstances have the obligation to
ensure that their conduct complies with those legal
imperatives.

That is why our delegation has particular interest
in the briefing to the Committee by Mrs. Mary
Robinson, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. The Committee should receive regular
briefings on this issue from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

We believe that it is important that the Committee
be persistent in its efforts to conclude the initial review
of national reports by 31 May. Meeting its deadlines
will enable the Committee to advance at a satisfactory
and efficient pace. We also believe that the Committee
should continue its efforts to achieve uniformity of
content in the letters it sends to States as a result of the
expert analysis of the national reports.

The international assistance required by States is
key to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
The Committee should continue its initiatives to offer
assistance to States that require it. In this endeavour it
should enjoy all the assistance and support the
Organization can offer. It also requires that the
contributions to the Committee continue to increase.

Thus, we value the Chairman's timely vision for
progress through a coordination strategy among States
and organizations at the international and regional
levels, with the objective of improving the ability to
fight terrorism and of avoiding duplication among the
various assistance programmes.

We value the dialogue held a few weeks ago with
Cesar Gaviria, Secretary-General of the Organization
of the American States (OAS). I wish to mention that
the OAS recently approved the draft Inter-American
Convention for the Prevention and Elimination of
Terrorism, in the framework of a working group headed
by Mexico.

Our efforts in this area also extend to the
subregional level, namely, North America. Mexico, the
United States and Canada are working on trilateral
strategies for border security in order to prevent the
movement of terrorists through our area. I also wish to
underline the efforts of the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism in improving border security.

Another element to consider in the fight against
terrorism is that we must insist that all efforts conform
to the provisions of the United Nations Charter and of
international law. The use of force is not without its
limits; it must be governed by a valid interpretation of
the legitimate right of self-defence and must in all
circumstances conform to the principle of
proportionality.

Finally, I wish to mention that my country
endorses the proposals and statements to be made later
in this meeting in the name of the Rio Group.

