Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): On
behalf of Germany, Sweden and Switzerland, I would
like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this meeting and
for the opportunity to address the Security Council.

I also thank the three chairmen of the committees
for their informative and timely briefings.

Today, I would like to focus on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), which
is currently reviewing the listing and delisting process
with regard to sanctions. I would like to share some
new thoughts and proposals on how to enhance the
effectiveness of targeted sanctions. Although my

S/l'V.5446

 

statement will focus on the 1267 Committee, those
reflections are also relevant to other Security Council
sanctions committees.

On an earlier occasion, I informed the Council of
an initiative launched by Germany, Sweden and
Switzerland in the field of targeted sanctions and
human rights. That initiative is a continuation of the
Interlaken, Bonn-Berlin and Stockholm processes and
aims at strengthening the implementation of targeted
sanctions by addressing concerns of due process.

As members know, our three Governments have
commissioned the Watson Institute for International
Studies at Brown University to draft a report on the
subject. We would like to share the report's content
with the Security Council and Member States with a
view to contributing concrete ideas for strengthening
the instrument of targeted sanctions. To that end, we
have asked for the report to be circulated as an official
United Nations document within the next few weeks.
The written text of my statement that has been
distributed contains a summary of the report and a brief
overview of its recommendations.

I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
the following main findings and recommendations.

First, the report describes the legal challenges
against sanctions measures that have been brought
before various courts in Europe and elsewhere. In the
past, those courts have shown that they were well
aware of the primacy of the United Nations Charter
and the special responsibility of the Security Council.
Nevertheless, some courts have also expressed their
willingness to ensure that Security Council decisions
comply with the compulsory norms of international law
relating to the protection of human rights - the jus
cogens - from which neither the Member States nor
the United Nations may derogate.

Secondly, the report summarizes the
improvements made over time by the sanctions
committees, particularly by the 1267 Committee, but
concludes that shortcomings remain with regard to
listing, delisting, notification of individuals and
entities, and especially the right to an effective remedy.

Thirdly, it describes the lack of periodic review
of those listed, the limited time to resolve delisting
requests and the open-ended nature of the present
sanctions regimes.

Finally, it concludes that the aforementioned
issues may infringe upon basic principles of human
rights protection.

We believe that the best way forward is reform on
a step-by-step basis. The Security Council and its
committees could start with the most urgent issues and
where progress can be achieved rapidly or at least
within a reasonable time. In our view, that includes the
following elements.

First, the listing criteria must be further refined.
In recent years, the scope of targeted sanctions has
been extended considerably to include broad categories
of individuals and entities. Much has already been
done to make the listings as clear and as unambiguous
as possible. We welcome in particular the fact that
Security Council resolution 1617 (2005) has given a
more precise definition of the term "associated with
Al-Qaida or the Taliban". However, we believe that the
criteria for identifying the individuals or entities
targeted by sanctions could be further developed and
refined.

Second, standards for statements of case must be
developed. The report's suggestion seems to be very
much in line with the Monitoring Team's proposal to
introduce a standard cover sheet.

Third, ways to notify targeted persons and
entities should be found. The report argues that the
United Nations has a responsibility to notify the targets
of sanctions, and it presents several ideas on how to do
so.

Fourth, a periodic review of listings, at least
every two years, should be introduced. Excessively
long intervals between reviews tend to change the
preventive character of sanctions into permanent
punishment, which could be very difficult for national
or international courts to accept in the long run.

Fifth, an administrative focal point should be
designated within the Secretariat to deal with all
delisting and exemption requests, as well as to notify
targets of listing. That proposal was put forward some
time ago by a member of the Security Council. It has
our full support.

Sixth, much could also be gained from
identifying a set of common standards and best
practices applicable to the different sanctions
committees.

Sll'V.5446

 

Seventh, a review mechanism should be
developed to enable individuals and entities to ask for
a review of their listing. That step is likely to pose the
biggest challenge. However, we believe that this is the
most important issue to address, because the lack of
such a review mechanism raises questions of due
process and it is the deficiency that is most often
brought up in courts. The Watson Institute's report lists
several options to be considered, ranging from a simple
reviewing mandate assigned to the Monitoring Team to
a full-fledged appeal system by independent courts or
tribunals.

Germany, Sweden and Switzerland wish to
pursue the dialogue on this important matter with the
Security Council and its subsidiary organs. We are
committed to strengthening the Security Council's
instruments to fight terrorism in conformity with the
very principles on which this Organization is founded.

