Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me begin by
extending a very warm welcome to you, Mr. President; it
is great to have you here in New York. Let me also thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his comprehensive
and unfortunately, once again, very sobering report.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is first and
foremost a political conflict that requires a political
solution. Germany therefore remains fully and firmly
committed to a negotiated two-State solution based on
the internationally agreed parameters as the only viable
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

As already stated last month (see S/PV.8583), we
are extremely concerned about repeated statements
from various sides in Israel calling for an annexation of
all or parts of the West Bank. Should such statements
become Government policy or law, it would constitute a
clear violation of international law, which prohibits the
acquisition of territory by force.

It is a truism that there is no fast track to peace.
However, bypassing the most controversial questions
in the process by taking them off the table or creating
facts on the ground will not lead to sustainable peace.
Germany will not recognize any changes to the 4 June
1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other
than those agreed by the parties through negotiations.
Nonetheless, I would like to underscore once more that
Germany remains steadfast in its commitment to the
security of Israel as a Jewish and Democratic State. We
will not be silent when Israel's security or right to exist
is questioned or compromised.

Joint efforts to restore a political perspective for the
resumption of the peace process are urgently needed.
We support any attempts to restart meaningful direct
talks and negotiations between the parties, with the
objective of achieving lasting peace. We therefore call
on all parties to refrain from taking unilateral measures
and counter collectively the negative developments on
the ground, which are undermining the viability of a
negotiated two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, based on the internationally agreed parameters.

With regard to the recent developments that the
Special Coordinator referred to, we are appalled by
the repeated deadly attacks on Israeli civilians in the
West Bank in the past weeks and strongly condemn the
repeated rocket attacks by Hamas or other groups from
Gaza into Israeli territory, which put Israeli security
and the lives of civilians at risk. That increase in
violence is deeply worrying. It makes the resumption
of much needed dialogue even more difficult and will
only create further suffering. It cannot be justified and
must stop immediately.

Concerning the recent incidents on the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, we recall the paramount
importance of the agreed status quo for keeping the
peace at that unique site. One of the main obstacles to
a political settlement is the ongoing Israeli occupation
and the continued settlement activities in the territories
occupied in 1967. The continued expansion of settlement
activity by Israel is a matter of great concern. We
firmly reiterate our position that settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under
international law and undermine the prospect for a
negotiated two-State solution.

The recent decision of the Government of Israel to
build more than 2,000 housing units in settlements in
the occupied West Bank and this week's announcement
of an additional 300 housing units in one of the Israeli
settlements only fuel the already heightened palpable
tensions between Israel and the Palestinian sides,
especially in the run-up to the September elections in
Israel. Therefore, we call on all sides to refrain from
further escalation.

Before I conclude, I will make two brief remarks.
First, with regard to the importance of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), in our view UNRWA
remains indispensable to meeting the basic needs of
Palestinian refugees. As the largest bilateral donor,
Germany remains committed to UNRWA and continues
to significantly contribute to the Agency's budget.

Lastly, concerning Lebanon, in view of the recent
incidents with regard to Lebanon, as we heard from
the Special Coordinator, we call on all sides to cease
violations of resolution 1701 (2006) and exercise
maximum restraint in order to avoid any escalation.

