Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Mr. Simonovic' for his briefing and to congratulate
him for this fourth monthly report of the United Nations
human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine. Chad
remains deeply concerned at the situation in eastern
Ukraine, which, as confirmed by the most recent, has
only deteriorated, especially in the regions of Donetsk
and Luhansk, which have become zones of intense
clashes between the separatists and Government forces.

The use of heavy weaponry in and around
cities, causing massive destruction of residential
neighbourhoods and a great many civilian casualties,
the deliberate destruction of health centres and public
buildings, leaving entire neighbourhoods without access
to water or medical services, make life impossible for
those who are not able to flee the fighting. The civilian
population thus finds itself taken hostage by the
violence and the hostilities.

Chad condemns this increasing violence and calls
on Government forces as well as the separatist forces
to cease all hostilities immediately and to exercise
restraint. Chad deplores the increase in the number of
cases of abduction, kidnapping and illegal detention.
The United Nations monitoring mission has stated
that there were 222 cases of abduction and torture in
Ukraine during the past three months.

According to the report, there have been a significant
number of forced disappearances and executions
carried out by both separatist and Government forces,
and there are of course internally displaced persons.

The Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees believes that there are currently 117,000
displaced persons in Ukraine. In his statement
made last Tuesday, Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, stated
that there were 4 million individuals at risk living in
conflict zones (see S/PV.7234). The situation of children
and vulnerable individuals is especially alarming.
Faced with this humanitarian disaster, Chad urges the
international community to provide logistical, material,
technical and financial assistance to the Ukrainian
Government as well as to the agencies present on the
ground to meet the needs of displaced populations.

Regarding the investigation of the crash of Flight
MH-17 and the unanimous adoption of resolution 2166
(2014), the Netherlands announced last Wednesday that
as a result of the fighting near the crash site, it would
suspend its investigation searching for the remains
of victims, which has been carried out for a few days
by a hundred or so Dutch, Australian and Malaysian
investigators. We deem this situation unacceptable
for the families of the victims and call on all parties
to respect the joint declaration by the trilateral contact
group made up of Russia, Ukraine and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, in which they
have committed themselves to provide free access to
the MH-17 crash site.

Chad calls on all parties to implement resolution
2166 (2014) and for an immediate ceasefire to ensure
that the investigations can resume. Finally, we reaffirm
our commitment to the territorial integrity of Ukraine
and reiterate our call for an inclusive political dialogue
to resolve the Ukrainian crisis in a peaceful manner.

