Mr. De Mistura: The last time I briefed the
Security Council (see S/PV.6497), as the Council is
aware, I insisted, against the rules, on allowing
Ambassador Tanin to speak first, as a sign of attention
and respect to the growing need for the Afghan people
to be recognized as a sovereign country. But this time,
Ambassador Tanin has insisted, with me, to go back to
the rules, to show that Afghanistan intends to stick to
international rules. Therefore, with his permission, I
will apply the old approach and take the floor as he
kindly requested me to do.

We meet today at the moment when we are at a
special crossroads. July is a significant month in 2011,
as decisions have been taken that relate to the
2
beginning of transition. Transition has been announced,
but it is also going to be based on the decisions taken
at upcoming meetings of the international community
with the Afghan authorities, starting approximately in
mid-July. This is also the month when we are starting
to see the gradual implementation of the decision
announced in the speech by President Obama with
regard to a gradual redeployment of international
forces, in particular those of the United States. In other
words, we are at a crossroads between national
sovereignty and what comes with it, namely,
responsibility and accountability, and between
continuing conflict and a politically inclusive dialogue.

First of all, on the transition, it is like a train that
is moving forward. According to every indicator I
have - and as we heard at the meeting we had on the
transition conference in Kabul - it is also on track.
The transition will also of course address seven areas,
provinces and cities. As usual, we will see that the
devil in the details. But the transition is on track.

An issue on which we are working - and on
which we should be working more, as was recognized
in the meeting to which I referred - has to do with the
fact that transition cannot be, and should not be, only
about security. It has to be about something more. It
needs to be a transition to something that the Afghan
people recognize and identify with. That is why we are
working together in order to ensure that the results in
the social, economic and human rights aspects are
linked to the transition. In that sense, while the
transition is irreversible like a Swiss train, we need at
the same time to make sure that it becomes solidly
irreversible with regard to the socio-economic aspect.

In that context, one element that has been
discussed in the past few days, and which may come up
again, is the idea of seeing whether we could have
some of the projects that may emerge that are related to
transition linked to some type of transition dividend. In
other words, there will undoubtedly be some savings
on the military side. Some of it may be utilized to
ensure that local Afghan authorities and the people in
the areas that are being transitioned feel that there is
continuing interest and substantive support for their
development. The United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will do its part in that
regard, based on its very clear mandate, in particular to
facilitate that aspect of the transition.
11-40242

That leads me to my second point, which is
normally the first one in Afghanistan, that is, security.
As the Council knows - and there have been many
reminders of this - the security situation has been an
issue of concern recently. But we have to look at it in
context. God knows I do so with care and caution,
having just experienced tragedy on 1 April. There have
been attacks on the Intercontinental Hotel. Many of us
have been there and we know its iconic value. It was
shocking. There have been attacks inside the city and
in military hospitals, and even in the Ministry of
Defence. There were attacks in Kandahar for two days,
as well as attacks in Herat on the Italian provincial
reconstruction team.

But let us put it into context. All the attacks were
taken care of in an effective way by the Afghan
military and police - albeit perhaps sometimes in a
rather confusing way, as we are all in the process of
training. Even at the Intercontinental Hotel, in a way,
the end of the attack was supported by International
Security Assistance Force helicopters. Again, however,
the Afghan forces were up front.

I think that is an important point, because there is
a perception of improvement in terms of the security
situation, which is true. There has been a surge and
there has been an improvement in the perception of the
momentum being reversed. It is also true, however, that
there is a constant attempt by anti-government
forces - during the spring offensive, as they call it,
and in the summer - to try to reverse that perception
by giving signals of dramatic surgical attacks. But I
must say that, so far, the first impression still prevails.
The Afghans have been able to handle it. That does not
mean that in the next few weeks or perhaps months, as
the summer is not over, there may not be moments of
great difficulty in the security situation.

That is Why it is so important, first, to address the
issue of civilian casualties, which is affecting the
Afghan people, and, secondly, to actually go into the
other phase, namely, a political search - as Secretary
of State Hillary Clinton and, recently, President Obama
have indicated, and as has President Karzai several
times. Everybody recognizes that no military solution
is conceivable in Afghanistan. We now need to move
more effectively into a political search.

That means reconciliation. Where are we on that?
Well, as is clear for all to see, there have been a lot of
contacts. Unfortunately, there have also been leaks to
11-40242
the media, which have not helped those contacts. But
there is clearly a need for dialogue, and we are getting
indications that this will be resumed in a more concrete
way very soon.

Meanwhile, the United Nations is doing its part,
in close coordination with Afghan authorities and
international stakeholders. We are focusing specifically
only on what we are mandated to do, and where we
perhaps have added value, that is, on confidence-
building measures. These are important, because they
are the measures that prepare for substantive
discussion, which can only be carried out by the
Afghans with the Afghans. They will actually have to
do what we have always said, namely, ensure that this
is Afghan-led.

But confidence-building measures do matter,
especially at this stage. They include issues such as
looking at civilian casualties and giving the Taliban a
chance, if they want to be involved, to actually qualify
by doing so with facts and not with words and by
reducing the tremendous negative impact that they are
having on the civilian population, especially in the
most recent period.

Secondly, and I know this is personal judgment,
but it is one based on the perception held by many in
Kabul, the decision that the Council courageously took
to split the list of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) between Al-Qaida and the
Taliban is certainly an indicator in the right direction,
if we want to continue to push for reconciliation. To
give one example, some of the members of the High
Peace Council, which is the ultimate authority and to
which we will refer when there is a substantive
discussion, happen to still be on the list. That is very
difficult to manage when we, as the United Nations and
UNAMA, assist them logistically and substantively and
try to travel with them and bring them around in order
to make sure that we have meetings.

One area for confidence-building measures is
certainly the possibility of establishing a venue - let
us not call it an office - where meetings could
eventually take place between the Taliban and
stakeholders, in particular Afghan partners, Without a
feeling of insecurity and with an atmosphere of
sufficient discretion. That is not yet there, but it is one
of the areas.

Let me mention an additional area, which has
come up in the past few weeks. It has to do with
education. If there is one area that the international
community and the Afghan authorities should be proud
of, in terms of improvement after the departure of the
Taliban, it is education. Seven million children are
currently enrolled and going to school, many of them
girls. We continuously witnessed the tragic decisions
taken during the Taliban's rule regarding schools in
general and girls in particular. There are some
indicators that they appear for the first time to be
sending messages - even publicly through the
Internet- that they might have learned from that
mistake. We hope that this is not just a tactical decision
and that they are in fact indicating their interest in not
attacking schools.

There have been some contraindications. Some
teachers have been affected recently, but on the whole
our own research indicates that some 400 schools,
newly established in certain areas that could clearly be
influenced by a Taliban presence, have seen a
substantial reduction of attacks. Minister Wardak has
drawn my attention to this. We, together with UNICEF,
will continue studying the situation; if this is a trend,
we will recognize it as a confidence-building measure.
But it needs to be verified.

There is one area that I think we need to refer to
when we talk about reconciliation. That is
reintegration. The institutional architecture is there,
and all members of the Council have contributed
substantially - some very substantially - to actually
making sure that this is a real and well-prepared
eventuality. So far, there has been some traction and
momentum. More than 1,800 people are currently in
the programme. But challenges exist.

First of all, it is clear that until real reconciliation
takes place, it will be very difficult to see major
momentum. But having it ready in order to attract and
respond to possible changes is very important, and the
proof is that figure of 1,800. We have some concerns
and are working on how to ensure that there is
sufficient vetting. I must share with the Council the
fact that one of the preliminary indicators of the attack
in Mazar-e-Sharif was that three out of the five people
who violently and brutally killed my colleagues were
actually reintegrated ex-Taliban. That shows, first of
all, that we need to be very careful about vetting and
that none of this is waterproof until there is a final
reconciliation.
My next point is that, regardless of whether or
not reconciliation takes place, without a regional
context it will never be totally sustainable. That is why,
over the past few months, we have been looking with
great satisfaction and interest at the substantial increase
in bilateral, trilateral and multilateral meetings, from
the Shanghai process to the several meetings that have
taken place between the Afghan, Pakistani and United
States authorities. The same applies to the meetings
taking place in Istanbul, in which Iran was included in
addition to Pakistan and Afghanistan. We therefore
hope and believe that the Istanbul meeting to take place
on 2 November will be quite an opportunity for this to
be addressed.

As members of the Council know, there is an
international contact group. It is informal, but is
growing in its impact and influence. We had a very
good and constructive meeting in Kabul, where, apart
from other major issues related to transition, Deputy
Foreign Minister Ludin came up with an initiative that
we are planning to support. The initiative will seek to
determine whether we may come to some
understanding in Istanbul on stability, along the lines
of what was done in the Balkans some time ago or
during the Helsinki process. In other words, it will seek
something in writing that reassures all sides about
mutually reinforced stability.

That would make more sense, of course, if there
were also a mechanism to support it and a financial
trust fund for regional incentives. All that may be on
the table by the time of the Istanbul meeting, but we
are certainly working seriously with the Afghan and
Turkish authorities and all participants, regional and
beyond, to get something moving in that regard.

There is no question that, at the moment, there
are some clouds related to regional understandings,
such as that currently prevailing on the border between
Afghanistan and Pakistan. This should not be overly
dramatized and should, frankly, be left to the Afghans
and Pakistanis to discuss. They have recently held very
constructive and useful meetings, both in Islamabad
and in Afghanistan, and they will be neighbours
forever. We will be there for a while, but they will
always be there. So while we are looking at these
events with concern, we are also hopeful that this type
of bilateral discussion will be a move in the right
direction.

There is another issue that is important in the
context of the regional environment, and that is the
concern of some regional neighbours over the ongoing
ambiguity about the nature of the strategic pact or
understanding that may be discussed between the
Afghan authorities and, in particular, the United States.
Some countries have been very concerned about the
possibility of permanent, large foreign bases in
Afghanistan. We have been trying to reassure everyone
that this does not actually seem to be the case and that
it is actually up to the Afghan authorities to reassure
the neighbours about the real nature of whatever
strategic agreement may be reached. Having travelled
in the region, I recognize that it is still an issue that we
believe would be better resolved with clarity before
Istanbul. We hope it will. There have been statements
issued by the United States authorities - even from
the highest levels in the Pentagon - trying very rightly
to offer reassurance in that regard, but some additional
homework would probably help to dissipate that cloud.

That leads me to another issue -
counternarcotics. At a time of possible gradual changes
of focus on the part of the international community in
Afghanistan, there is a concern that the so-called
economic environment will be changing. That is
proven by facts. The military drawdown will also
reduce the impact of everything that is financially
linked to a substantial military presence. The particular
fear of my colleagues in the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, to which I draw the Council's
attention, is that the narco-economy may then become
more appealing to some Afghans. There is therefore an
important need for us not to forget that aspect, which
as Council members know is substantively affecting
not only Afghanistan but also, again, its neighbours.

That leads me to the issue of human rights. If
there is one area where I believe the United Nations
will be remembered in Afghanistan, it is probably the
way it has held the fort and raised high the flag about
the need to respect human rights. That is why the
civilian casualties report is so important and has been a
major irritant, frankly, particularly to the Taliban, who
have told us many times that it is hurting them. We
have been telling them that there is a way to avoid
that - by not hurting civilians.
This has also had an impact on the interventions
of the International Security Assistance Force and
NATO, particularly air raids. I know that the errors that
have been made are increasingly drawing the attention
of the United States and NATO authorities, whereas the
horrors that the Taliban have been perpetrating in many
places - such as the recent attacks on the bank and a
hospital - have also drawn attention, and they are
annoyed by that. We hope that this will help everyone,
and the Taliban in particular, to understand that there is
a moment when the popular support that they believe
they enjoy is being affected by the level of civilian
casualties they have been causing.

The issue of women is still very important. We
have 69 women in Parliament. We count on them to be
able to defend what has been achieved by women in
Afghanistan, but we remain worried about the reports
we are getting about the many cases of concern, such
as the judiciary sometimes punishing women when
they move out of their homes or decide not to marry.

The same thing obviously applies to the issue of
children. There have been cases of children used as
suicide bombers. There have been cases of children
being attacked in a way that has drawn the attention of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.

On the humanitarian side, there is one area to
which I need to draw the Council's attention. At the
moment, the welfare programme is having a difficulty
with resources. It is one of our own stars, trying to
show the Afghan people that we will not abandon them
at any time, as well as actually providing food to more
than 6 million children. At the moment, it has had to
substantially reduce the number of beneficiaries due to
a lack of resources. I draw attention to that because it
is an important issue for all.

Aid coherence is crucial, and it is also important
to recognize that there is a body for aid coherence. It is
called the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
(JCMB). The JCMB is the best body; there is no need
to invent a new one. The United Nations specializes in
creating new bodies, so I would be reluctant to suggest
one. Rather, the JCMB should be reinforced. The
JCMB has the possibility and potential to deal with aid
coherence. But there is a cloud - it is the Kabul Bank.
I do not need to remind the Council of that, but it is an
important issue that is, in a way, an obstacle to
progress at the moment on the JCMB and even to the
follow-up to the Kabul Conference.

That issue is not the Council's responsibility, but
that of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The
IMF is engaged and, to be fair to Minister Zakhilwal,
eight out of the 10 indicators that were requested to be
deployed in order to reassure the international
community and the IMF have been addressed, but two
remain. We hope and have been contributing to
drawing the attention of the IMF to the possible
consequences of an Afghan default, so to speak, which
is not imminent if that is not approved but is certainly
of concern. At the same time, Kabul Bank is a serious
issue to the Afghan authorities - $800 million is not
something to gloss over. Therefore, serious attention is
being focused at the moment.

The same applies to the issue with which the
Council is very familiar - the parliamentary crisis. We
were hoping that would not take place 10 months after
the elections and six months after the President had
solemnly inaugurated the Parliament. We would then
have been going through an election that, while
imperfect, would be handled by the Afghan institutions
during a continued political process.

Unfortunately, this has not been the case. A
special court has indicated that 61 members of
Parliament should perhaps leave their positions. There
is a current tension, as the Council is aware. Our
position is the position of the Security Council -
22 December. We will not change it. The second
position is that, indeed, the judiciary has the right to
prosecute anyone who has committed a crime, but not
to change the outcome of elections, and that the
solution must be an Afghan solution and a political
solution, but not a judicial solution.

We are hopeful and will continue to work on
behalf of the Council, together with the Afghan
authorities, to avoid prolongation of that institutional
crisis. Afghanistan needs checks and balances; it needs
a Parliament, an executive and a judiciary that all work
together. At the moment there is a cloud, but since I am
an optimist, I am not expecting much rain, yet, on that
issue.

The last point I will make, with the Council's
permission, is a message. This is a transition period in
every sense. But there is also a message, which we
must be certain the Afghans hear, that 2014 will not be
1989. They are worried, and rightly so, that for the
third time during their recent history they will be
graciously abandoned by the international community.
I know that is not our intention and certainly not that of
the United Nations or UNAMA, We are going to
review our footprint. We will review the way that we

must work, because transition is taking place
everywhere. But we will be there - if everything is
there and if the Afghans want us - for a long time.
And I think that, from the international point of view,
we need to constantly reassure the Afghans of that.
That will help them to pass through the transition in
this difficult period.

