Mr. Griffiths: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me this opportunity to brief the Security
Council.

Today I am very pleased to report to the Council
on progress in the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement. Between 11 and 14 May, Ansar Allah
undertook an initial redeployment of forces from the
ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa under United
Nations monitoring. My colleague Lieutenant General
Michael Lollesgaard and his team from the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA) were there at each of the three ports to
monitor and verify these redeployments. His Mission
confirmed that Ansar Allah was fully compliant
throughout the withdrawal and that they were very
cooperative. The military forces of Ansar Allah have
now left those three ports.

I would like to congratulate the Lieutenant General
and his team for that achievement and express my
gratitude to them for remaining steadfast in support
of the Al-Hudaydah agreement, reached in Sweden
on 13 December. This progress will allow the United
Nations to play "the leading role" in supporting the
Yemen Red Sea Ports Corporation in management and
inspections at the ports, including enhanced monitoring
by the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism, with inspectors ready to be deployed.

The United Nations is also ready to help improve
the productivity and efficiency of Al-Hudaydah port.
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
is sending in teams to the port to install lights to help
ships berth safely, repair facilities, upgrade the berths
and help demine the outer perimeter of the port facility.
In addition, starting this Saturday, UNDP will be
supporting 4,000 people in Al-Hudaydah, who will be
employed on public works schemes. So, there are signs
of a new beginning in Al-Hudaydah. I would like to
suggest that change in Al-Hudaydah is now a reality.

As I have said to the Council many times since
December, when that agreement was made in Sweden,
we never expected the implementation ofthis agreement
to be easy, and it has not been. But with the continuous
commitment of the parties and the coalition, the swift
and decisive support of the Council and the stewardship
ofLieutenant General Lollesgaard's Mission, UNMHA,
we have finally seen that first concrete step towards the
implementation of the agreement reached in Sweden
in December.

I am grateful to Abdulmalik al-Houthi for
his commitment and to Ansar Allah for following
through on those promises. It shows their seriousness
and commitment to implement what was agreed in
Stockholm. I commend them for being the first to
redeploy their forces, as originally agreed. This is
most welcome.

I should also add, and I am sure that we will
hear later, that the Government of Yemen has been
consistent in affirming its commitment to redeploying,
as negotiated and agreed in the first phase of
redeployment. This is also most welcome. I had an
opportunity to meet the Permanent Representative
yesterday. We discussed that very commitment,
which is clear and unequivocal. I am very grateful to
President Hadi Mansour for his continued leadership.
I know that he is personally committed to the full
implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement and has
often insisted, in particular, on the prime importance of
the redeployments.

This moment is significant. It is worth cherishing
such moments, which are not as frequent as we would
hope. But this, of course, is only the beginning. The
redeployments must - and I am sure, will - be
followed by concrete actions by the parties to deliver
on their obligations under the Stockholm Agreement.
I know we will hear more on this later. We would like
the parties to ensure that the momentum that we are
now beginning to see is maintained by implementing
subsequent steps of the mutual redeployments, verified
and monitored by the parties, and ensuring the support
that we need in the United Nations to increase our
role in the ports. If there is no forward movement, the
Al-Hudaydah agreement will remain in the precarious
situation that we have seen this year.

I call on both parties to agree on the operational
plan for the second phase, which Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard is negotiating, so that we can continue to see
movement in Al-Hudaydah. Once an agreement there
has been finalized and the implementation of the rest of
the first and second phases is under way, the parties will
monitor, verify and report to us on all redeployments
as agreed through the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, in which they are represented. My Office
is also pursuing an agreement with the parties on an
approach to the issue of local security forces in parallel
with negotiations on redeployments.

I hope that the progress we are witnessing and
the subsequent steps the parties intend to take will
allow additional areas in Al-Hudaydah, such as Ad
Durayhimi district, to witness the immediate benefit of
increased humanitarian assistance. Of course, we will
hear a lot more on such matters from our colleagues,
Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore. The purpose of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement, what we and the parties had
in mind all along, was to improve the humanitarian
situation both there and in the rest of Yemen. That is
its aim.

I am encouraged by the steps taken by the parties
to address the issues related to the economic aspects
of the Al-Hudaydah agreement, specifically looking
at the revenue in the ports. Representatives of the two
parties came together in Amman yesterday, and today
with my Office, to discuss those issues. I must stress
the importance of those discussions, as the objective is
that they will ensure that the revenues from the ports
are used for the benefit of the people of Yemen and the
salaries are paid across the front lines. I would like
to take this opportunity to thank the Government of
Jordan for allowing that meeting to take place and for
hosting it.

Despite the significance of the last few days,
Yemen remains at the crossroads between war and
peace. While the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah is generally
holding - those being carefully chosen words - the
intensification of the conflict in other parts of the
country, as I am sure we will hear, continues to be
alarming. That intensification in all of its different
aspects is a reminder that hard-won achievements
of the sort that I have been describing can be easily
wiped away. We cannot ignore how the war affects the
political process and the move towards peace. Finding
our way through to a political solution is always a
delicate exercise, a fragile vessel.

Tangible progress on Al-Hudaydah, however, will
and should allow us to look ahead to the negotiations
to end the conflict and enable the resumption of the
political negotiation and the finding of a political
solution to the conflict. As many Yemenis have made
clear to me, only a comprehensive solution will be able
to provide Yemen with sustainable peace.

It has been three years since the parties discussed
politics, three years since they had the privilege of
meeting in Kuwait in 2016. It is about time we gave
them the opportunity to do so again. I hope that the
parties can start those negotiations on the political
solution as soon as possible. They have laid much ofthe
groundwork for those discussions, and the key tenets
of that solution are well known, not least because of
those three months in Kuwait, three years ago. Those
discussions will be guided by the relevant resolutions
of the Council, including resolution 2216 (2015).
The negotiations, which is the principal focus of my
mission, will require patience, good faith and ~ of
course - concessions that go beyond what we have
seen before.

The resolution to this conflict will also be possible
only if we include the voices of a broad range of
Yemenis. The inclusion of women in particular in the
peace process will shape the future of their involvement
during the transition. I recommit my Office to be
dedicated to that proposition. The contribution of the
Yemeni women's technical advisory group, which has
been with us in the talks and between the talks, was
already valuable during the Stockholm consultations,
and it should provide a basis to reach out much more
broadly to Yemeni women who remain in their homes,
in the front lines, looking after their families.

Last month, I met with eight representatives of
the technical advisory group in Scotland, where we
generated ideas for the comprehensive implementation
of the peace agreement and on how to maintain stability
in Yemen during the post-peace agreement phase. They
came with great difficulty to the United Kingdom.
Traveling from Yemen is neither a simple nor a safe
matter. I would like to record my gratitude to them for
the risks they take and for the advice they give. Again,
we will depend on that relationship as we move into
reviewing the political options to resolve this conflict.

I would like to emphasize again, if I may, the
importance of enhancing southern participation in the
peace process. I have met with several southern groups
during the past year. We have an office in Aden now
that is led by a very distinguished and experienced
political officer of the United Nations. I am grateful for
the commitment that these groups show us to ensuring
that their concerns about their future should be resolved
in dialogue with all Yemeni groups and within the
context of Yemeni politics and Yemeni rule. That is the
commitment that they give us, but we must maintain a
very close relationship with them to make sure that we
hear them and that we listen to their aspirations.

There are signs of hope. Nothing can or should
remove or reduce our welcome of the redeployments
made in recent days in Al-Hudaydah and of the prospect
of more to come. But there have also been alarming
signs in recent days. War has a habit of trumping
peace - its impact more corrosive than the positive
effect of hard-won gains towards ending war. The ease
with which progress can be reduced or removed is
indeed frightening. I think that is also a lesson of recent
days. Progress can be made; progress can be threatened.

Finally, what I would like to ask Members of the
Council is first to welcome the redeployments we
have seen in Al-Hudaydah in the past few days. We
should also welcome the commitment of both parties
to those redeployments, urge them to work quickly
with Lieutenant General Lollesgaard to implement
the remaining redeployments and, on that basis and
through the Council, to work with us urgently on a
political solution. These beginnings must be protected
from the threat of war. We must not allow war to take
peace off the table.

