Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We welcome the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Herve Ladsous, Leiutenant-General Tesfamariam,
Force Commander of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, Major-General Michael Lollesgaard, Force
Commander of the United National Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and Major-
General Michael Finn, Head of Mission and Chief
of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization. We thank them for their briefings. We
express our deep appreciation for the very interesting
and useful insights provided.

We acknowledge the dramatic change in the nature
and scope of United Nations peace operations worldwide.
With reference to the Secretary-General's remarks
on 11 June 2014 (see S/PV.7196), at present United
Nations peacekeeping missions are forced to operate
in situations where there is no peace to keep. Thus the
field personnel entrusted with the mandate to protect
civilians are themselves increasingly under threat and
forced to counter asymmetric and unconventional
attacks while carrying out other complex mandated
tasks, including protecting the civilian population.

The three topics introduced by the briefers reflect
the complex reality of the environment in which peace
operations are deployed. I shall briefly address each of
them, namely, the challenges involved in the protection
of civilians, the challenge of operating in an asymmetric
environment, and the challenges arising from caveats
and impediments in the command and performance of
peace operations.

The protection of civilians has become the central
feature of the mandates approved by the Security
Council, and the primary reason to deploy a United
Nations peacekeeping mission. However, at present
this core objective of United Nations missions is
seriously challenged by repeated cycles of violence,
weak governance and reoccurring instability, even
in countries where peace agreements have been
successfully implemented.

From the United Nations perspective, interpreting
the concept of the protection of civilians consists
of a three-tiered approach as part of a mission's
strategy - with dialogue and engagement as the first
tier, the provision of physical protection as the second
and the establishment of a protective environment as
the third. Those concepts are key elements in ensuring
a mission's success. However, the lack of resources and
effective information gathering and analysis undermine
the efforts of States working towards unity of purpose
with the different troop-contributing countries within
a mission. Law and order problems and inadequate
training and preparation of military forces are also
challenges that the Council must address in a timely
manner. Corrective measures are necessary to avoid
failure and ensure the best conditions for a mission's
success.

Operating under an asymmetric environment
is the most extreme situation facing contemporary
peacekeeping missions, which were originally designed
as a separation force to maintain trust or an armistice
agreement between symmetric opposing regular armed
forces. At present, as the assessment review shows,
an asymmetric environment in which a peacekeeping
mission operates poses major security and safety
issues to peacekeepers, who are mandated, as their
core objective, to protect civilians. That is further
compounded by the increasing threat of regional
terrorism, particularly in Africa, with the use of
vehicle-based bombs and improvised explosive devices
and suicide attacks increasing the numbers of casualties
among United Nations personnel. It is therefore
necessary to establish a comprehensive asymmetrical
threat approach as part of a strategic framework aimed
at this deadly threat, while maintaining the military and
civilian components, thereby permitting the mission to
effectively accomplish its mandate.

Finally, the conditionality imposed by caveats acts
as an impediment to command and performance, given
that unity of command and control is of paramount
importance in any mission's performance and success.
Also, some Member States contributing troops or
police to peacekeeping missions impose caveats, such
as with regard to the location of deployment, the types
of actions that units are not allowed to undertake
and parallel rules of engagement. These, against the
backdrop of an operational link between a contingent
and their capitals, often result in the disobedience
of orders on the part of the Force Commander. That
is a totally unacceptable situation, as it hampers the
mission's operational capabilities. We are of the view
that troop- and police-contributing countries should
strictly respect the chain of command, since the
failure to follow coherent and consistent orders of the
Force Commander may lead to wrongdoing and even
catastrophic consequences to all those involved, while
damaging the reputation of the entire United Nations
system.

In conclusion, we express our deep appreciation
for the convening of this meeting, for the briefings
provided and for the interaction afforded between
Council members and the Force Commanders as heads
of the military components on the ground.

