Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align themselves with this
statement.

I, too, would like, first of all, to thank the High
Representative, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, for his
comprehensive and enlightening briefing on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The European
Union expresses its continued support to the High
Representative in his endeavours to ensure the
implementation of the Dayton/Paris Accords.

For the first time, more than five years after the
Dayton/Paris Agreements, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
a Government without the participation of nationalistic
parties. The Union expresses its hope that this
Government will carry out much-needed reforms and
work for the benefit of all the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The new Government will have the full
support of the EU in fulfilling commitments
undertaken in Dayton/Paris, notably as elaborated at
the Ministerial Meeting of the Peace Implementation
Council on 25 May 2000.

The European Union wishes to recall that the
citizens and peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina can
move towards Europe only in the framework of the
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this context, the
EU condemns recent unilateral moves by the so-called
Croat National Congress of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
place itself outside the provisions of the Dayton/Paris
Accords. The EU calls on the Croats of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to work within the legal institutions of
their country at all levels to promote their interests.

The EU reiterates its support for the decision of
the High Representative to remove the Member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Ante
Jelavic, and others from their publicly held offices and
their positions within the Croatian Democratic Union
(HDZ) following their repeated undermining of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. At the same time, the EU
welcomes the High Representative's express desire to
maintain a dialogue with Bosnian Croats and to
encourage their participation in improving economic,
social and cultural conditions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The EU underlines the crucial role of
neighbouring countries in promoting a stable and
multi-ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The EU notes the recent establishment of a
special parallel relationship between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Republika Srpska of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and urges the High
Representative to monitor any further amendments to
it, in order to ensure that it remains consistent with the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The EU notes with satisfaction the progress
which is being made across the region in bringing
individuals to account for abuses of power and criminal
offences which were committed under the cover of
previous undemocratic regimes. The EU welcomes the
decision by the former President of the Republika
Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mrs. Biljana
Plavsic, to voluntarily present herself at The Hague in
order to cooperate with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The EU
calls upon all other persons indicted by the ICTY to
surrender themselves to the Tribunal and urges relevant
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
elsewhere, to comply with their obligation to fully
cooperate with the Tribunal and to arrest all indictees
who remain at large.

The EU wishes to encourage the High
Representative to review current international civil
implementation structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and to make proposals as to their streamlining with a
view to ensuring the most effective coordination of all
international actors. Being one of these actors, the EU
is determined to sustain its long-term commitment to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Union is the main troop
contributor to Bosnia and Herzegovina and remains by
far the largest donor of long-term economic assistance.
The commitment of the EU is also expressed in the
Stabilization and Association Process, this being the
path for Bosnia and Herzegovina's rapprochement with
the Union. The EU wishes to stress the urgent need to
implement political, economic, democratic, human
rights and rule of law reforms, as outlined in the EU
Road Map, in order to allow a move to the next stage
of the Stabilization and Association Process, namely, a
feasibility study.

The EU expresses its support for all efforts aimed
at enhanced regional cooperation, in conformity with
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
the inviolability of the borders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the States in the region. In this
context, the EU recalls the role of the Stability Pact and
the instruments it has put in place in order to increase
cross-border cooperation and achieve regional stability.

