Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for convening this open debate, which is of particular importance given that this year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations, the founding treaty of this Organization, which includes the purposes and principles that unite all the nations represented here. Guatemala, as a founding country of the Charter of the United Nations, firmly believes in this Organization and in the essential role of the Security Council in the maintenance and upholding of international peace and security, the observance of human rights and the sustainable development of peoples. This is a landmark year. Seventy-five years after its founding, given the global circumstances we face, we must turn our attention now more than ever to the founding principles of the Organization and to upholding the Charter to preserve international peace and security and fulfil the foundational and institutional existence of the United Nations. Given the importance of this debate, I would like to contribute by referring to three established priorities that uphold the United Nations Charter: the first paragraph of the Preamble, the purpose set out in Article 1, paragraph 1, and General Assembly resolution | (1). I will proceed in that order. The first paragraph of the Preamble specifies that the mission of the United Nations is to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. In that regard, we must pool efforts among nations to peacefully settle conflicts. The Organization was established to create mechanisms of peace and prevent future wars - we must do everything possible to avoid their outbreak. The purpose set out in Article 1, paragraph 1, is to maintain international peace and security, and to that end to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression, and to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of disputes. To that end, the Security Council must shoulder its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security through the peaceful settlement of disputes by discharging its duties in accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. Lastly, based on the Charter, General Assembly resolution | (1) was formulated in response to the way the Second World War ended and underscored the importance of eliminating atomic weapons of mass destruction. In that regard, 75 years after the Charter and in view of the imminent, devastating and tragic risk of another world war, it is now more necessary than ever to recall and fulfil the obligations to which we as States have committed ourselves in order to ensure international peace and security. Guatemala underlines the trust that Member States place in the organs of this Organization, including the International Court of Justice, by bringing before its consideration disputes that have arisen among them, as well as the commitment of countries to maintaining and promoting the rule of law throughout the world. Guatemala recognizes the important work of the International Court of Justice, since its judgements provide certainty and due compliance with the norms of international law. Allow me to convey our recognition and support for the work of the Court and its judges. I reiterate the importance that Guatemala attaches to the Security Council and its functions under Chapter VI of the Charter with regard to the peaceful settlement of disputes. Guatemala reaffirms its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter and to assisting the Security Council in fulfilling those efforts by prioritizing the preventive approach to the maintenance and consolidation of world peace. I wish to conclude my statement to the Security Council with these words of Pope Francis contained in his message to the United Nations Conference to Negotiate a Legally Binding Instrument to Prohibit Nuclear Weapons, Leading Towards their Total Elimination, held in March 2017: "An ethics and a law based on the threat of mutual destruction - and possibly the destruction of all humankind - are contradictory to the very spirit of the United Nations." We must do something about that. It is our responsibility.
