Ms. Rasi (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria, Latvia, Poland, the Czech Republic, Romania and
Slovakia, and the associated country Cyprus align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union is deeply shocked by the news
from East Timor, where, following the expression of the
democratic will of the people on 30 August, a calculated
campaign of intimidation and violence has resulted in
widespread slaughter and destruction and the Violation of
their most basic human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET),
which has courageously withstood heavy intimidation and
pressure, has now been obliged to withdraw most of its
staff from Dili. Also the International Red Cross and other
humanitarian organizations have had to leave, as have
practically all international media. Thus, almost no impartial
eyewitnesses are left in East Timor. According to reports it
is clear that hundreds, if not thousands, of innocent
civilians, including women and children, have been killed.
Tens of thousands of people have fled or have been
forcibly relocated out of East Timor.

The European Union has expressed its grave concern
to the Indonesian authorities and urged them to discharge
fully their obligations on security arrangements under 5
May 1999 Agreements. The Presidency's Foreign Minister
has also been in direct contact with her colleagues, both
European and others. She has also discussed the matter
with United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan. It is
clear that the international community shares the same
concern, sense of urgency and gravity of the situation.

The European Union stresses that the popular
consultation of 30 August 1999 is an accurate reflection
of the views of the East Timorese people, who have made
a clear and democratic choice in favour of independence.
This irreversible choice must be respected.

The European Union recalls its position, which was
expressed in its statement of 27 August before the
Security Council, that it is the Indonesian Government's
responsibility to ensure security, stability and public order
in East Timor, to disarm militias and to hold accountable
the perpetrators of the killings.

The European Union condemns in the strongest
terms the escalation of violence in East Timor and urges
the Government of Indonesia to take immediate steps to
restore law and order and to cooperate with the United
Nations. It is essential that a secure environment is
restored so that people can return to their homes in safety.
We call on the Government of Indonesia to accept an
international armed presence under the mandate of the
United Nations Security Council to assist it in this task.
The European Union is following the situation closely and
is considering further action to support the efforts of the
international community.

The European Union is increasingly concerned at the
worsening humanitarian situation in East Timor.
Conditions must be restored for the rapid resumption of
humanitarian assistance, including full access for United
Nations agencies and humanitarian and human rights
organizations to areas where the displaced have gathered,
including West Timor. The Union deplores the attack on
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
compound, leading to the evacuation, as well as attacks
on churches and church property and the killing and
dispersal of people who took refuge there.

The European Union commends the courage and
efficiency of the staff of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor, which has been operating in extremely
difficult conditions.

The European Union is following the situation
closely. It stands ready to consider further how it can
contribute to meeting the needs of East Timor and its

 

people in the process of independence resulting from the
popular consultation.

I wish to add that Malta also wishes to align itself
with this statement.

