Mr. Daeie (Serbia) (Spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): I would like to
take this opportunity to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
introducing the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/901)
and for his overall engagement in the achievement of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). I also salute all Members of
the Security Council and and take this opportunity to
inform the Council of the importance of the continued
consideration by this organ - every three months - of
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija, with the aim of
creating conditions for the unhindered implementation
of the UNMIK mandate and as a way of supporting
the dialogue process between Belgrade and Pristina
that is being faciliated by the European Union (EU).
I also take this opportunity to thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his contribution
to the work of the Organization during his tenure, as
well as to wish success to his successor, His Excellency
Mr. Antonio Guterres.

Notwithstanding numerous challenges, the
Republic of Serbia has demonstrated time and again
its clear commitment to solving the outstanding issues
through dialogue, within a status-neutral framework
that is guided primarily by the interests of regional
stability and the creation of conditions for economic
prosperity and the progress of the region in the process
of EU accession negotiations.

The agreement on telecommunications was recently
reached due to the efforts of the Republic of Serbia,
whereby a contribution was made to the implementation
of the Brussels Agreement. Yet our readiness to seek
sustainable solutions through negotiations conducive to
a better life for the people of Kosovo and Metohija has
frequently not been reciprocated with the same approach
from the other side, which regrettably continues to
resort to unilateral and evidently very detrimental
moves, such as the recent unheard-of attempt by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government (PISG)
in Pristina to confiscate the Mining, Metallurgy and
Chemical Combine at Trepca.

Let me point out that, ever since the inception
of the dialogue, Serbia has insisted, during almost
every round and at every level, that the question of
property be included in the agenda, and yet Pristina has
always refused to talk about the matter. Such actions
by Pristina, which instil an atmosphere of unilateral
imposition, fait accompli and ultimatum instead of
solving outstanding issues through dialogue with the
aim of finding acceptable solutions for all involved
parties, as has been done in the past, are not in the
interests of regional peace and stability at all.

As the Council may well know, In 1999 UNMIK
undertook to oversee the Mining, Metallurgy and
Chemical Combine at Trepca under resolution 1244
(1999). UNMIK transferred the combine management
rights to the Kosovo Trust Agency, established by
UNMIK itselfin 2002. Following the illegal, unilateral
declaration of independence by Pristina in 2008, the
Privatization Agency of Kosovo was established,
which took over the competencies of the Kosovo Trust
Agency, which has not been approved by UNMIK to
this day. The illegal Privatization Agency of Kosovo
then proceeded to privatize State- and community-
owned property in the province, to the extent that,
through the persistent pursuit of abusive practices for
which no legal basis exists in resolution l244 (1999),
Pristina unilaterally privatized about 70 per cent of
State- and community-owned property in the province.
At the same time as the unlawful privatization, Pristina
went on to seize the private property of Serbs and of the
Serbian Orthodox Church. That widespread ill practice
was carried out, by and large, by way of the submission
of fraudulent documents issued by Kosovo institutions
to local Albanians.

The adoption of the law on Trepca was done in
gross violation ofthe basic principles of resolution 1244
(1999) and the constitutional framework for provisional
self-government in Kosovo. The latter, let me recall,
specifies explicitly that the authority to administer
public-, State- and community-owned property, in
accordance with the relevant UNMIK legislation, as
well as the regulation of public- and community-owned
enterprises, are powers and responsibilities reserved for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
That law, I emphasize, was adopted by the PISG
without participation by UNMIK or consultation with
the owners/shareholders of Trepca, representatives of
the municipalities in the territories on which the Trepca
mines and plants are located or representatives of Serbs
in the PISG. Let me remind the Council that Serbs are
part of the Government of Kosovo and the Trepca North
management and employees. Those unilateral actions
by the PISG induce legal insecurity that may seriously
threaten the fragile security situation in Kosovo
and Metohija. Particularly disconcerting is the fact
that the law disrupts lastingly sustainable economic
development, without which the ethnic structure in
the Serbian communities in the north of the province
is untenable.

By those actions the PISG in Kosovo and Metohija
have patently crossed the bounds of their mandate
and confiscated the private property of Trepca, thus
affecting the owners/shareholders, creditors and the
employees in a direct way. They did so contrary to
the principles of international law against such types
of confiscation, as well as a number of international
instruments guaranteeing the right to the peaceful
enjoyment of property, prohibiting discrimination and
promoting equality before the law, such as the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms, the European Charter of Local
Self-Government and so forth. Also, the law runs
roughshod over the basic principles of the free market
and competition and is in direct contravention of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement between
Pristina and the European Union and of the Central
European Free Trade Agreement.

Pristina is in the process of transforming, without
any legal basis or justification, the largest economic
giant in Kosovo and Metohija into the property of the
so-called Republic of Kosovo, while denying Serbia
any rights whatsoever, even though it is the majority
shareholder in the corporation. That is a serious attack
on the interests of the Serbs, including 3,000 of them
working in Trepca. It is estimated that about 38 per
cent of Serbian families directly or indirectly depend
on it. Property and the right to property are sacrosanct,
particularly in the democratic world, and who owns
Trepca is only too apparent. The companies and citizens
of Serbia who built it own it, and no unlawful decision
of the Kosovo authorities can change that.

Proceeding therefrom, the Government of
the Republic of Serbia decided to make all legal
consequences of the acts and actions of the PISG in
Pristina relative to the legal and physical status of Trepca
null and void. Desirous of ensuring that Trepca, which
is of vital importance for the survival ofthe Serbs in the
province and for the economic development primarily
of the municipalities of Kosovska Mitrovica, Zveean,
Leposavie and Zubin Potok, as well as of Novo Brdo
and Graeanica, the Government took action and made
a decision. The attack on Trepca is not only an attack
on one company, it is also an attack on the right of a
people to exist in a territory and an attack on the very
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999), on which peace
and stability in the province rest.

Trepca is the lifeblood of the Serbs' existence in
northern Kosovo and Metohija. Serbian homes sit on
Trepca's land, and thousands of Serbs work in Trepca's
mines and support their families by that work. For them
the defence of Trepca is the defence of their right to
exist in Kosovo. In that sense, the attempt to seize it
from its lawful owners is also an attempt to finalize the
ethnic cleansing of the Serbs and to bring into question
the ethnic composition of Serbian communities in the
long term. This is not acceptable.

Not only do the authorities in Pristina usurp the
property of the State of Serbia in Kosovo and Metohija
through the law on Trepca; in article 5 the law states that
the so-called Republic of Kosovo will also appropriate
mineral resources in other parts of Serbia, outside of
Kosovo and Metohija, which is complete legal nonsense.

Serbia remains open to seeking a peaceful and
sustainable solution to this situation, which is not of its
own making, in the belief that resolving all questions
and problems through dialogue and agreement is the
only right way forward. In that context, we expect
Security Council members to bring the force of their
authority to bear and have the law annulled, thereby
preventing its negative legal and security consequences
from jeopardizing the stability of Kosovo and Metohija
and the region, as well as enabling the process of
dialogue and the normalization of relations. Otherwise,
Kosovo and Metohija will become a black hole in
Europe without any protection of private property.

I would like to point out, as I did at previous
meetings of the Council, that the establishment,
within the shortest period of time, of the Community
of Serb-majority municipalities, as a mechanism for
the systematic institutional protection of the Serbian
community in Kosovo and Metohija, is of paramount
importance for the survival of the Serbian people
in the province. Unfortunately, instead of being the
central issue and acted upon as a matter of priority,
the establishment of the Community has become the
subject of political blackmail. Our side insisted in the
past period that the dynamics of the establishment of
the Community be worked out and that the date for the
management team to commence its work be determined.
The Community of Serb-majority municipalities is to
be based only on agreements already reached in the
dialogue, and not on subsequent attempts to unilaterally
alter the agreements reached with the facilitation of the
European Union.

The process ofestablishing the Community of Serb-
majority municipalities must not be allowed to drag on
and be threatened by unilateral acts that send messages
of disenfranchisement to the Serbian people in Kosovo
and Metohija. One such message is the law on strategic
investment in Kosovo, which, if implemented, would
provide Pristina with cover to contract capital projects
directly, without tender offers; for the participation of
the institutions of local self-government; and to possess
and sell general assets arbitrarily to the detriment of the
status and interests ofthe Serbian people in the province.
That law was adopted contrary to the procedure that
provides for the adoption of laws of vital interest to
local communities, eviscerating the Community of
Serb-majority municipalities by infringing on the
competencies that under the agreement belong quite
explicitly to that Community to be.

It is clear that this legislative provocation by
Pristina is aimed at making the Community of Serb-
majority municipalities an empty shell and preventing
Serbs from making decisions with regard to their
economic development and urban planning. The theft
of Serbian property in Kosovo and Metohija, such
as the failed attempt to seize the tourist complex on
Mount Brezovica, cannot be legalized by any law. It is
therefore necessary to return to the negotiating table, as
the unilateral acts do not benefit anybody.

The situation in Kosovo and Metohija continues to

be characterized by the absence of physical and legal

security for Serbs, especially for internally displaced

persons (IDPs) who have returned or would like to

return home. IDPs are prevented from participating in

developing the law on the Kosovo property comparison
and verification agency, which is yet another
inadmissible and frightening example of the attempt
to seize Serbian property in outright contravention of
the agreement on cadastre reached within the dialogue
conducted with the facilitation of the European Union.
All along, thousands of Albanians are being inscribed
in the cadastre as owners of the property of IDPs by
way of submission of fraudulent documents, while
no special mechanism has been provided to notify
IDPs of the proceedings instituted in connection with
their property.

Another method of discouragement of returns,
especially in the region of Pee, is the dissemination
of information in the Kosovo media of the issuance
of indictments for war crimes against a large number
of Serbs, almost as a rule against IDPs reporting for
return. IDPs are repeatedly being attacked, with the
frequent use of firearms and explosive devices, while
acts of desecration against Orthodox graveyards and
memorial plaques of abducted or murdered civilians are
on the rise. Attempts to prevent IDPs from observing
religious holidays, as was the case in Djakovica and
Musutiste, continue unabated. In addition, religious
extremism, compounded by terrorism and the activities
of radicalized extremists returning from battlefields
and terrorist group formations, has dramatically
increased in Kosovo and Metohija. That exacerbates
the polarized political environment, which is replete
with tensions and tear gas democracy and persistent
violence against the members of Serbian and other
non-Albanian communities.

Security in Kosovo and Metohija has always been
in short supply and marked with escalating violence. As
a rule, returnees to ethnically mixed communities are
the most vulnerable. It is therefore hard to understand
why there is reduced focus and space on security
observations in the report of the Secretary-General. It
is for that reason that we propose that new chapters on
the situation in the communities south of the lbar River,
on obstacles aggravating or preventing IDP returns, on
property rights and impunity for ethnically motivated
crimes be included in the quarterly reports of the
Secretary-General.

Let me also point out that the monotonous recitation
of incomplete statistics on attacks on the life and property
of members of non-Albanian communities serves but
to cast a pall of relativity over the civilizationally
inadmissible phenomenon of persecution on an ethnic
and religious basis. The report would be much more
informative if, in addition to statistics, it advised
of how competent institutions - including police,
public prosecutors and the judiciary - reacted, and if
it provided data relative to investigations, the search
for perpetrators, indictments, criminal or civil trials
and the types of sentences handed down, along with
the terms of their validity and enforcement in cases
of ethnically motivated criminal offences. Without
institutional reaction, all attacks and other offences
against Serbs are being depersonalized and reduced
to statistics, which leads to the tolerance of a climate
of impunity of ethnically motivated crimes against
Serbs in the long run. Providing data on the outcome
percentages related to such criminal offences would
therefore be very informative indeed.

Instances of desecration against the spiritual
heritage of the Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija
are many. The last such instance was the arson that took
place in the Church of Christ the Saviour in Pristina
at the beginning of September, of which I also made
mention in my previous statement to the Council (see S/PV.7760). Let me remind the Council that that is an
unfinished church that was converted into a public
lavatory and a podium to shoot music videos featuring
scantily clad singers. As if that were not enough,
unknown persons broke into the church and set it
afire. That contemptible act is an outright consequence
of the refusal of the Kosovo authorities and police to
provide round-the-clock protection to the church,
which has been frequently broken into and desecrated.
That incident was preceded by protests by Kosovo and
Metohija Albanians who time and again manifested
unchecked hostility towards the Serbian Orthodox
Church and the Serbian people in the province, the
targets of systematic ethnic terror for the past 17 years.

The church, the only remaining trace and symbol
of the presence of Orthodox Christianity in downtown
Pristina, in which more than 40,000 Serbs lived
before 1999, has been designated for destruction, just
as every other Serbian thing destroyed or expelled
from Pristina and many other places in Kosovo and
Metohija. For weeks, the Pristina authorities bulldozed
each and every square foot of the land surrounding
the church, in an attempt to link it in whichever way
with war crimes; once they failed, the arson ensued.
The extremists calling for the destruction of the church
or its seizure from the Serbian Orthodox Church and
conversion are in fact calling for the continuation of
ethnic cleansing and the denial of basic religious rights
and freedoms to the Serbian people, thus violating the
civilizational norms of the present-day world. They
fan the flames of ethnic and religious extremism and
radicalism and hamper stabilization and reconciliation.
Furthermore, reflecting Pristina's true attitude towards
the cultural and religious heritage of the Serbs, they
are at the same time indicative of how right Serbia
was to oppose Kosovo's admission to UNESCO. Those
who destroy, set ablaze or desecrate Serbian churches
cannot be their keepers. Perhaps those who supported
the admission have now come to realize to whom they
wanted to entrust the protection of the Serbian heritage
in the province.

Because basic conditions for sustainable returns
do not exist, the number of returnees to the province
continues to be lamentably low. I submit that that is a
defeat for all those involved in the process of return.
It is incumbent upon all of us to change that situation
and to create conditions in which IDPs are given a real
choice, in deeds and not only in words, between return
and local integration. To do so, though, we must see to
it that basci conditions be fulfilled in places of return
with regard to personal and property security. The rule
oflaw, non-discrimination, full respect for basic human
and civil rights and a step away from politics, which
deepens the gap among communities on a national
and religious basis, are the necessary preconditions
for normalizing relations and finding solutions to
questions relative to IDPs from Kosovo and Metohija.
It is important to keep such people in the focus of the
international community, and of the United Nations in
particular, despite the numerous problems the world
faces, including the current refugee and migrant crisis,
all the more so as this is exactly a question that explicitly
falls under the UNMIK mandate. The international
community must not allow those people to be forgotten.
It is not enough to note that the level of returns is
unacceptably low; the reasons for the failure should be
analysed instead. The failure is attributable primarily
to the rigid attitude of the majority community, as
well as of its political leaders, towards the return of
displaced Serbs.

Let me remind the Council - and, when speaking

about Kosovo and Metohija, the Secretary-General
should also recall in his reports and remind each of the
members ofthe Council - that truly sustainable returns
have been realized only by 1.9 per cent of internally
displaced persons. Does the Security Council believe
that that is a topic that should no longer be discussed?
If not, the Council would call on Pristina to create the
necessary conditions and appeal to people to return to
Kosovo. We cannot allow that to be forgotten. I hope
that none of the countries represented in the Council
will operate with double standards now that it pertains
to Serbians who are displaced. That is why I recall, once
again, that the Security Council adopted a resolution
giving a mandate to the Mission to enable the return
of internally displaced and persecuted persons from
Kosovo, whether Serbs or Albanians. Only 1.9 per cent
of Serbs have returned. That percentage accounts for
approximately 4,000 internally displaced persons. One
of the reasons for that is the disregard for communities
south of the Ibar River, which increases their feeling of
being isolated, sidelined and left to their own devices.

Each and every time the representatives of Pristina
utter their accusations of alleged genocide and ethnic
cleansing of Albanians, please remember my remarks
from our previous meeting that, out of 427 localities
in which they lived until 1999, Serbs were expelled
from 311. Today no Serbs are present there. More than
220,000 were expelled.

Let us remember the victims of the monstrous
crime of trafficking in human organs, testified to by
Mr. Dick Marty, Special Rapporteur of the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe, in his report. Let
us remember the abducted and disappeared Serbs and
other non-Albanians from Kosovo and Metohija, the
fate of whom is unknown 17 years after the conflict.
More than 1,000 Serbs have been killed since 1999.
The number of their killers against whom legally valid
sentences were handed down still amounts to zero.

Let us remember Father Chariton, the martyr
bestially killed in my native Prizren in June 1999.
He was decapitated in the same way in which, to the
consternation of the entire world, the terrorists of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant behead their
innocent victims today. His headless body was found
with his arms and backbone broken and with stabs in
his heart, gruesome evidence of the torture of Albanian
extremists to which he succumbed.

Let us remember the March pogrom of 2004, in
which 19 Serbs were killed and 900 wounded, despite
the international presence in the province. Nine hundred
and thirty-five Serbian, Roma and Ashkali houses were
set afire. Six towns and 10 villages were ethnically
cleansed. About 4,000 men and women were expelled
from their homes. Thirty-five churches were destroyed,
burned or desecrated, many of which were built as early
as the fourteenth century. The abbey of Devic, which
was founded by the Serbian Despot Durad Brankovie
in 1434, was also burned that March, while those who
set fire to Mother of God Ljeviska Chuch, which is on
the UNESCO World Heritage List, burned automobile
tires so that fire quickly incinerated some of the most
beautiful icons from the first half of the fourteenth
century, which represents some of the cultural heritage
of the world.

Let us remember the numerous instances of
vandalism on Serbian cultural and religious heritage
throughout the province, unbecoming of modern-day
Europe and the civilized world. Since June 1999 and
the cessation of the armed conflict, 236 churches,
monasteries and other facilities owned by the
Serbian Orthodox Church, as well as historic-cultural
monuments, have been targets of attack. One hundred
and seventy-four religious sites and 33 historic-
cultural monuments have been destroyed. There are
no undamaged tombstones in most Serbian cemeteries,
while south the Ibar River no monuments from Serbian
history remain intact. No localities south of the lbar
River have streets today with Serbian names, as most
of them have been renamed to bear the names of the
members of the Kosovo Liberation Army, who are
proven terrorists and perpetrators of monstrous crimes.
The message sent to the Serbs is very clear indeed:
those who killed and expelled them now pass as national
heroes, and monuments are erected and streets and
public institutions are renamed to glorify their names.
Those instances of institutional violence in present-day
Kosovo and Metohija are part of the strategy aimed at
erasing the traces of the centuries-long presence of the
Serbian people and State and legitimizing the results of
the ethnic cleansing of the Serbian people.

The representatives of Pristina continue to repeat
their false accusations, which are based on the premise
that a lie told 1,000 times becomes a truth. Let us
remember all that I have said. Those lies cannot change
the fact that Kosovo is not and cannot be a State. Kosovo
is nothing but the product of a violation of international
law, the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the postulates on which modern civilization was
built. Ethnic cleansing, mass violations of the human
and civil rights of non-Albanians, and the destruction
of the cultural heritage that belongs not only to the
Serbian people but also makes up a part of Europe's and
the world's cultural heritage, all make up the foundation
of the self-declared fake State of Kosovo.

The best evidence of the civilizational immaturity
of those professing to be the leaders of the Albanian
people in Kosovo and Metohija is the recent
adoption - and please listen carefully to this - in the
Kosovo Parliament of a cynically entitled "Resolution
on the protection of the values of the Kosovo Liberation
Army". That shameful resolution is predicated on the
assumption that crime is of positive social value. If
the seizure of property and the torturing and killing
of civilians, as well as the ambush of journalists and
ambulances, can be called values, then the terrorist
Kosovo Liberation Army does deserve to have a
resolution devoted to it. It is not known that any
Parliament in the world, except perhaps during the
Second World War, ever adopted a resolution glorifying
criminals and terrorists. Yet the Parliament in Pristina
has managed to make itself unique once again. Not
a modicum of censure of terrorism and violence is
to be found in the resolution, which also makes no
mention of the "yellow house" in which people had
their organs ripped, of the abductions, of the rapes
or of the pogroms of Serbian and other non-Albanian
civilians, which represent the true values and legacy
of the Kosovo Liberation Army. For those reasons I
say to the members of the Security Council - who are
also representatives of civilized society - that that act
by the highest legislative body in Pristina deserves the
strongest possible condemnation.

It is exactly in that way that the Parliament in
Pristina sent a clear message to the entire international
community, including those sitting here in the
Chamber, about what the Parliament thinks of the
Specialist Chambers - which Mr. Tanin referred to
and which other speakers likely will as well - and
the crimes of the Kosovo Liberation Army that those
Chambers are supposed to verify and punish. That
means that the Parliament in Pristina, which adopted
the necessary legislation for the commencement of the
work of the Specialist Chambers in The Hague, has
sent an unequivocal advance notice as to what we can
expect going forward in the process of establishing
accountability for the crimes committed against the
Serbs and other non-Albanians.

That also shows that the visits by Hashim Thaci to
monuments and in connection with the farmers killed
in their fields at Staro Gracko in July 1999 and the
children killed at Gorazdevac in 2003 while they were
playing on the banks of the village stream are nothing
but an act of one-shot unsuccessful political marketing.

The assessment from the report before us states that

"[l]eading by example helps to change attitudes
in wider context and gives optimism for the
potential for reconciliation to succeed at the social
level."(S/20]6/901, para. 22).

Let me remind the Council that nobody was held
accountable for those crimes and that, in all likelihood,
nobody ever will be. Only time will tell if those visits
will be transformed into a concrete positive step forward
in the furtherance of security and respect for the rights
of non-Albanian communities. Once the perpetrators
are identified and tried, we will certainly commend
Mr. Thaci's visits. For the time being, though, not just
those crimes, but no crime to date committed in Kosovo
since 1999 has been punished.

In the interest of regional stability, our side will
continue the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
The dialogue is aimed primarily at addressing the
everyday vital problems of the people living in Kosovo
and Metohija and at normalizing relations. We will
not abuse the dialogue as a platform to ram through
the independence of Kosovo. Let me recall that the
essence of each and every dialogue, including the one
in Brussels, is to achieve agreements, and not impose
solutions. The role of the international community is to
help achieve compromise, rather than assist one side in
imposing its interests. That is true in particular of the
Community of Serb-majority municipalities, which is
of paramount importance for the Serbian community in
Kosovo and Metohija.

Serbia will never recognize the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo, but it will
continue the policy of seeking peaceful solutions of
this question on the basis of a responsible approach
and the full implementation of the agreement reached
within the Brussels dialogue. Regardless of the
numerous challenges and frequent manifestations
of non-constructiveness and the only-too-evident
propensity to resorting to half unilateral steps, we
will continue to be committed to working towards the
normalization of relations. We do not want the situation
in Kosovo and Metohija to be a latent threat to the
stability and progress of Serbia or the region. We will
therefore work with dedication on solving disagreements
peacefully, being aware that a long process is in front
of us and that, to make things more difficult, we often
do not have a proper interlocutor, one who shares our
vision ofa region aspiring to reconciliation, the rule of
law and democratic values.

I call on States that have not recognized the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo
to stay loyal - despite the pressure to which many
of them have been exposed - to their principles of
respect for international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and the supreme authority of the Security
Council for safeguarding international peace and
security, whose resolution 1244 (2000) confirms the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Serbia. They should always bear in mind that the
support of the international community is key to the
success of the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
Each and every change of position of the countries that
have not recognized the independence of Kosovo would
negatively affect the continuation of the constructive
approach of the parties in the dialogue and the
implementation of the agreements reached.

At the same time, I also call on various countries
that have recognized the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo to seriously reassess their
decisions and contribute in that way to the efforts
aimed at finding a mutually acceptable solution to the
question of Kosovo and Metohija. That is what we are
asking for - a chance for dialogue and an agreement
instead of unilateralism, instead of unilateral acts. We
expect Council members to lend their support, while
keeping mind the values enshrined by the United
Nations, and to repudiate the rampant propaganda and
outright lies whereby we keep being told perpetually by
the representatives of the PISG in Kosovo at Security
Council meetings.

In conclusion, let me point out once again that
Serbia continues to be firmly committed to peace,
dialogue, reconciliation and regional stability - in a
word, to lasting solutions that will lead us to the future
instead of to the conflicts of the past.

