Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank Ambassador Verbeke
for his successful leadership in heading the Security
Council mission to Belgrade and Pristina. Both at the
organizational stage and as it was being carried out, the
mission benefited from his great diplomatic skill,
which made it possible to fully attain the objectives
set. All of that is reflected in the report (S/2007/256),
whose balanced content duly attests to the work
accomplished.

From the very moment that the mission was
proposed, Peru joined those who considered it
favourably. We are pleased that it took place, because it
enabled our delegation to gain greater clarity with
respect to various elements, among which we wish to
highlight the following.

First, the wounds of the 1999 conflict are still
very visible. That is why reconciliation among
communities and the integration of minorities -
particularly Serbs - into a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo will require a significant amount of time and
sustained international follow-up.

Secondly, the current situation in Kosovo is the
result not only of political developments since 1999,
but also, and in particular, of events that occurred

before that year in the former Yugoslavia in general
and in Serbia in particular. In that connection, a
decision on Kosovo's future status will have to be
taken from a broad political and historical perspective,
beginning with the process of disintegration of the
former Yugoslavia and the degree of autonomy that
Kosovo enjoyed there - autonomy that was later
snatched away.

Thirdly, recognizing that tradition of autonomy
makes it possible to better understand the profound and
irreparable impact of the 1999 conflict on Kosovo
society, as well as the progress noted in preparing
Kosovo's provisional authorities to be in a position to
take charge of their own destiny as soon as possible.

Fourthly, the combination of elements I have just
described leads to the conclusion that returning Kosovo
to Serbian sovereignty is not a realistic solution for this
situation.

Fifthly, we were also able to note the European
Union's heightened level of commitment to the Balkan
situation, including its readiness to assist Kosovo in
future institution-building.

In that context, the Ahtisaari proposal brings
together the requisite components to ensure peace and
stability in the region. That is because, first of all, it
establishes a model for the political organization of an
independent Kosovo; secondly, it sets out a series of
guarantees for minority communities in Kosovo, in
particular the Serbian ethnic minority; and, thirdly, the
commitment of the countries of the European Union
serves as a guarantee of stability, not only with regard
to Kosovo but also with respect to other Balkan
countries, including Serbia. That is a central element,
as Peru has always favoured solutions promoted by
countries of the region in which a conflict is taking
place.

My delegation will therefore be in a position to
support a draft Security Council resolution endorsing
the proposal of the Special Envoy.

