Mrs. Camara (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation is very happy to see you, Sir, presiding over
this important Security Council meeting on Africa. The
Mauritian presidency for the month of January should
be congratulated on giving the central place to African
issues in recent weeks. I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, most sincerely for that.

My delegation would also like to join the
unanimous praise for the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, for his efforts for peace in the world. I would
also like to welcome the Secretary-General of the
African Union, Mr. Amara Essy, and my colleagues,
the ministers of other countries that have agreed to take
part in this meeting.

As well, allow me to convey to the peoples and
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Nigeria the condolences of the people and
Government of the Republic of Guinea for the
tragedies that occurred in Goma and Lagos.

This meeting of the Security Council is more than
symbolic. It reflects the unanimous resolve of the
Council to be more involved in seeking solutions to the
various kinds of recurring problems afflicting Africa,
particularly those involving peace and security.

The debt burden, the continuing drop in the prices
of raw materials, poverty, HIV/AIDS, bad governance
and the consequences of numerous conflicts are some
of the factors explaining the current situation of Africa.
It is also recognized that all efforts to address these
challenges will be in vain until the conflicts have been
halted and totally resolved. There is no hope for
development without peace and security. Similarly,
democracy, so frequently called for by our various
partners, cannot be achieved in conditions of poverty.

Several hotbeds of tension in Africa continue to
concern the international community. In the Great
Lakes region, the situation is more complex and of
great concern. National dialogue in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, scheduled to be resumed in
South Africa, is more necessary than ever. Its
conclusions should provide the foundation for genuine
national reconciliation. The various State and non-State
political actors must preserve the spirit of Gaborone.

The commitments of the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi
contained in the joint communique signed on the
occasion of the visit of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Burundi to Kinshasa are in this regard very
encouraging. The other political actors parties to the
conflict must take inspiration from that action in the
interests of the region.

Guinea reiterates its full support for an
international conference on the Great Lakes region,
whose conclusions, we hope, will support regional
efforts. We also appeal to all regional actors to look
beyond mere security concerns and give priority to
cooperation in the search for peace and stability in the
region.

The Council can take credit for devoting an
important meeting last month to the subregion of West
Africa, which has witnessed deadly and destructive
internal conflicts during recent years. However, several
signs indicate that the efforts of the international
community are starting to bear fruit. Encouraging signs
are starting to appear in many places. Guinea welcomes
the work of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), which has enabled a gradual restoration
of State authority and the progress achieved in the
implementation of the programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). Despite the
official conclusion of the DDR programme, the
collection of certain weapons still in circulation among
the public should be continued because they could pose
a threat to post-electoral peace.

Next 14 May, Sierra Leone, long torn by a
complex conflict, will hold general elections, which we
hope will be free and transparent, with a heavy turnout.
My delegation welcomes UNAMSIL's support for the
election process and the adoption of Council resolution
1389 (2002).

The long-term reintegration of former combatants
remains a major concern of my delegation. The
measures taken must be re-evaluated and strengthened
in order to avoid a repeat of the Liberian syndrome.

In connection with work to stabilize the
subregion, my delegation welcomes the ongoing efforts
being made by the leaders of the Mano River Union
countries to restore confidence and get the Union's
activities started again. The forthcoming tripartite
summit will, we sincerely hope, lead to the
strengthening of confidence-building measures to
overcome the obstacles remaining on the road to
lasting peace.

With regard to the current situation in the
subregion of West Africa, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) has taken a number of
important initiatives to restore peace. Among them are
the implementation of many mechanisms for the
prevention, management and settlement of conflicts:
the creation of a Council of Elders made up of eminent
persons; the implementation of measures to build
confidence among States; assistance to member States
in consolidating democracy; the establishment of four
monitoring stations as an early warning system; and the
fight to stop the proliferation of light weapons,
including the Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Light Weapons. That
Moratorium has just been renewed for a second three-
year period.

My delegation welcomes the close cooperation
between ECOWAS and the United Nations to restore
peace and security in West Africa. The experience in
crisis management that ECOWAS has acquired in
recent years is enlightening and could be of use in
terms of a genuine partnership between the United
Nations and that organization. The opening of a United
Nations Office next to ECOWAS in Dakar is further
evidence of their common resolve to strengthen ties
and unite their efforts. This kind of "proximity
diplomacy" will be helpful.

Mr. President, as you know, peace has a price.
This is why my delegation would hope that
extinguishing conflicts in West Africa will be
accompanied by the implementation of a
comprehensive, integrated programme for economic
recovery. This would involve effectively completing
DDR programmes and the long-term rehabilitation of
ex-combatants in Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau,
extending State authority by setting up the proper kinds
of structures, ensuring the voluntary return of refugees
and displaced persons by strengthening confidence-
building measures, and setting up self-sustaining pilot
programmes. The United Nations regional office will
help to implement this comprehensive peace-building
strategy.

In West Africa, as in the Great Lakes region, the
linkage between the ongoing fighting and the illicit
trading in natural and other resources has been clearly
established. Pressure must be maintained on those
whose responsibility has already been proven.
Measures envisaged or taken by the Security Council
must be effectively implemented so as to neutralize
their harmful activities, which are damaging to
international peace and security. Impunity for those
responsible for plundering resources is just as bad for
international peace and security as the plundering
itself.

Questions involving Africa account for more than
half of the work of the Security Council. Today's
debate is part of a series of meetings that the Council
has initiated in order to ensure that it has an effective
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security, particularly in Africa.

We should consider setting up new instruments
that would help the Council to prevent and resolve
conflicts in Africa. In this regard, we would like to
propose the setting up of a high-level Security Council
working group to take a look at what is being done
with regard to Africa. Its conclusions should lead to the
elaboration of a comprehensive, integrated strategy for
a multisectoral plan of action. It would be a question
primarily of taking stock of thinking about how to
improve coordination and cooperation between the
Council, the OAU and regional and subregional
organizations.

Implementing such a plan of action could be
facilitated by a unit within the Secretariat to coordinate
multisectoral activities for Africa. Such a focal point
within the Secretariat, and for Member States, would
have a comprehensive multisectoral vision of African
issues and would be able to work on and streamline
their handling. Implementing such proposals would
help to strengthen what the Security Council can do to
maintain peace and security in Africa. Also, it would
be desirable to establish closer cooperation between the
Security Council and the OAU, particularly the latter's
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution.

As we begin this new millennium, we have to say
that the poverty and backwardness of Africa are in
vivid contrast to the prosperity of the developed world.
Africa knows it must take the right steps to avoid being
excluded from the phenomenon of globalization that
characterizes international relations today. And so,
Africa has decided to enter a new stage in its history,
transforming the OAU into the African Union and
adopting a new development programme, the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD). These
two new initiatives are in keeping with the profound
aspirations of our peoples, and they should open up
new prospects for the African continent. Globalization,
far from being a handicap for Africa, could provide
both the context and the resources for its recovery.

The New African Initiative, re-named the New
Partnership for Africa's Development, adopted in July
2001 in Lusaka at the last OAU Assembly of Heads of
State and Government, should enable Africa to
participate actively in world economics and politics
and thus emerge from its current marginalized
situation. NEPAD offers the international community,
particularly the developed countries, a historic
opportunity to establish a genuine world partnership
with Africa, based on mutual interest and shared
responsibilities.

But these ambitious goals will not be reached as
long as the many conflicts in Africa continue. Here, the
work of the Security Council and the equally important
work of the OAU and subregional African
organizations must be coordinated and strengthened to
end these conflicts and enable our countries to take up
the challenge of development.

In conclusion, I would simply like to reiterate my
deep gratitude to the delegation of Mauritius for having
organized this debate.

