Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I
would like, at the outset, to thank you, Sir, for your
presence among us today, which bears witness to your
commitment to the Great Lakes region and especially
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also thank
Mrs. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, and
Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as the Ministers who have honoured the
Council by participating in the meeting.

The path undertaken in just over 18 months in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is remarkable. In
November 2012, Goma - the main city in the eastern
part of the country - fell into the hands of a rebel group
in less than 24 hours, and almost all of the Kivus was
controlled by various armed groups that competed in
carrying out violent, barbaric attacks against civilians.

Today, the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) has
been defeated and a number of armed groups have
surrendered their weapons. The Congolese Government,
thanks to its armed forces and with the support of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
is gradually regaining control of a part of its territory
that has been out of reach for too long, while displaced
persons have started a timid return to their villages.

But enormous challenges remain, and together we
must work towards durable progress. The commitment
of the international community, notably the Council
and the deployment of the largest United Nations
peacekeeping operation, should help to put an end to the
spiral of violence in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo in support of the Congolese Government,
whose action is clearly essential.

There are both short- and long-term challenges to
overcome. In the short term, as stated by the Special
Representative and the Special Envoy, the fight against
armed groups must continue in accordance with
resolutions 2098 (2013) and 2147 (2014).
Although the M-23 has been militarily defeated it
has not disappeared. The demobilization of combatants
is incomplete and the prospects for the military
regrouping of the M-23 remains a significant threat.
It is crucial to ensure that the signatory parties to the
Nairobi declarations implement the relevant provisions
in that regard. On the one hand, we call upon the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to boost efforts to
operationalize the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme; on the other hand, we call
on Uganda and Rwanda to work together to ensure a
definitive end to the group's actions.

The major offensive launched by the Forces armees
de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC)
with the support of MONUSCO against the Allied
Democratic Forces has dealt a blow to the group.
It resulted in heavy losses among the FARDC, and
we salute them for their courage during the difficult
combat.

We also cannot forget actions taken against various
Mai-Mai groups, including the Mai-Mai Cheka and
the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et
souverain, which have also spread terror among the
local population.

Finally, regarding the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), the Council's mandate
has for many years been exceedingly clear. Resolution
2147 (2014) requires the immediate and permanent
demobilization of the FDLR. We have taken note of
the decisions of the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region to extend the process for an
additional six months, with a meeting scheduled at the
end of three months. The time frame for the process, in
which regard the FDLR has shown no tangible sincere
commitment, seems inconsistent in view ofthe tensions
and abuses on the part of the FDLR for more than
20 years. Only the swift disarmament of that armed
group, and the other groups, will reduce tensions and
restore confidence in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in the region. Maximum pressure
must focus on the FDLR leadership to ensure its good
faith commitment. The military option must remain on
the table.

In the medium- and long-term, only the
implementation of the structural reforms set forth in
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
in Addis Ababa will guarantee peace and lasting
security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Security sector reform regarding the police and the
army, good governance, decentralization, judiciary
and local administration are not only slogans that the
international community likes to chant; they are also
conditions for a long-term solution for the country's
development. There is no way out of the crisis without
effective capacity-building for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to guarantee the protection of its people
throughout the country and continue the fight against
corruption and trafficking. The good conduct of the
electoral process is an essential aspect of peace and
stability. This process must be conducted in accordance
with constitutional rules and in the spirit of the African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance,
to which the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
signatory. In particular, a credible and legitimate
road map should be drawn up as quickly as possible,
including a timeframe and a specific budget for the
elections.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has a
key role to play in the implementation of all of those
reforms. MONUSCO is there to support and assist it,
but cannot act in its stead. We reiterate our full support
for Martin Kobler and his activities. We would like to
pay particular tribute to his efforts, along with those
of the Force Commander, to ensure that MONUSCO's
protection-of-civilians mandate is implemented.
Mr. Kobler's response following the Mutarule incident
was commendable, and he has our full support in his
dialogue with the troop-contributing countries for the
implementation of the mandate with which we have
entrusted him.

It is up to us all, in the Council and in the region,
as well as neighbours, donors and troop-contributing
countries, to provide Mr. Kobler with the means to
undertake his broad-reaching mission. The commitment
of the United Nations must be durable and determined
and live up to the hopes raised by the successes achieved
in recent months.

Finally, I, too, wish to pay tribute to Mary Robinson
for her commitment and her tireless efforts over the
past 18 months to build trust between the leaders of the
region and to implement the Addis Ababa Framework
Agreement, which we are convinced remains pivotal
to the sustainable settlement of the crisis in the Great
Lakes region. We wish every success in this endeavor
to his successor, Mr. Said Djinnit.
