Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I should like to join
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this special meeting. I am certain that its
topic is of great importance to all Member States, and I
should particularly like to take this opportunity to
thank the presidency for its efforts to explore more
fully the Security Council's capacity for promoting the
pacific settlement of disputes.

I believe that each of us is motivated by the
objective of strengthening the primary role of the
Security Council so that it may fully and effectively
discharge its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations, in the area of the settlement of disputes
or of any situation whose continuance is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security. Otherwise, an inability on the Council's part
to peacefully manage disputes would lead us to a world
order where force was the only or the preferred option.
Therefore, I sincerely believe that the peaceful
settlement of disputes remains the ultimate, albeit
difficult, aim of any attempt to strengthen international
security.

Theoretically, the end of the cold war and
numerous manifestations of cooperative relations
among the major Powers, on the one hand, and the
collapse of the Soviet Union and the emergence of a
number of conflict-torn States, on the other, should
have provided the Security Council with new
opportunities to carry out the primary role in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, as new Member States
have asked it to do. Here, it is relevant to emphasize
that Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
sets forth a comprehensive list of peaceful means for
the pacific settlement of disputes.

Although the romanticism and great expectations
that the new fledgling democracies enjoyed upon their
admission have largely disappeared, Azerbaijan
continues to believe that the United Nations - as the
only universal Organization contributing to a
comprehensive value system aimed at the maintenance
of peace and stability - and its institutions have
played and continue to play an important role in
building a new security architecture.

In the meantime, we must be honest in
acknowledging a number of serious deficiencies - and
sometimes even failures - of the Security Council.
First and foremost, the Council has not always been
successful and consistent in implementing its own
resolutions, especially with regard to conflict
settlement. One need only take a quick look at the
situation surrounding the conflict in and around the
Nagorny Karabakh region of Azerbaijan, where a lack
of implementation of Council resolutions has had a
dreadful impact on the settlement process. One fifth of
my country's territory remains under Armenian
occupation. An entire generation of victims of the
conflict has grown up in the numerous refugee camps
in Azerbaijan. Their unbearable pain and deep
frustration can hardly be ignored, either domestically
or internationally.

Only two weeks ago, we commemorated the tenth
anniversary of resolution 822 (1993), adopted by the
Security Council on 30 April 1993, condemning the
occupation of the Azerbaijani district of Kelbadjar by
the Armenian armed forces. Neither that resolution nor
three subsequent ones demanding the immediate,
unconditional and full withdrawal of the Armenian
armed forces from the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan have been implemented. Unfortunately,
they remain dead letters. Armenia's flagrant, decade-
long violation of Security Council resolutions 822
(1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993) was a
primary concern of the recent identical letters from the
Foreign Minister of Azerbaijan, Mr. Vilayat Guliyev,
addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President
of the Security Council and contained in document
S/2003/528.

Similarly, we are concerned that, despite the fact
that resolution 884 (1993), in operative paragraph 8,
requests

the Secretary-General, the Chairman-in-
Office of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) and the Chairman
of the CSCE Minsk Conference [to] continue to
report to the Council on the progress of the Minsk
process and on all aspects of the situation on the
ground and on present and future cooperation
between the CSCE and the United Nations in this
regard",

none of those institutions has ever reported to the
Security Council on the matter in question. I should
like to take this opportunity to rectify the situation by
informing Council members of the fact that the Minsk
process will not result in any progress until Armenia
ceases to view itself as something beyond the
framework of international law and stops trying to
achieve a forceful solution of the conflict on the basis
of a fait accompli.

Nor will progress be achieved through the
mediators' efforts, which are not based on an
international legal framework for the settlement. This
is another concern that, I believe, merits consideration
by the Security Council and has direct bearing on the
settlement process. The Council should be more
resolute and should ensure that the mediators' activity
does not go beyond the universally recognized norms
and principles of international law.
With respect to the issue of fostering mutual
confidence between Armenia and Azerbaijan, so
actively endorsed by the mediators, allow me to stress
that nothing other than the liberation of the occupied
Azerbaijani territories will restore my country's
confidence in Armenia.

The continuation of the conflict threatens not
only the security of my country, but also that of the
whole region and that of all of Europe. The situation
demands principled approaches and actions on the part
of the international community. Impartiality with
regard to the settlement process has nothing to do with
the wait-and-see policy taken by the Security Council.
It is of paramount importance that the Council stand
for strict observance of its resolutions by all United
Nations Member States. My delegation is strongly
convinced that inconsistency in upholding its
resolutions is absolutely inadmissible for and
detrimental to the prestige of the United Nations organ
primarily responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. There is no expiration
date for the Security Council's resolutions until they
are implemented. Therefore, I reiterate our appeal to
the Security Council to insist on the implementation of
its resolutions regarding the conflict in and around the
Nagorny Karabakh region of the Republic of
Azerbaijan as an unaccomplished task of its own
agenda.

Azerbaijan remains committed to the peaceful
settlement of this protracted conflict based on full
respect for the norms and principles of international
law, full implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the appropriate documents and
decisions of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. But one need be under no
illusions: compromises on our side will never
compromise our territorial integrity.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that all the
foregoing proves the necessity of the serious
engagement of the broader United Nations membership
in the process of strengthening the Security Council's
role in the peaceful settlement of disputes. The United
Nations Charter offers vast possibilities for action by
the Security Council to prevent disputes from arising
between parties, to prevent existing disputes from
escalating into conflicts and to contain and resolve
conflicts when they occur.

We are grateful to the Pakistani presidency for its
important initiative and hope that today's deliberations
will make a tangible contribution to the matter in
question.

