Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
too should like to extend a warm welcome to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim, and to thank him for the information
he provided in our previous private meeting. We should
also like to acknowledge your initiative, Mr. President,
to convene this open meeting of the Council.

I shall limit my statement to three elements in the
report of the Secretary-General, the first of which is the
role to be played by the international community.

The participation of the international community
in the reconciliation process in Somalia has been very
important thus far. Indeed, the leadership shown by the
Government of Djibouti in the Arta process was
fundamental to the establishment of the Transitional
National Government.

Moreover, at this moment the initiative of the
heads of State of the lntergovernmental Authority on
Development (lGAD), under the leadership of
President Moi of Kenya, to hold a national
reconciliation conference in mid-April, deserves our
full support.

The participation of regional leaders in that
Conference attests to the importance to the region of
achieving a more broad-based reconciliation process, in
order to guarantee greater stability in Somalia. We
therefore support that initiative and hope that it will
bear positive fruit.

The regional authorities already have an
established role in the reconciliation process. We
believe that the same should be true for the United
Nations and the Security Council. The report of the
Secretary-General notes that, for security reasons, it is
impossible to re-establish a political office in Somalia.
We take note of that consideration, but we believe that
we must seek different alternatives that would give the
United Nations a greater political presence on the
ground, which may eventually help improve security
conditions.

One option we could consider is to strengthen the
role of the Security Council. Here I have in mind more
regular briefings to the Council as to the situation on
the ground. The Council could also create monitoring
mechanisms to monitor arms embargo violations.
Another initiative might be to promote an information
network, through United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations that are carrying out
humanitarian programmes, in order to provide more
and better information and thus to get a better and more
accurate picture of what is happening on the ground.

The second element involves the arms embargo.
We deem alarming the information we have received as
to the number of small arms that are continuing to
circulate throughout the country. That traffic is proof of
the continued violations of the arms embargo imposed
by the Security Council through resolution 733 (1992).
It is also clearly necessary to create a monitoring
mechanism for these sanctions, since violations
continue to occur because of the lack of detailed
follow-up.

The presidential statement on small arms issued
by the Council on 31 August last, under Colombia's
presidency, notes the need to enhance the effectiveness
of arms embargoes through the establishment of
specific monitoring mechanisms. It also makes the
point that cooperation must be promoted among non-
governmental organizations and regional organizations
in order to achieve a better application of arms
embargoes.

It is our View that the Somalia sanctions
Committee, chaired by the Ambassador of Bulgaria,
must spearhead this process in order to ensure
compliance by all States with the provisions set out by
the Council. I should like to assure Ambassador Tafrov
of the full cooperation of my delegation in this respect.

In that same presidential statement, the Secretary-
General is asked to include in his reports analytical
assessments on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. The sad reality is that conflicts are fuelled by
trafficking in small arms, the interference of
neighbouring States and the indifference of arms-
exporting countries as to the destination of their
products. That is why we stress that the next report of
the Secretary-General should address in greater depth
this issue as it affects Somalia.

The third element involves the fight against
terrorism. The combat against terrorism is being waged
at the international level and demands the commitment
of all States. The Transitional National Government
has informed us that it has adopted a series of measures
to implement resolution 1373 (2001). It has asked the
international community for assistance so that it can
create the infrastructure necessary for ensuring full
compliance with that resolution. Our view is that this
appeal must be heeded in order to avoid having
Somalia, for lack of cooperation, be used as a refuge
for terrorists.

The effects of the fight against terrorism have
already made themselves felt in Somalia. The closing
of the Al-Barakaat Group of Companies has caused a
drop in family income, which has made the
implementation of certain programmes more difficult.
It would be desirable to establish transparent funds-
transfer systems, so that the Somalis could benefit from
lawful systems that have no connection with networks
that finance terrorism. In this context, we support the
initiatives that the United Nations Development
Programme intends to carry out in that country.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate the
commitment of the international community and of the
Council in particular to work towards national
reconciliation in Somalia and to prevent anarchy,
which has held that country in its grip for so many
years, from triumphing once again.

