Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's open debate. We view this as a timely occasion
on which to assess the progress made thus far in the
implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) and to share our determination

to deal collectively with threats to international peace
and security. My delegation's gratitude also goes to the
three Chairpersons who briefed us on the activities of
their respective Committees established pursuant to
Security Council resolutions.

The threats to international peace and security are
interconnected and increasingly global in scale. They
require our urgent and determined collective response.
Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction are grave threats that can be most
effectively addressed when countries join forces and
take common action. The United Nations has been
playing a crucial role in confronting those challenges.
In particular, the efforts of the Security Council
deserve our praise and support.

The three Committees, on whose activities we
have just been briefed, are at the forefront of the
Security Council's endeavours to deal with the threats
of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We note with satisfaction the enhanced
cooperation among the three Committees, and we
encourage them to continue to cooperate closely in
fulfilling their mandates.

We welcome the programme of work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee for this semester, and
we support the Committee's three priority objectives,
namely, monitoring and promoting the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001), providing technical
assistance to States proactively and maintaining
dialogues with States on the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005). Having said that, my
delegation would like to place particular emphasis on
the first of those goals, namely, monitoring and
promoting implementation, because we believe that
success in that area will best achieve the objectives of
resolution 1373 (2001). We very much hope that the
Committee will strengthen its work in that area.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) was a
significant contribution by the United Nations to
strengthening the existing measures against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. However,
there still remain challenges to be addressed before the
goals of that resolution are attained. Many States have
yet to submit their first national reports on
implementation. Moreover, in many cases, there are
significant gaps between the commitment of States to
the resolution and their practical implementation of its
requirements. We are also concerned about imbalances
in implementation among States and among regions.

While the submission of a report does not
guarantee implementation, it is an important first step
in the process. We therefore support the 1540
Committee's programme of work to intensify its
outreach activities and to assist Member States in
preparing and submitting national reports. To ensure
the full and effective implementation of the resolution,
the Committee needs to further strengthen its
monitoring role, promote good practices and share
lessons learned.

My delegation strongly supports the efforts of the
1267 Committee to combat dangerous groups that
threaten international peace and security. We appreciate
the Committee's key role in the adoption of
resolution 1730 (2006), which put in place measures to
ensure fair and clear procedures for delisting from
sanctions committees. We hope that those new
procedures will allow the 1267 Committee to carry out
its important mandate with even greater legitimacy,
strength and focus.

The Republic of Korea is fully committed to
combating terrorism, irrespective of its form or
motivation. We are also committed to full and
comprehensive cooperation with the United Nations to
strengthen the international fight against terrorism. In
line with those commitments, we have faithfully
implemented resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004). We have put in place the necessary legal
and administrative systems to ensure compliance with
them. I reiterate my Government's support for the full
implementation of those three critical resolutions at the
national, regional and international levels.

