The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/29, containing a letter dated
21 January 2011 from the Ombudsperson addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council underlines that
terrorism constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security, the
enjoyment of human rights and the social and
economic development of all Member States, and
undermines global stability and prosperity, and
emphasizes the importance of the Al-Qaida and
Taliban sanctions regime as an essential tool in
combating the threat posed by terrorist activity.

"The Security Council recalls its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security under the Charter of the United
Nations and further recalls Article 103 of the
Charter.

"The Security Council stresses the need for
full implementation of all its resolutions and
statements on terrorism, including resolution
1904 (2009).

"The Security Council recalls the
establishment of an Office of the Ombudsperson
pursuant to resolution 1904 (2009) to assist in
considering delisting requests submitted by, or on
behalf of, an individual, group, undertaking or
entity on the list created pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) and resolution 1333 (2000) ("the Consolidated List"), underlines its commitment to
ensuring that the Office of the Ombudsperson is
able to continue to carry out its role effectively, in
accordance with its mandate, and, in that regard,
undertakes to renew the Office's mandate in June
2011.
"The Security Council welcomes the first
report of the Ombudsperson submitted pursuant
to annex II of resolution 1904 (2009) (S/2011/29)
and the work of the Ombudsperson to date.

"The Security Council takes note of the
observations in the report, to which it will
respond in the context of the renewal of the
Ombudsperson's mandate in June 2011 in order
to ensure that any necessary improvements to the
Ombudsperson procedure are implemented.

"The Security Council underlines the
improvements to the procedures of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) ("the Committee") and to the
Consolidated List and the seriousness with which
the Committee undertakes its mandate to carry
out regular and in-depth reviews of entries on the
Consolidated List, and expresses its intent to
continue efforts to ensure that procedures are fair
and clear.

"The Security Council underlines the
important role of the Ombudsperson in ensuring
fair and clear procedures for individuals
designated pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
and encourages individuals seeking delisting
from the Consolidated List to pursue their case
through the Ombudsperson.

"The Security Council welcomes the
observation by the Ombudsperson that States
have been cooperative in responding to requests
and providing information in the cases and looks
forward to Member States' continued cooperation
with the Office of the Ombudsperson."

The statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/5.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

Since this is likely the last public meeting in
which I shall participate in my capacity as President of
the Security Council for the month of February, I
would like to seize this opportunity to thank all
Council members for their cooperation and flexibility
during this eventful and even historic month, in which
the Council was called upon to deal with important
and, in some instances, unexpected challenges. My
gratitude also goes to the Secretariat for its continued
support to the presidency.

The meeting rose at 10.30 am.
1 1-245 64
