Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing and express our appreciation
for the efforts that the Secretary-General has continued
to undertake to end the current situation in Ukraine.

Chile would like once again to express its deep
concern about the serious escalation of the crisis in
eastern and southern Ukraine, especially in the regions
of Donetsk and Luhansk, and now in Novoazovsk. It
is essential to reverse the escalation immediately to
ensure that those regions return to peace and security,
because the situation there is already very dangerous
and unpredictable. For all those reasons, we call on the
parties to exercise maximum restraint and moderation
and to cease all fighting immediately.

Our country would like to reiterate once again, as
we have done consistently since the start of the crisis
in Ukraine, that there is an obligation to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, as well as to observe the
principle of non-intervention and non-interference in
the internal affairs of another State. That principle has
also been enshrined, inter alia, in the Helsinki Final
Act, which created the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), of which Ukraine and
Russia are both signatories, as well as the Budapest
Memorandum on Security Assurances, both of which
documents apply fully to both Russia and Ukraine,
among other States.

In that connection, therefore, we would like to
also state that the parties involved should refrain from
carrying out actions that are incompatible with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
With that in mind, Chile would like to make an appeal
for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops
present on Ukrainian territory, unless they have been
expressly authorized by the legitimate authorities of
that country.

We are very concerned by the humanitarian and
human rights situation in the southern and eastern
parts of Ukraine, especially the growing number of
internally displaced persons and the situation of ethnic
minorities. We are also concerned about the increasing
violations of human rights that have been recorded
in those areas, which makes it essential to restore the
rule of law in that region. In that connection, we would
like to note that humanitarian aid initiatives should be
implemented with full respect for the sovereignty of
Ukraine and in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.

We hope that the observation mission, in close
cooperation with the special monitoring mission of
the OSCE, will continue to play a constructive role in
mitigating the tensions on the ground.

As we have stated previously, we would like
to reiterate that accountability should be ensured
regarding all violations and abuses of human rights so
as to ensure that those responsible, whoever they are,
are brought to justice.

Once again, we would like call upon the parties
to seek a peaceful solution to the crisis through direct
political dialogue, to refrain from unilateral measures
and to support international mediation efforts, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 68/262.
In that regard, we welcome the meeting between
the Presidents of Ukraine and Russia in Minsk on
26 August, and we encourage them to continue those
contacts and to intensify them in order to achieve a
peaceful and rapid solution to the crisis in Ukraine.

We would also like to highlight the various
initiatives of the Secretary-General and, overall, of the
entire United Nations system. They have tried since the
very beginning of the crisis to find a peaceful solution
to it.

Chile believes that the time has come for constructive
participation in an inclusive process that ensures the
rule of law, fundamental freedoms and respect for
human rights, as well as the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, in order to ensure
conditions that will enable the Ukrainian people to
determine its own future sovereignty in a peaceful and
democratic way.

