The President: The bombing of Pan Am flight
103 over Lockerbie was an appalling act of terrorism
which cost the lives of 270 people of many different
nationalities. Families and friends - many of whom
are here today - have endured continuing pain and
grief since that date. As a result of painstaking
negotiations, we are moving towards a resolution of
this terrible affair. Libya has accepted responsibility;
Libya has agreed to pay a substantial sum of
compensation to the relatives of those who were
murdered; and Libya has agreed to cooperate with any
further Lockerbie investigation and has renounced
terrorism. Those are all very substantial gains, which
open the possibility of Libya moving back into the
international community and of the lifting of sanctions.

The Security Council, in considering the agenda
before it, is also conscious of two factors: first, that the
Council, in a matter of this gravity, needs to act
unanimously; and secondly, that there are other very
legitimate concerns pertaining to Libya which still
need resolution. It is in recognition of those factors that
the Council, in an informal meeting, has had a very
lengthy discussion of the related issues, and colleagues
have concluded that the most appropriate course today
would be for me, from the Chair, invoking rule 33 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, now to
propose the adjournment of this meeting until 10.30
am. Friday, 12 September 2003, in the expectation that
the agenda we have adopted today will be the agenda
before us on Friday.

I thus put to the vote the procedural motion that
the meeting be adjourned until 10.30 am. Friday, 12
September 2003.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Angola, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Guinea, Mexico, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

The President: The procedural motion is carried
by unanimity.

The Council is united in its determination that it
will address this issue at 10.30 on Friday.

The meeting rose at 2.40 p.m.

