Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for your continued able stewardship of this
Council during these difficult days. I would like to
welcome the Secretary-General and thank him for
gracing this meeting with his important presence. I
would also like to thank Mr. Jan Egeland for his very
precise and important report, and Mr. Vijay Nambiar
for his report on the very important mission which was
dispatched by the Secretary-General to our region. I
would also like to take this opportunity to thank his
colleagues, Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen and Mr. Alvaro de
Soto, for the important work they did.

We just heard the Palestinian Observer describe a
situation which seems very surrealistic. There was a
whole array of description of what Israel does as if it
all came out of nowhere, as if it all emanated out of the
clear blue sky. No mention of the kidnapping of the
Israeli soldier, Corporal Gilad Shalit; no mention of the
firing of hundreds of Qassam rockets by the deadly
Hamas-led Government of his people; no mention of
the fact that Israel totally withdrew from Gaza nearly a
year ago. There is a certain absurdity to the constant
use of words "occupying Power" when referring to an
area which has not been occupied for a year, which has
been totally free to run its own affairs and to prove that
it is indeed capable of running its own affairs, take care
of its people, their standard of living and their quality
of life, and which instead brutally and cynically chose
terror.

The same was apparent also in the Palestinian
Observer's reference to his sisters and brothers in
Lebanon and the Israeli aggression which, again, came
out of nowhere. No kidnapping of two Israeli soldiers,
no shelling of Israeli cities by hundreds of missiles and
rockets.

I think that the Council deserves more.

We met here just one week ago. What a
difference a week makes. Think of what we all have
learned in one week. The world has learned of the
enormous arsenal of missiles that Hizbollah has been
amassing in Lebanon. The world has learned how
deeply Hizbollah has penetrated Lebanese society. The
world has learned again how ruthless and
indiscriminate Hizbollah is. The international
community and the Council have learned how right
they were in repeatedly demanding the disarming of
this terrorist monster.

We have been aware for years of this deadly,
cancerous growth which has insidiously invaded this
beautiful, potentially prosperous country, and we have
repeatedly warned about the danger. The Council took
the threat seriously, as witnessed by its resolution 1559
(2004). And now, sadly, the peoples of Israel and of
Lebanon are reaping the miseries of war, sown long
ago but nurtured by those who chose to turn a blind eye
to what was so clearly happening.

Terrorism has occupied, ravaged, raped and
pillaged Lebanon. Terror is the true occupying power
of Lebanon. For years, Hizbollah has been amassing
thousands of rockets, aimed at Israel, preparing for this
attack. Its forces may be concentrated in the south, but
its tangled web holds the entire nation of Lebanon
hostage to its violent agenda. The Government of
Lebanon, for its own political reasons, has chosen
conflict with Israel instead of battling the cancer that
occupies the body and soul of its very country. That
cancer must be excised. It cannot be partially removed
or allowed to fester. It must be removed without any
trace, or, as cancers do and will, it will return and
spread, striking and killing again.

Since last week, when the State of Israel was
suddenly attacked without any provocation, citizens all
across northern Israel have been suffering the
consequences of Lebanon's failure. Rockets terrorize,
maim and kill people in cities such as Haifa, Nahariya,
Tiberias and Safed. Towns across the Galilee have been
hit by a ceaseless barrage of missiles. And only two
days ago, two young children playing in St. Paul's
Street in the holy city of Nazareth - the home town of
Jesus - were mercilessly struck down by a Hizbollah
rocket.

As we speak, another wave of dozens of rockets
is raining down on cities and towns across northern
Israel. At the first siren, thousands run for the safety of
bomb shelters and reinforced safe-rooms, which, by
law, must be in all homes. The rockets they flee are
sent from across a border, from other homes, where
other families reside. Their special rooms, however,
have been modified to serve as rocket launching pads.
This is the horrible equation that we face.

We have witnessed civilian casualties, and we
grieve for each one of them. Also, we have heard how
difficult it is to distinguish between Hizbollah and
civilians. We have heard this from none other than the
Lebanese Ambassador, who said on American
television just this week:

"It is impossible to differentiate between
Hizbollah and civilians in Lebanon. Hizbollah is
everywhere in Lebanon, and has become part of
Lebanese society."

This is also how cancer works, attacking healthy
cells, invading and spreading through the whole body
until healthy and malignant become inseparable. And
this is exactly the point that Israel has been making for
years. Terrorism has been sending its long tentacles
through every level of Lebanese society, integrating
itself into the very fibre of a nation. Terrorists live and
operate among civilians, occupying their towns and
villages, using them as human shields, and they have
infiltrated the Government itself.

We are told of a so-called political branch of
Hizbollah. Do not be misled by this ruse - an attempt
to paint a kinder face on cold-blooded terrorists who
are intent on cold-blooded murder. The Hizbollah
member of parliament and the terrorist in the hills
launching rockets at Israeli civilians both have the
same strategy and goal. These labels cannot be allowed
to give legitimacy to a gang of thugs.

In spite of the very difficult situation on the
ground, Israel is acutely aware of the humanitarian
situation. I wish to inform the Council that I have just
received official confirmation from Israel that in
addition to the corridor allowing evacuation from
Lebanon, a two-way, in-and-out humanitarian corridor
to meet the needs of those affected on the Lebanese
side has been established. As the Israeli side of this
mechanism is now being formulated, I would like to
assure the Council of the continued cooperation of the
Government of Israel on this important issue.

We have been hearing calls for a cessation of
hostilities, but before we can contemplate a cessation
of hostilities, we must insist on the cessation of terror.
A temporary, artificial ceasefire - or whatever term
one may use - will only result in an illusionary lull,
which would allow this disease to spread and kill
again. The international community must finally
address the terrorism that occupies Lebanon. The
current crisis is not only a danger to Israel and
Lebanon, but to the entire region. We should have no
illusions: the terrorism at the root of this crisis is a
danger everywhere. We know where it starts, but we do
not know where it will take its violence. Too many
nations have been taught this harsh lesson.

The international community must also
vigorously address the sponsors of terrorism: Syria and
Iran, the members of that exclusive club, that axis of
terror. Those Governments support, harbour, train and
finance the terrorists and their murderous acts. As we
speak, they continue to aggressively undermine all
efforts toward a lasting peace in the region, supplying
deadly arms to Hizbollah in the north and Hamas in
Gaza.

No words can better describe the true feelings of
the Lebanese people than those of Lebanese leaders
themselves. As I did last week, I would like to share
with you a few more of their thoughts.

Walid Jumblat, the Lebanese Druze leader, said:

"The abduction of the two Israeli soldiers was
secretly planned in Damascus two days before the
meeting of the G-8 meeting in order to divert
attention from Iran. The Iranian envoy, Larijani,
himself transmitted the code to implement the
abduction plan in order to set off an international
turmoil, which would divert the world's attention
from the Iranian nuclear crisis."

And Saad Hariri, the son of the slain Prime
Minister of Lebanon, whose murder is now being
internationally investigated, said of Syria's role:
"The Syrian president's security apparatus in
Damascus has incited Nasrallah in order to set
Lebanon on fire... Lebanon became the
battleground of other countries - countries that
call us brothers but who have no interest
whatsoever in our fate."

Israel welcomes the declaration of the G-8
leaders, whose statement of 16 July provides a basis
for progress towards a sustainable peace, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. As a
first step towards this goal, Israel demands the
immediately release of its kidnapped boys, Ehud
Goldwasser and Eldad Regev, as well as Gilad Shalit,
who is still held by Hamas.

Israel, as it has done in this Chamber before,
demands the full disarming of Hizbollah and insists
that Lebanon employ its sovereignty over all its
territory, in full compliance with resolution 1559
(2004). This very Council has demanded this, and now,
finally, it must be fully implemented. It must be
implemented for the safety of Israel, for the stability of
the region and the well-being of the world. And today
more than ever it must be implemented to assure
Lebanon's future. Lebanon had a glorious past and a
potential for a bright future before it mortgaged it to
terrorists and tyrants. It must today remember this past
in order to regain its future, for, as Winston Churchill
said, "A nation that forgets its past has no future."

Once terror has been excised from our midst,
Israel stands ready to embark with the people of
Lebanon on a process of rebuilding, renewal,
development and cooperation, so that projects will
replace rockets, goods will replace arms, factories will
replace bunkers and playgrounds will replace
battlegrounds; so that Israeli and Lebanese children
will play with seashells rather than be hit by shells
from rockets; so we can rekindle the glory of our past
and secure the future of the generations to come.

