Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset my delegation would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your wise leadership of the Council's
work. We thank you and all the members for the
prompt response to the request of the Arab Group for a
special meeting.

Today the Security Council is looking into the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, at a time when the conditions
in those territories are deteriorating because of the
Israeli practices that target the Palestinian people. We
have seen settlements continue, homes demolished and
land appropriated. Work to complete the wall is
persisting, and it is even being extended deep into
Palestinian territories, in spite of the widespread
international condemnation of the wall and the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
which reiterated the illegality of the wall and the
necessity that it be dismantled.

There is no doubt that those Israeli practices -
especially the building of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including inside and around East
Jerusalem, and the system involving this wall - run
counter to international law. Those practices have also
proven useless. True peace cannot be established by
building psychological and physical barriers, nor
through excessive use of the military machinery
against civilians. True peace is achieved through
serious and responsible political will. That peace is
long overdue in the Middle East.

In that context, Tunisia repeats its call to the
international community and active stakeholders to
rapidly intervene in order to provide the necessary
protection to the Palestinian people and force Israel to
stop its practices against them and to end all unilateral
measures. Tunisia also reiterates the importance of
stopping the building of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including in and around
Jerusalem, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution ES-lO/ 15 of 20 July 2004, and to dismantle
what has already been built.

Tunisia reiterates that peace is the strategic
option, and we must maintain solidarity with the
fraternal people of Palestine and support their struggle
to restore their legitimate rights and find a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question
of the Middle East. Tunisia would also like to see
efforts continue to resume negotiations on the basis of
the relevant international decisions. We call on the
Quartet to intensify its efforts towards that end.
Returning to the logic of peace, recognizing the
national rights of the Palestinian people and reaching a
just solution at all levels will no doubt allow for
peaceful co-existence among all the peoples of the
region in a climate of understanding and security. Thus
they could start building and reconstruction in order to
achieve progress and prosperity for all.

The United Nations - especially the General
Assembly and the Security Council - has a permanent
responsibility vis-a-vis the Palestinian people, and it
must continue to shoulder that responsibility. The
Organization is the guarantor and protector of the bases
of international legitimacy with regard to the question
of Palestine and of the Middle East in general. It is a
political role that must continue until a just and
comprehensive solution is finally found.

