Monsignor Hansen (Holy See): The Holy See
wishes to thank the United Kingdom for convening this
open debate on the role of reconciliation in maintaining
international peace and security. The theme is both
crucial for the peace and stability of present and
future generations and central to the mission of the
Catholic Church, which, throughout its history, has
sought continually to be a sign and instrument of unity
among peoples.

A powerful example of reconciliation came about
after violence erupted in the Central African Republic
and various stakeholders sought to amplify or, indeed,
manipulate the religious nature of the conflict, so as
to further compound artificial divisions among the
population. Three men stood up and said "no": the
Catholic Archbishop of Bangui, an evangelical pastor
from the city and an imam. They courageously set
up an interreligious platform at the national level,
the experience of which was repeated at the level of
local communities across the country. In spite of the
inevitable problems and difficulties encountered along
the way, the initial and inspired vision of those three
religious leaders remains. Furthermore, the visit of His
Holiness Pope Francis to that divided and impoverished
land, in November 2015, points to such efforts as the
only way forward. It was and remains inconceivable
for people of faith and members of major religions
to make an unjust use of weapons for one group to
dominate others.

Religious leaders must stand together and show to
those in their pastoral care that diversity - whether
that be ethnic or religious - need not be an obstacle to a
nation's unity and that divisions can be overcome when
we commit to fraternity. The Pope's invitation to the
Imam ofthe Central Mosque in Bangui to ride with him
and greet the people together from the Popemobile was
a powerful sign and had an incredibly positive impact.

Reconciliation, of course, involves differences;
it acknowledges divisions and seeks to overcome
difficulties that all too often lead to people being killed
and suffering violence and other violations against
their human dignity, and it requires magnanimity
to see the bigger picture, seek the common good and
invest in a more just, humane and prosperous future.
However, genuine reconciliation in no way minimizes
the suffering; rather, it must deal with it. Genuine
reconciliation examines what led to dispute and conflict
in the first place and uses appropriate means to find a
way to a lasting and durable peace, which, of course, is
not possible without justice.

Promoting reconciliation is not simply wiping
the slate clean and can never be seen as an excuse for
impunity. The guilty must be held accountable and those
whose lives have been so sorely affected should receive
some form of reparation. In that regard, societies that
have been fractured should make use of mechanisms,
such as transitional justice, to set the foundations
on which the rule of law might be re-established
and universal human rights be enjoyed by all. A key
element in ensuring that peace may truly flourish is
to guarantee that initiatives are also implemented at,
and rise up from, grass-roots and community levels, in
which church communities and religious leaders have
an indispensable role to play - one that can never
allow for ambivalence or political manipulation. In that
regard, it is also important to engage all relevant actors,
including members of civil society that were formed in,
and who form, in their turn, cultures of peace.

