The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Italy.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Portugal
on behalf of the European Union. My brief remarks are
meant to complement those of the European Union
presidency.

At the outset, I join other delegations in thanking
Ambassador Kumalo and his team for their leadership
on the mission, as well as for coordinating the
preparation of the report (S/2007/711). The attention
devoted to this mission by the Timorese people and
authorities, and the richness of the report, validate by
themselves the strong impact that the mission has had.

The Security Council sent clear messages to the
country at a crucial juncture, and we have now
available a considerable wealth of information and
ideas that will allow the Council to have a more
informed discussion on the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
early next year. In this regard, the mission has
confirmed that UNMIT is fulfilling its mandate in an
effective manner and that all parties in Timor-Leste
count on its continued presence, as we have also heard
today from the representative of Timor-Leste.

Indeed, the persistent complexity of the
stabilization efforts in Timor-Leste requires sustained
attention and assistance from the United Nations in all
the key areas, from security to political dialogue, from
human rights to development. The events of the past
two years have proven that we need to be patient. If we
do not continue to make progress, we risk rolling
backwards.

In this context, as many have stated, the
importance of Timorese ownership cannot be
overestimated. It is up to the people and the leadership
of Timor-Leste to find solutions to the remaining
challenges. I was glad, in this regard, to hear in this
Chamber from the Timorese representative last week,
and again today, that Timor-Leste sees its relationship
with the United Nations and the international
community at large as one of interdependence rather
than of dependence. That is the approach that should
inspire our common action.

The successful organization of the electoral cycle
has once again demonstrated the commitment of the
Timorese people to peace and democracy. At the same
07-64195
time, the report clearly indicates that, unfortunately,
the challenges lying ahead still coincide broadly with
those which caused the 2006 crisis. Reconciliation and
institution-building remain the most daunting of these
challenges, along with the lack of visible progress in
people's livelihoods.

The EU presidency has already elaborated on the
aforementioned challenges, as well as on the efforts
that the European Union is undertaking to help address
them. From our side, I would just emphasize the
importance of the active participation of Timor-Leste
in regional cooperation and integration initiatives, by
which the country is raising its international profile
and engaging its neighbours in the stabilization
process.

Finally, I wish to recall that Italy, along with its
EU partners, has constantly supported the young
Timorese democracy at all stages of its genesis and
development, the latest initiative being the
participation of Timorese officials in human rights
training courses at the San Remo International Institute
of Humanitarian Law. We remain committed to
supporting Timor-Leste in its quest to consolidate
peace, democracy and development.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. On behalf of the Council, I should like to express
gratitude and appreciation to all the members of the
Security Council mission, which was very ably led by
Ambassador Kumalo, for the manner in which they
discharged their important responsibility.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.05 pm.
21
