Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank Foreign
Minister Nin Novoa for his presence here and commend
Uruguay for convening today's ministerial-level
meeting. I thank also the Secretary-General for his
briefing, which made for sobering listening.

New Zealand has been an elected member of the
Council for just over a year. During that time, the
conflicts of the Middle East have taken up much of
the Council's attention - sadly, to too little practical
effect. The fighting and killing in Syria continue, with
people dying of starvation and as a result of bombs and
bullets. The conflict in Yemen persists with horrific
consequences for the Yemeni people, despite the self-
evident truth that neither side can win by military
means. Peace in Libya remains elusive.

And the Israeli-Palestinian peace process remains
dormant, while disaffected people on both sides resort
to violence, threatening a renewed outbreak of serious
fighting, and the parties themselves engage in mutual
recrimination, sharing only their manifest failures to
show leadership and engage. That bleak situation is the
responsibility of the Middle East itself, of those who
involve themselves in the region and of the Council.

The conclusion of the Iran nuclear deal gives hope.
It shows what can be achieved when States commit
themselves to diplomacy, determined to find a solution.
The confirmation by the International Atomic Energy
Agency that Iran has lived up to its undertakings and
the resulting lifting of sanctions are highly encouraging
next steps. We exhort Iran to continue on the path of
engagement with the international community and to
avoid acts that call into question its commitment to the
agreement. It is notjust Iran and the P5+1 that want that
agreement to succeed, all member States have a stake in
its faithful implementation.

We continue to hope that that example will be
followed in Syria. The establishment of the International
Syria Support Group and the adoption of resolution
2254 (2015) were promising signs after almost five
years ofwar. But we need those involved - in Syria, in
the region and beyond - to make the difficult political
decisions necessary to come to a political solution. The
bargaining must take place at the negotiating table, not
beforehand nor on the battlefield.

We welcome the news from Special Representative
De Mistura that invitations to the talks are being issued
today and that the talks themselves are now scheduled to
start on Friday. While we were concerned at the delayed
start, we support Mr. De Mistura's determination
to ensure that the talks start on the best possible and
properly inclusive basis. We urge all parties to bring
the necessary political will to find a solution to the
conflict and salvage what is left of Syria. The Syrian
people need leadership, relief from the fighting and
starvation, and some reason to believe that a way out of
their current nightmare exists.

Amid the devastating and persistent conflicts in the
Middle East, the Council has done too little to address
the situation in Israel and the occupied territories. For
seven years, we have been largely silent - and, worse
still, inactive - on the Middle East peace process. In
the year that New Zealand has been a member of the
Security Council, settlement activity has increased, as
has violence affecting hundreds of ordinary Israelis and
Palestinians. Shockingly, street-level violence has now
become the new normal.

Neither side has shown the necessary willingness
to make the concessions essential for peace. Both have
increased their unhelpful rhetoric and the blaming of
each other. And moves such as Israel's intention to
declare 385 acres of land in the West Bank as State land
is deeply unhelpful and further hobbles the prospects
for peace.

The two-State solution is the only credible model
we have for bringing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
to an end. But its viability is slipping away. Given
the levels of violence and mistrust and the entrenched
positions, resuming negotiations seems improbable in
the near future. Neither side seems willing or able to
demonstrate the political vision necessary to broker
peace. The vacuum is being filled with extremist voices,
who will find an increasingly receptive audience the
longer the stalemate continues.

Israeli, Palestinian and influential world leaders
must stand up and reverse that trend. The parties are
not so far apart that no scope exists for a decisive role
for the Council. That is why New Zealand has been
consistent in its call for the Council to play its part.
It must assume a role in reaffirming the fundamental
importance of the two-State solution and in creating
the necessary conditions for a resumption of talks. We
know some disagree. For some, the Security Council
and the United Nations system are too partisan to play
a role. For others, any gesture of involvement is seen as
rewarding intransigence.

Let us change that perception by taking reasonable,
meaningful action to encourage the parties to return
to talks. Sadly, there was no agreement in 2014 on
Jordan's draft resolution S/2014/916 (see S/PV.7354).
In 2015, both France and New Zealand put forward
proposals for Council action. Those proposals were
met with mixed responses from Council members, and
from the parties themselves. Some wanted more, some
wanted less, some wanted nothing at all.

Agreement will inevitably require compromise. It
may well be that, after seven years of inaction, a Council
contribution will have to begin with a single step. We
have suggested what such a step might look like. We
remain ready to take our proposed draft resolution
forward. But we are also ready to support any other
reasonable initiative aimed at generating momentum
towards peace talks, and in that regard we have listened
carefully to the statement just made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt. For the Council to do nothing
is not an option. We hope that 2016 will be remembered
as the year when we, as a Council, found the requisite
political will and determination to affirm the two-State
solution and set out a path towards a resumption of the
Middle East peace process.

