Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov for his informative
briefing. The fact that we now have a dedicated Under-
Secretary-General for Counter-Terrorism to brief us
on such matters and to help us to move forward on
the all-of-UN approach to counter-terrorism and the
prevention of violent extremism is very welcome.
In addition to the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
as well as the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, are
key partners in that work.

As we heard from Mr. Voronkov this morning, the
list of countries recently struck by terrorist attacks is
long. Despite the strategic setbacks in Syria and Iraq,
thanks to the resolve of the global coalition, to which
we proudly belong, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) remains a serious threat to international
peace and security. The ongoing transformation of the
group from having territorial ambitions to a networked
global organization, with less control over its affiliates,
is a clear trend. That will present new challenges
to combating its activities. At the same time, the
organization remains locally embedded in a number of
protracted conflicts, for example, in Afghanistan and
Libya, as we have heard this morning.

Adapting to the changing nature of the threat from
ISIL will be essential ifwe are to respond successfully.
The Security Council has been proactive in that
regard by adopting last year a significant number
of resolutions with a bearing on counter-terrorism,
including resolution 2396 (2017), on foreign terrorist
fighters. However, as Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov stressed, in order to have the desired effect,
such resolutions must be fully implemented. In that
regard, we welcome the support being provided by
the United Nations to Member States, particularly in
relation to capacity-building.

The fight against terrorism is integral to the Security
Council delivering on its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. The link between
terrorism and conflict is clear. Of the 22 countries
most impacted by terrorism in 2016, all were defined
as being in conflict. In addition, it is worth recalling
that since the year 2000, 99 per cent of deaths resulting
from terrorism have taken place in countries either
in conflict or with a high level of political instability.
Efforts to combat terrorism cannot therefore be viewed
in isolation but must be seen within the broader context.
Fully implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the sustaining peace agenda should
be seen as a core part of our efforts.

Preventing violent extremism remains critically
important and must be viewed as a long-term endeavour.
For instance, as underlined in the report (S/2017/1125),
it is essential to manage the spread of violent extremism
in prisons. Sweden has worked on that issue both at
home and abroad, including in Somalia, where staff
from the Swedish Prison and Probation Services have
been seconded to support the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia and the Somali prison authorities
in reintegrating convicted Al-Shabaab prisoners and
in reducing the likelihood of them returning to violent
extremism after release.

I thank the Under-Secretary-General for his
ongoing and unwavering commitment to the important
prevention of violent extremism agenda, in line
with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the Secretary-General's Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism. It is essential that
relevant agencies and organs, including the Security
Council, pay increased attention to the need to prevent
violent extremism.

There are three more concrete issues that I
would like to address regarding our response to the
terrorist threat.

First, on accountability, we must hold perpetrators,

organizers and sponsors of terrorism to account. In
doing so, it is of course important that the prosecution
of suspected terrorists be carried out with full respect
for human rights and the rule of law. We look forward
to an agreement as soon as possible on the terms of
reference for the investigative team for Da'esh crimes
in Iraq, consistent with the United Nations procedures
for sharing evidence. The prosecution of terrorism-
related offences and war crimes in Swedish courts
is increasing. We were among the first countries to
prosecute suspected perpetrators of war crimes in
Iraq and Syria, based on the principle of universal
jurisdiction. Last year, an individual was also sentenced
to prison for using social media to provoke members of
the public to commit a terrorist offence.

That incident underlines how the use of information
and communications technology and social media by
terrorists is a great concern. We can, and must, deal
with that phenomenon very seriously but without
impinging on respect for human rights or on the rule
of law. That is the challenge before us: protecting our
citizens while simultaneously safeguarding global
connectivity and the open, free and secure flow of
information. The same rights that people have offline
must also be protected online, including the freedom
of expression.

Secondly, special attention is needed with regard
to the gender dimension in counter-terrorism. Women
play multiple roles in relation to terrorism, including
those of perpetrator, supporter, facilitator, victim
and preventer. In a recent study of 15 countries, the
Women's Alliance for Security Leadership concluded
that women's rights groups were often the first to
warn about the signs of increasing violent extremism.
We welcome the attention paid to that issue in the
Secretary-General's report.

We also note with satisfaction that, in the wake of
resolution 2395 (2017), we are already seeing the issue
of children and the rights of the child increasingly
reflected in the work of CTED and in the Secretary-
General's report.

Finally, looking forward, we welcome the Secretary-
General's decision to hold a meeting of the heads of
Member State counter-terrorism agencies in June. The
transnational nature of many terrorist activities makes
the prevention of terrorist acts by any one country alone
more difficult. My Ethiopian colleague just mentioned
that. The meeting will therefore be an important
opportunity for our respective operational agencies
to meet. Let me also underline the importance that we
attach to the review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which is set to take place in June. We hope
that the negotiations will be productive and will result
in strengthened cooperation.

