Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Sandra Honore, for her comprehensive
briefing. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/162), together with Special Representative
Honore's briefing, clearly shows that although there has
been significant progress at various levels, a number of
formidable and fundamental challenges remain.

Jamaica notes with keen interest the political
milestones that emanated from the inter-Haitian
dialogue mediated by the Episcopal Conference of
Haiti. We further note that that dialogue culminated in a
groundbreaking preliminary consensus on the holding of
combined elections in 2014 for two-thirds of the Senate,
the Chamber of Deputies, municipal administrations
and local councils. That accomplishment symbolizes a
turning point in Haitian governance and signals what
can best be described as a new direction in political
practice in Haiti. We urge all stakeholders to capitalize
on the momentum gained to date with a view to the
holding of free and fair elections.

Jamaica recognizes that political stability and
the solidifying of development gains are inextricably
linked to sustained citizen security. We note with some
concern, however, that while the statistics reflect a
downward trend in major crimes, including kidnapping,
the figures associated with reported rapes have risen.
We thank the Mission for its August 2013 study on the
subject and, in that regard, encourage continued efforts
to bolster the capacity of courts, prosecution offices
and police stations to properly handle those types of
cases.

It is unfortunate that the scourge of sexual and
gender-based violence persists in Haiti. Jamaica
takes note of and commends the uniquely tailored
programme that serves to train police personnel in
methods used to prevent and respond to such crimes.
For Jamaica, the issue of sexual exploitation and
abuse within the Mission is of paramount importance.
Such cases unacceptably mar the image of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
What is more, they stain the international image of the
United Nations and that of countless other personnel
in the field who are dedicated to the cause of fostering
and maintaining peace. Jamaica strongly supports the
application of a zero-tolerance approach to such cases.
In that connection, we laud efforts to launch thorough
and timely investigations into all allegations of abuse
and encourage the continuing and determined work to
prevent future incidents.

Jamaica notes with satisfaction the significant
growth in the size of the Haitian National Police, from
5,000 officers at the start of the Mission to the current
force complement of 11,228 officers. We encourage
MINUSTAH to continue building the capacity of the
Haitian National Police as a high priority. That should
include strong recruitment campaigns and unrelenting
efforts to ensure that the goal of 15,000 officers in
service by the end of the police development plan for
2012-2016 is attained. Special emphasis should also
be placed on the recruitment of women and skilled
personnel capable of contributing to the development
of Haiti at the highest level.

MINUSTAH's community violence reduction
programme is being increasingly recognized for its
impact on public safety and community development.
By supporting community-based labour intensive
infrastructure and environmental projects, MINUSTAH
has effectively provided a viable and innovative
alternative for at-risk youth. With the tremendous
success of that programme in mind, we welcome
the 29 projects that were initiated for the 2013-2014
financial year.

We note the progress made in upholding the rule
of law in Haiti, as exemplified in the Government's
"5 E" policy programme. Jamaica therefore strongly
supports the assistance provided by MINUSTAH to the
Haitian institutions responsible for ensuring the rule of
law. In particular, we note the work done in the area
of pre-trial detention and that carried out through the
legal aid offices, as well as the success encountered
in the processing of more than 2,000 cases during the
reporting period.

With regard to the Haitian economy, the Secretary-
General's report notes an increase of 4.3 per cent in the
economic growth rate. That accomplishment, coupled
with the growing levels of innovation and industry across
the country, speaks to the resilience and determination
of the Haitian people in overcoming the many obstacles
to social and economic development. While we share
in the hope for and expectation of a more prosperous
Haiti, we are mindful of existing constraints, including
the poor infrastructure and unstable electricity supply,
which, as the Secretary-General notes in his report,
continue to hinder economic growth. It is clear that the
persistence of those constraints will inevitably have a
negative effect on Haiti's ability to continue along its
positive path.

Jamaica continues to maintain its support for the
four jointly agreed stabilization benchmarks outlined in
the conditions-based consolidation plan. We welcome
the updates on achievements and challenges provided
by the Secretary-General and look forward to receiving
additional information on how the United Nations can
further continue to contribute to Haiti's stabilization
and development.

At the same time, we support the efforts geared
towards the responsible and carefully planned
drawdown. We call for a post-2016 reconfiguration
that is in keeping with the needs of the Haitian people.
The five options outlined in the report all present their
own challenges and advantages. We look forward with
anticipation to further discussion on those and related
matters.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Jamaica's
support for the Government and people of Haiti. I wish
to express the my country's sincere appreciation to those
serving in MINUSTAH and applaud the commitment

that they have shown to improving the lives of the
Haitian people.

