Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): I thank Mr. Hedi Annabi
for his update on the situation in Kosovo. We also
welcome Mr. Covie, Deputy Prime Minister of the
Republic of Serbia, and we thank him for his statement.
We are also thankful for the detailed briefing attached
to the copy of his statement, and we note with great
satisfaction the steady progress towards the final
solution to the problems in Kosovo. I would like to
commend here the efforts of all the parties in the
consolidation of the reconciliation process in southern
Serbia.

My delegation congratulates the parties in
Kosovo on reaching an agreement on the coalition
Government, and on the choice of their President and
Prime Minister. The compromise reached demonstrates
the good will to work together towards creating a
democratic, multi-ethnic and stable Kosovo. Indeed,
this development reassures the international
community of the strong determination of all parties to
build a bright future for all the people of Kosovo.

We would also like to express our gratitude to
Special Representative ofthe Secretary-General Steiner
for all the efforts he has made to facilitate the dialogue
between the parties. We wish Mr. Steiner could be
present today to share his views on the challenges
facing Kosovo as the new institutions embark on the
path to self-rule.

We are happy to note that all the ingredients are
in place for the Provisional Self-Government to start
full operations and take over executive powers from
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). UNMIK has so far fulfilled
efficiently its duties of assuming interim governance,
but now the reins are in the hands of Kosovo's leaders.
We encourage them to sustain the momentum and show
that they can govern effectively and fairly for all the
citizens of Kosovo.

The agreement reached last month by political
leaders contains the right mix of all the necessary
components that will ensure the smooth running of the
Provisional Self-Government institutions. We note,
among others, respect and promotion of democratic
principles; free and equal treatment towards all of
Kosovo's inhabitants, without discrimination; the
creation of conditions conducive to reconciliation and
tolerance among different communities; and the
adoption of measures to foster rapid economic
development. All these appear to be promising, but it is
one thing to agree on paper and another to put it into
practice - especially in the case of Kosovo, where a
democratically elected Government is functioning for
the first time. The test is now for the political parties to
show that their will to operate a functioning
parliamentary democracy is under way.

Of no less importance is the economic situation
of the province. So far, donors have contributed largely
in the reconstruction of the economy. Kosovo needs the
full engagement of the donor community, as it has
suffered from decades of under-investment. We
therefore call on all the donors to sustain their
assistance to the province. We hope that the request
made by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Steiner, during his recent visit to
European countries will be met with a positive
response.

We also welcome the decision of the Provisional
Self-Government to adopt the legislation necessary to
create the conditions for a market-based economy and
to encourage private direct investment. If Kosovo is to
stand on its own feet, it cannot depend solely on
foreign funding and a single means of revenue
collection. Private direct investment in the province
will open up opportunities for the people to engage in
gainful activities, and it will also positively contribute
to creating a stable society. The sooner the decision
makers adopt the necessary legislation, the better it will
be for the province to reap the benefits. At the same
time, the high rate of unemployment can be addressed
with the participation of the private and public sectors,
and with more investment.

A flourishing economy will also help in bringing
internally displaced persons back to their homeland. A
high rate of returns can only be possible if a safe and
secure environment is guaranteed for the minority
communities, and if property rights are restored to
them. It is for the political leaders to put all their ideas
into constructive action in favour of the integration of
minorities into Kosovo's society.

The total elimination of arms and ammunition
from the province is equally important if a secure
environment is to be created for all the inhabitants. In
that regard, we welcome the weapons-amnesty
programme set up by UNMIK and KFOR to combat
organized crime. We urge all Kosovo to cooperate with
UNMIK and KFOR to wipe out all illegal possession of
arms and ammunition.

Lastly, we encourage the leaders of the
Provisional Self-Government to enhance dialogue with
Belgrade in line with the provisions of the Common
Document, signed in November 2001. Working
together in the High-level Working Group on such
practical issues as cooperation in security and tackling
organized crime, missing persons and minority rights
will surely reinforce mutual confidence. We were
happy to learn that the Yugoslav authorities yesterday
returned to Kosovo all Albanian detainees held in
Serbian prisons since 1999, in accordance with the
commitment under the Common Document.

