Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
United Kingdom presidency for organizing this open
debate. The focus on mediation and the settlement of
disputes is significant, since the last time the Council
deliberated on the subject was in April 2009 (see S/PV.6108). The presidential statement adopted in the
aftermath of that debate remains (S/PRST/2009/8)
pertinent to our present day context. We thank the
Secretary-General for sharing his thoughts about the
use of mediation as a tool for his desired surge in peace
diplomacy. We appreciate the valuable insights shared
by other briefers this morning.

Our delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation
and to be delivered on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Mediation has traditionally proven to be a useful
instrument for preventing and resolving both inter- State
and intra-State conflicts. There have been a number
of constructive initiatives in recent years with a View
to enhancing the capacity and expertise of the United
Nations on mediation. It is critical that the momentum
be sustained towards further integrating mediation
in the comprehensive approach to sustaining peace.
In that context, Bangladesh welcomes the Secretary-
General's decision to establish the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation. We look forward to receiving
updates on the group's work in order to have an
enhanced understanding of the evolving challenges
and opportunities concerning the use of mediation in
peace processes.

The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic have also set some
positive examples on the way the United Nations field
presences can contribute to mediation efforts at the local
level. The special political missions have been playing
a useful role in that regard in diverse contexts, which
should help build a repository of good practices while
highlighting potential pitfalls and missed opportunities.

We acknowledge the United Nations efforts to share
its mediation expertise with outside actors, including
interested regional and subregional organizations. We
urge all Member States to favourably consider proposals
to further strengthen the capacity of the Mediation
Support Unit under the Department of Political Affairs.

In order to be effective, mediation must pass the
rigours of transparency and objectivity, as also noted
by various delegations. Any fruitful, tangible outcome
from mediation efforts will hinge on the impartiality of
the mediators, their compliance with agreed mandates
and respect for national sovereignty.

The importance of appropriate buy-in by the parties
concerned need not be overemphasized. It is perhaps
advisable to make mediation efforts visible only when
the parties involved commit themselves to engaging in
any such exercise in good faith and right earnest. Ad
hoc and poorly coordinated mediation efforts - even
when launched with the best of intentions - are not
likely to advance the goal of achieving durable peace.

Promoting meaningful participation by women and
young people in mediation efforts is an area that requires
further investment across the board. That should go
beyond mere commitments and result in mainstreaming
their participation on the most critical issues at stake.
As the briefers mentioned, mediation should tap into the
resources and expertise offered by various stakeholders
to reach to the core of humanity among those involved.
In that context, we commend the initiative ofthe Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide to promote the role of religious leaders in
preventing and resolving conflicts.

Bangladesh is a staunch supporter of the resolution
of conflicts through peaceful, non-confrontational
means. Our commitment to mediation and conciliation
features prominently in our foreign policy postures. It
has been most evident in our successful efforts to resolve
a number of outstanding issues with our neighbouring
countries, including those related to land and maritime
border delimitation and common water-sharing.
In a similar vein, we would remain open to any
constructive efforts by interested parties to help resolve
the Rohingya humanitarian crisis, which Bangladesh
has unwittingly been made a party to. We recognize
the efforts initiated by the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy, and by a number of Member States through
their designated Special Envoys. We remain convinced
that any progress in unlocking the crisis and achieving
a durable solution can be possible only through the
Security Council's custodianship of the issue and
sustained engagement by the international community.

