Mr. Verhagen (Netherlands): Mr. President, I
join you and others in expressing my sincere
condolences to the people of China and Burma/
Myanmar.

Securing sustainable peace is even harder than
ending armed conflict. Today, as the international
community is engaged in efforts to end armed conflicts
in many places, we must prepare to undertake the
difficult task that is securing sustainable peace. That is
extremely urgent and this debate is extremely timely. I
therefore commend the United Kingdom for its
initiative in organizing it.

Peace is more than the absence of armed conflict.
Peace encompasses freedom from want and fear, and
freedom of religion and expression. Peace is the ability
to live a decent life, raise a family and not have reason
to fear that authorities or others might hurt one or one's
family.

Peace is about living in a country with people of
different beliefs, races and convictions, where human
rights are respected and where one is governed by
legitimate leaders who know that their legitimacy rests
on the quality and fairness of their decisions. Peace
requires the rule of law domestically, and if it fails
domestically, then it must come through international
institutions such as the International Criminal Court
and the special tribunals set up by this Council.

Finally, peace is also about being protected by
one's Government against harm, and about being
helped by the Government if one is harmed, by arms,
by man-made disasters or by natural disasters such as
the cyclone that hit Burma two weeks ago or the
earthquake that hit China last week. And while all this
may seem simple and fundamental, this kind of peace
is elusive for millions. That is what today's debate is
about: what can we do better to help people - real
people - to reach real peace.

As is pointed out in the excellent note prepared
by the President, the primary responsibility for
building peace and stimulating sustainable
development after conflict lies with national
authorities. The principle of the responsibility to
protect, embraced by all of us at the 2005 summit,
stresses that each individual State has the responsibility
to protect its populations. That responsibility is broad.

The principle of the responsibility to protect is
not, in my View, aimed at eroding or undermining the
principle of national sovereignty. It aims to promote
responsible conduct by governments, or - as was
suggested yesterday by the President - responsible
sovereignty. So, in my view, it also includes protection
against non-man-made threats, such as the effects of
natural disasters. Why? Because gross negligence and
woefully inadequate responses to such threats may
actually lead to even greater humanitarian suffering.
Suffering may be caused to such an extent that the
inadequate response must be considered a crime
against humanity, thus forming a ground for action by
this Council.

It follows that when a government cannot or does
not effectively live up to its responsibility, the
international community must act. The Security
Council is the central forum for debate and discussions
in such cases, while member States can join assistance
efforts. Against this background, I warmly support the
leadership role taken up by the Secretary-General and
some countries, notably those of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, to come to the rescue of the
suffering Burmese people. The Government and people
of the Netherlands are committed to supporting these
efforts.

I return to peacebuilding after armed conflict. As
has been pointed out by others, crucial elements in
meeting the challenge of building peace after conflict
are timing, coordination and assuring that the capacity
for assistance is ready to be deployed right when
needed. Those factors are crucial for timely action.

Next to the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission has a central role to play in mobilizing
support, if possible even before fighting has ended. We
expect the Commission to ensure that countries that are
donor orphans are not left behind.

We see a pivotal role for United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) to lead in the
recovery phase, enabling the Government to provide
basic services and helping to restore the social fabric.
It urgently needs to develop greater surge capacity,
working with United Nations agencies and others like
NATO and the European Union. Hence the necessity
for coordination and hence our support for
strengthened roles of the representatives of the United
Nations. Afghanistan is a case in point, and my
Government will be very pleased when the United
Nations is able to spread its presence throughout the
country.

Allow me to underscore the urgent need for
coordination both by and within the United Nations.
The roles of the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission, UNDP and others must be channelled
through a single United Nations office in the country
concerned.

Regarding capacity, I agree that the challenge is
to create effective ways for making expert capacity
permanently available, through pooling, for example.
We all face the same difficulty as others do: there are
too few experts are available when we need them.

The need for flexible funding is evident. In the
Netherlands, we have created a stability fund with this
aim. It can be used for both official development
assistance (ODA) and non-ODA. We suggest that
others set up similar funds.

When peace is in sight, there is no time to lose.
Peacebuilding requires the provision of basic services,
effective and inclusive dialogue and providing people
with secure and safe livelihoods. We call for strong
United Nations leadership and pledge our support for
efforts in this respect.

