Mrs. Chassoul (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking Ambassador Heraldo
Munoz, Permanent Representative of Chile, for his
briefing on the work of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and for the list
submitted pursuant to paragraph 23 of resolution 1526
(2004) (S/2004/349, annex II).

Costa Rica has always been firmly committed to
combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. My country strongly endorses the
measures adopted by the Security Council to bring to
justice those responsible for committing and preparing
terrorist acts and to prevent such criminal acts from
being committed. For this reason, Costa Rica fully
supports all measures that may be necessary, in
keeping with international law, to dismantle the
criminal Al Qaeda network and the Taliban.
Fortunately, to date, no individual associated with Al
Qaeda or the Taliban has been located on Costa Rican
territory, and it has been determined that they do not
possess assets in our country.

Concerning the list presented in keeping with
resolution 1526 (2004), I wish to stress the point that
on 30 April the Government of Costa Rica presented
the Chairman of the Committee with an exhaustive
report on the measures my country has taken to
implement sanctions against Al Qaeda and the Taliban;
we hope that the report will be circulated as soon as
possible as an official document of the Security
Council.

As regards our experience in implementing
resolution 1267 (1999) and subsequent resolutions, I
would like to underscore that the implementation of
these sanctions is a highly complex process and,
accordingly, requires time in order to carry it out
correctly. In Costa Rica, for example, implementation
requires coordination among various public agencies,
including the department of intelligence and security,
the directorate-general on foreign immigration, the
police force, and the offices of the superintendents-
general of financial institutions, of securities and of
pensions, as well as cooperation among all the
country's public and private financial institutions.

Moreover, the list of individuals subject to
sanctions is difficult to work with. The information
provided is in some cases insufficient to identify with
certainty the persons subject to coercive measures. For
that reason, the Committee should provide States with
more information, so as to enable them to clearly
identify such persons. At the same time, confidentiality
in the work of the Committee must be maintained, so
as to prevent further information leaks that would
erode Member States' trust in that body.

In addition, in order to facilitate judicial and
police cooperation, it is essential that there be
sufficient substantiated evidence and open judicial
investigations concerning each and every person who
appears on the list. In keeping with the basic principles
of human rights and due process, if it proves necessary
to take measures against such individuals or their
assets, the relevant judicial authorities must be
provided with concrete evidence showing that the
measures are justified. The Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, for example, has stated
that if a person is arrested without such detention being
ordered or supervised by the competent judicial
authorities, there is a clear risk not only of that
person's legal rights being undermined, but also of his
or her physical safety being jeopardized. For that
reason, we believe that a mechanism should be set up
that will enable States to have ready access to relevant
information. In this regard, the mechanisms already
established by Interpol should be used.

The submission of lengthy and repetitive reports
is a heavy burden for countries that are overwhelmed
by increasingly detailed and lengthy questions. It is
essential to establish better coordination among the
various United Nations bodies responsible for counter-
terrorism activities. As we indicated earlier, my
delegation is convinced that combating terrorism
should become a permanent activity of the United
Nations. We believe that coordinating the international
fight against terrorism should be entrusted to an
independent, professional and permanent body located
in the heart of the Organization's structure.

We have accordingly proposed the creation of the
post of United Nations high commissioner against
counter-terrorism, with its own office, which would
assist the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. We believe that the
new body should take over not only the activities now
carried out by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the 1267 Committee, but also the counter-terrorism
activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the assistance, coordination and information
work done within the Secretariat. In addition, that
office should become a facilitator for coordination and
cooperation among the various national agencies that
are working to combat terrorism, such as the ministries
of justice, the judicial agencies and the police forces of
the various States Members of the United Nations.
Only by creating such a body will we be able properly
to tackle the challenge of international terrorism.

