Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Since the Council last
discussed the disturbing situation in Afghanistan, on 28
August 1998, the political and humanitarian situation in the
country has deteriorated further.

In September and October, fighting again intensified
and the conflict escalated, provoking alarming regional
repercussions. We were concerned, and still are, about the
increased threat of the Afghan civil war becoming a
regional conflict, and particularly about the rise of military
tensions along Afghanistan's borders. We would like to
commend the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Brahimi, for helping ease those tensions.

The latest fighting has brought about a new phase in
the Afghanistan conflict. One of the parties has taken
control of most of the country, and it seems convinced that
it is in a position to take over militarily the entire Afghan
territory.

That might be true at this stage. But in reality, the
warring factions must recognize that the conflict cannot be
settled on the battlefield. Any thought of a conclusive
military victory by one party is an illusion. History, old and
new, shows us that a military conquest by one of the
warring parties will not bring an end to the Afghan conflict.

Portugal stands for a political settlement, negotiated
between the factions and accommodating the rights and
interests of all Afghans. We therefore strongly support the
demand that the Afghan factions stop fighting and enter
urgently into negotiations, under United Nations auspices,
aimed at creating a fully representative and broad-based
Government.

We remain deeply concerned by continuing reports of
outside interference in the affairs of Afghanistan. Although
the enmity between the Afghan factions is deep, we are
convinced that the continuation of the conflict is, to a great
extent, a consequence of intervention from outside.
All countries with an influence on the factions in
Afghanistan would do more to promote peace and regional
stability by using that influence to prevent the supply of
arms and other military support and to encourage the
parties to negotiate.

The reports of ethnic- and religious-based
persecution represent a particularly worrying aspect of the
current situation in Afghanistan. Like others, we strongly
condemn the murder of Iranian diplomats and the
occupation of the Consulate General of the Islamic
Republic of Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif, which represented a
flagrant violation of international law and of the Vienna
Conventions on Diplomatic and Consular Relations.

The increasingly ethnic nature of the conflict poses
a threat to the unity of the Afghan State and makes it
more difficult to find a peaceful political solution. We
urge all factions to ensure the safety of civilian
communities and to facilitate the provision of
humanitarian assistance,

We also deplore the widespread violations of human
rights in Afghanistan, which continues to be a place
where human rights and international humanitarian law do
not seem to exist. The continuing and intolerable
discrimination imposed by the Taliban against women is
a particular source of concern.

The Afghan factions must not expect the
international community to accept their general lack of
commitment to recognize, protect and promote human
rights. In this context, my country strongly supports the
Secretary-General's proposal to establish within the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan a civil
affairs unit aimed at monitoring and promoting respect for
international humanitarian standards and human rights, as
well as at preventing grave violations of human rights in
the future.

Another two sources of grave concern are drug-
trafficking and the continuing presence of terrorists and
terrorist training camps in Afghanistan, both factors with
far-reaching repercussions inside and outside the country.
No political movement, no matter how much territory it
controls, will gain international respectability as long as
it is perceived to be harbouring terrorist activities. These
completely intolerable and destabilizing practices
represent global threats, and they must cease immediately.

In conclusion, Portugal, supporting the efforts of the
"six plus two", will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us and urges all Afghan factions to comply fully
with it and to put an end to the suffering of the Afghan
people.
