Mr. Renie (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I should like to thank Presidents Pocar and Byron
and Prosecutors Del Ponte and Jallow for their detailed
briefings and for the effective work they and their
teams have been doing at the head of both Tribunals.

When it acted under Chapter VII by creating the
two International Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda, the Council sought to send a clear
message to the entire international community that
there would be no impunity for the most serious crimes
committed against humanitarian law, genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes.

Almost 15 years later, we are able to commend
the manner in which both Tribunals have contributed,
in their respective fields of competence, not only to
rendering justice, but also to easing tensions and
restoring peace and security. They have been at the
forefront of international criminal justice, which we
expect both to punish those who commit especially
horrible crimes and to deter others from doing so in the
future.

We are not here today to take stock of the
Tribunals' work, but we can affirm that they have met
our expectations of them. In 2003 and 2004, the
Council identified the time frame for the completion
strategy for the work of the Tribunals. It asked the two
Tribunals to take every step in their power to stay
within their deadlines. It also urged all States, in
particular those of the regions concerned, to cooperate
fully with the Tribunals in order that they may
complete their work within the time specified. It
emphasized the need for the international community
to help strengthen the capacity of the national
jurisdictions concerned so that they could deal with the
cases referred to them.

We have heard today briefings by the Presidents
and Prosecutors in which they took stock of the efforts
made to speed up and improve procedures. We also
heard statements regarding certain requirements
pertaining to the use of human resources, in particular
as regards ad litem judges and the organization of
appeals chambers. Lastly, we have taken note of
references to judicial considerations that may hinder
the meeting of the deadlines set by the Council for the
completion of work. We are committed to respecting
those deadlines as much as possible.

Resolution 1534 (2004) underscored the
importance that the Council attaches to the deadlines.
Insofar as the Tribunals have been asked to take every
step in their power to respect the deadlines, those
deadlines are nevertheless guidelines. Certain elements -
including, for example, the arrest and transfer
of fugitives - are outside their control. It is crucial
and necessary that justice be done with regard to those
bearing the greatest responsibility. In that connection, I
would like in particular to reaffirm the commitment of
France to ensure that Mr. Kabuga, Mr. Karadiie and
Mr. Mladic' be handed over to justice. We also
emphasize the importance of cooperation by countries
of the regions concerned in that regard.

We take note of the information provided with
regard to not meeting deadlines. We ask the two
Tribunals to do everything they can to reduce delays as
much as possible. On the basis of the joint document
circulated by the Tribunals, the Council and the
Tribunals must also seriously carry out the work that
must be done to identify the legacies of the Tribunals
and the decisions that need to be taken with regard to
residual functions that must be continued following the
completion of their work. That work is highly technical
and must be done very methodically, in full
cooperation with the staff of both Tribunals.

Finally, I would like to thank Ms. Del Ponte, who
is leaving her post and who has expressed her
disappointment. I think that the work she has done for
many years on behalf of both Tribunals will allow her
to leave with a clear conscience.

