Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Guterres for his interesting
briefing on the topic of refugees and their impact on
situations in the area of peace and security. Russia
welcomes the constructive involvement of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in addressing existing humanitarian
problems in relevant situations, including those on the
agenda of the Security Council.

We share the view that the issues of ensuring
security and complying with the core norms and
standards of international law in the area of refugees
are interdependent and complementary. At the same
time, we note once again that any projects in the area
of protecting the rights of refugees and addressing
problems of forced displacement in general in post-
conflict countries should complement overall efforts in
the area of peacebuilding and subsequently reaching
settlements and also contribute to these processes.
Furthermore, we would like to underscore the
importance of coordinating UNHCR activities with the
Governments of relevant States.

Conflicts continue to be the primary reason that
there are many refugees and internally displaced
persons worldwide. The grim prize of first place
continues to be held by Iraq, with more than 2.5 million
refugees and about 2 million internally displaced
persons, most of whom have been deprived of their
ability to meet their own basic vital needs. Their
problems need to be addressed immediately. Beyond
the specifically humanitarian aspect, these challenges
put a heavy burden on the host countries, especially
Syria. The developments of recent weeks once again
demonstrate the need to seek long-term solutions in the
area of the Middle East settlement, in particular as it
relates to the problems of Palestinian refugees. We urge

UNHCR to be prepared to cooperate more closely with
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, including in
coping with possible new flows of refugees.

We welcome the readiness of UNHCR to seek
ways to address the situation of Afghan refugees. This
problem also puts a heavy burden on host countries,
above all Pakistan and Iran. We are gravely alarmed by
the problems of displaced persons with regard to the
situation in the Sudanese province of Darfur. Our
hopes for an improvement in the situation there are
related above all to the establishment of a process for
political negotiations and the deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur.

We share the view expressed by Mr. Guterres
with respect to the UNHCR mandate and believe that it
is necessary to continue to draw a clear distinction
between UNHCR's activities in providing assistance to
refugees and assistance to internally displaced persons.
Whereas the former fall under the mandated functions
of UNHCR, for the latter, UNHCR interventions are
warranted only when a number of core conditions are
met, the primary condition being that the relevant
country has made a request in advance. We believe that
the core responsibility for providing assistance to
internally displaced persons lies specifically with the
Government of the country where such displacement is
occurring.

A critical function of UNHCR in the context of
post-conflict settlement is, in our view, to provide
assistance in facilitating the sustainable voluntary
return of refugees, which is the preferable means of
addressing the issue of forced displacement. Failure to
address that issue could well result in the emergence of
new conflict situations, which in turn could threaten
international peace and security. At the same time,
UNHCR should also have a plan prepared for cases in
which, for various reasons, it is impossible to
implement the scenario of voluntary returns; here, the
integration of displaced persons in host States or third
countries would be required.

In many States with situations on the agenda of
the Security Council, ensuring the security of refugee
camps is an urgent problem. That is particularly the
case in conflict zones in Africa: Darfur, Chad, the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that regard, we call on UNHCR to
continue to give priority attention to the
demilitarization of camps for displaced persons and to
separating combatants from persons who are entitled,
under the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol, to
claim refugee status.

Once again, the Russian Federation thanks the
High Commissioner for his briefing and the French
presidency of the Council for convening this meeting.
We hope that there will be continued constructive
cooperation between the Security Council and
UNHCR.

