The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kasljagic'
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/126, which contains the text of a
letter dated 19 February 2004 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, and its enclosure.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council notes the report of
the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations of 18 February 2004 (S/2004/ 126, annex), which refers to the increasing number of
challenges to the police certification process
conducted by the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH)
International Police Task Force (IPTF).

"The Security Council recalls its relevant
resolutions and its support for the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Annexes thereto
(collectively the Peace Agreement, S/1995/999, annex). The parties to the Peace Agreement had
the responsibility to cooperate fully with, and to
instruct their respective responsible officials and
authorities to provide their full support to, the
IPTF during its mandate on all relevant matters.
The Council affirms that such responsibility
included giving full and immediate effect to the
decisions issued by the IPTF, including decisions
to deny certification. The Council also affirms
that Bosnia and Herzegovina has the obligation to
respect fully and to promote the fulfilment of its
responsibilities under the Peace Agreement.

"The Security Council reaffirms the legal
basis in the Charter of the United Nations on
which the IPTF was given its mandate. The
Council recalls that during its mandate the IPTF
was entrusted with the tasks set out in Annex 11
of the Peace Agreement, including the tasks
referred to in the Conclusions of the London,
Bonn, Luxembourg, Madrid and Brussels
Conferences and agreed by the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

"The Security Council affirms that the
certification process was carried out pursuant to
the mandate of the IPTF and fully endorses this
process. The comprehensive and rigorous vetting
procedure was designed to create a police force
comprised entirely of personnel meeting
internationally recognized standards of personal
integrity and professional performance.

"The Security Council expresses concern at
the failure of the competent authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to take due steps to implement
decisions to deny certification. The Council notes
that this failure has already led to several
challenges before the courts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina brought by persons whose
employment in Bosnia and Herzegovina's law
enforcement agencies was terminated pursuant to
a denial of certification by the IPTF.

"The Security Council further notes that in
some cases such persons have been reinstated
following decisions of some local courts. The

Security Council calls upon the Bosnia and This statement will he issued as a document of
Herzegovina authorities to ensure, including the Security Council under the symbol
through the adoption or amendment of domestic S/PRST/2004/22.

legislation. that all IPTF certification decisions
are fully and effectively implemented and that the
employment of persons who were denied
certification by the IPTF be terminated, and that
such persons will be precluded from employment, The meeting rose at 11.15 (1.711. either now or in the future, in any position within

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
any law enforcement agency in Bosnia and
Herzegovina,"

