The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing today. We
share the sense of frustration that she expressed in her
statement.

The situation in Darfur remaines very serious.
There has been a further deterioration in the security
situation, resulting in an estimated 300,000 Darfuris
becoming displaced, which is more than the total
number in the past two years.

We welcome the initial steps to implement the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, but it remains way
behind schedule. The Government of the Sudan and the
Darfur Regional Authority must make a renewed effort
and clearly signal their commitment to delivering peace
in Darfur.

We welcome the commitment of the Justice and
Equality Movement-Bashar to support the Doha
Document. We strongly condemn the attack that resulted
in the deaths ofMohamed Bashar and 10 members ofthis
movement. Attacks against those willing to lay down
arms and negotiate are unacceptable and detrimental to
the peace process. We call on all sides involved in the
fighting to cease hostilities immediately and to engage
in a peaceful settlement of the conflict.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur plays a crucial role in building
peace and stability for the people of the region. It is
unacceptable that it continues to face access restrictions
across Darfur, despite the clear demands of the Council.

The commitment made by the Government of the
Sudan to removing all obstacles to development in
Darfur must now be put into practice.

I thank the Prosecutor for her update on the trials
of Abdullah Banda and Saleh Jerbo. It remains deeply
concerning that the Government of the Sudan continues
to obstruct the pursuit of justice for the people of Darfur
and has failed to cooperate over the four outstanding
arrest warrants. Reports of one of those indicted being
present in the area of current conflict are particularly
alarming.

As laid down by the Council in resolution 1593
(2005), the Government of the Sudan has an obligation
to cooperate with the ICC, and we continue to urge it
to do so. We also call on all States to cooperate with
the ICC to end impunity and to deliver much-needed
accountability, and we regret the fact that some ICC
States parties have failed in their duty under the Rome
Statute. The Council, for its part, must now consider
urgently what more it can and should do to assist the
Court in delivering the mandate we entrusted it with in
referring the situation in Darfur.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

