The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

As a result of consultations among members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
signatories to the Arusha Agreement, and the
transitional President His Excellency Mr. Pierre
Buyoya in particular, for their efforts to advance
the peace process. It expresses its full support for
the transitional Government set up on the basis of
the Agreement, which was represented by
President Buyoya at the meetings of the Council
on 5 February 2002. The Council reiterates its
gratitude for the facilitation efforts of the former
President Mandela. It also expresses its support
for the ongoing efforts of President Bongo and
Deputy President Zuma, as well as States in the
region and South Africa to facilitate the
implementation of the Arusha Agreement.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
continued fighting against the legitimate
transitional Government set up pursuant to an
inclusive peace agreement is totally unjustifiable
and unacceptable and threatens the
implementation of the peace process. It once
more calls on the rebel groups immediately to lay
down arms, in the interest of all Burundians, and
recalls that only a negotiated solution will finally
end the fighting. In this connection, the Council
commends the commitment of the transitional
Government to enter into ceasefire negotiations
and pays tribute to the efforts made to that end by
the facilitation team and, in coordination with the
latter, by the States in the region, particularly the
United Republic of Tanzania. The Council
emphasizes that it is now up to the rebel groups to
do their part. It calls on them immediately to
translate into action the encouraging signals that
they have given recently. It emphasizes further
that, while the transition is moving ahead
according to the established time frame, time is of
the essence for the rebels finally to join the peace
process.

"The Security Council welcomes the steps
taken by the Governments of Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to normalize
their relations. In this regard, it also welcomes the
joint communique they issued on 7 January 2002
(8/2002/36). It calls on them to implement as
soon as possible the elements agreed in this
communique, and in particular to ensure that the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will not be used for armed attacks against
Burundi, and to proceed to the effective
withdrawal of Burundian troops from Congolese
territory.

"The Security Council emphasizes that
national reconstruction and economic recovery
are the other main challenges which the Burundi
peace process must overcome in order to place
itself on a stronger footing. The Council stresses
the important role of the international community
in this regard and calls on donor countries to
honour as soon as possible the pledges which
they made at the Paris (December 2000) and
Geneva (December 2001) donor round tables, as
well as on the United Nations system as a whole
to support the transitional Government for the
reconstruction of the country."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/3.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.35 pm.
