Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for coming to New York to preside over
today's meeting. We would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Migiro and Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien for their statements.

The rule of law is an important symbol of human
civilization and social development, and strengthening
the rule of law in international relations is conducive to
maintaining world peace, promoting common progress
and strengthening efforts to build a harmonious world.
The Security Council's fulfillment of its primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security within the framework of international law is of
great significance in strengthening international law
and furthering the process of strengthening the rule of
law in international relations.

In that connection, I would like to stress the
following points. First, the Charter of the United
Nations is the cornerstone of the international rule of
law. The Charter and the basic principles of
international law established by it are the basis of the
existing international legal order and the foundation for
building the international rule of law. At the 2005
World Summit, world leaders unanimously committed
to stricter compliance with the United Nations Charter
and international law. That solemn commitment must
be translated into practical action. In international
affairs, countries should abide by the basic principles
of international law, such as sovereign equality,
fulfilling obligations in good faith, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the non-use or threat of
force. They should engage in building harmonious
international relations, seek to prevent and reduce
conflicts, and preserve world peace and security.

Secondly, in strengthening the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations, the many political,
economic and social factors should be taken fully into
account. Strengthening the rule of law in conflict and
post-conflict countries is both a prerequisite for the
transition from conflict to peace and a fundamental
guarantee for building sustainable peace. Far from
being merely a legal matter, strengthening the rule of
law is closely related to various political, economic
and social factors. Post-conflict reconstruction covers
many elements and the task of building the rule of law
should be integrated into and coordinated with the
political process and economic and social
reconstruction, and not separate from them, so that
they can be mutually reinforcing. That is the only way
to eliminate the root causes of conflicts.

Thirdly, when conflict and post-conflict countries
are assisted in strengthening the internal rule of law,
their sovereignty must be respected. Basically,
strengthening the rule of law in such countries falls
within the realm of internal affairs. While the
international community can provide support and
assistance in terms of finance, technology and
capacity-building, it is necessary to respect the
autonomy of recipient countries, take full account of
local history, culture and legal systems, and avoid
imposing anything from outside.

Fourthly, it is necessary to strike the right balance
between maintaining peace and pursuing justice.
Ensuring compliance with international humanitarian
law is an important aspect of strengthening the
international rule of law. We condemn all criminal acts
that violate human rights and international
humanitarian law and support the international
community in pushing to resolve the issue of impunity
in conflict regions and to punish serious international
crimes, such as war crimes, genocide and crimes
against humanity. In our view, the issue of impunity
can be fully resolved only if tension is eased and
political stability achieved in the relevant regions.
Efforts to seek criminal justice should further rather
than interrupt the relevant peace process, and foster
rather than hamper national reconciliation and
peacebuilding.

Lastly, the efficiency and credibility of United
Nations sanctions should be enhanced. Over the past
decade, the Security Council has increasingly resorted
to sanctions as a means of deterrence or punishment.
Despite the Council's efforts to improve sanctions
procedures, the effects and negative impact of
sanctions continue to be matters for widespread
concern. China has always taken a cautious approach
to the use of sanctions and advocated for strict criteria
and appropriate time frames for sanctions so as to
avoid, as far as possible, their negative impact on
people's livelihoods and economic and social
development.

China supports strengthening United Nations
sanctions in accordance with the following principles:
undertaking broad consultations on the basis of
Security Council resolutions and moving forward
cautiously; emphasizing facts and evidence and
avoiding double standards; and taking fully into
account the practical situation of the countries
concerned and the nature of the relevant sanctions
committees, as well as enhanced efficiency.

