Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Reske-Nielsen for his briefing. I commend
him on his strong leadership and commitment in the
final but very crucial phase of the presence of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Lcste
(UNMIT). I also wish to thank the Government of
Timor-Leste, represented here by Foreign Minister Jose
Luis Guterres and Ambassador Sofia Mesquita Borges,
for its unwavering dedication in ensuring that stability
continues to prevail in Timor-Leste and in undertaking
its thoughtful and thorough planning for the handling
of the drawdown of UNMIT and its anticipated
withdrawal.
For more than a decade, the United Nations has
been present in Timor-Leste, working hand in hand with
the Timorese Government and people to support their
efforts to emerge from conflict and to build sustainable
peace and security. Today is an important opportunity
to reflect on UNMIT's achievements during the past
six years, to consider its lessons in United Nations
peacekeeping and to look ahead to the United Nations
future role in that young democracy, which celebrated
the tenth anniversary of its independence this year.

Timor-Leste has come a long way since the
establishment of the first United Nations mission there
in 1999. In March 2011, the Policia Nacional de Timor-
Leste (PNTL) assumed executive policing authority
from UNMIT and the United Nations police. Since
that time, the PNTL has exercised responsibility for
all police operations in the country. On 31 October,
UNMIT ceased operational support to the PNTL - one
of the last major milestones as the Mission withdraws
by the year's end.

UNMIT also coordinated closely with Timor-
Leste during the three rounds of presidential and
parliamentary elections in 2012. The elections were
free, fair and peaceful and included high levels of
participation. They and the resulting peaceful transfers
of office stand as major achievements for Timor-Leste.

Finally, we should recall that the essential State
institutions in the security, justice and Government
sectors, which today play crucial roles in safeguarding
stability and democracy, did not exist 13 years ago.
Despite its impressive progress, however, Timor-
Leste continues to face many challenges that must be
addressed to avoid a return to conflict and instability.

The United States wants to see Timor-Leste
maintain stability, deepen democracy, respect
human rights and improve the delivery of justice. We
support the Government of Timor-Leste's continued
engagement on the world stage through its leadership
in the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative,
the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States,
UN-Women and United Nations peacekeeping. We
commend Timor-Leste for its strong leadership as
one of the Chairs of the International Dialogue on
Peacekeeping and Statebuilding and of the Group of
Seven Plus coalition of fragile States. As we prepare
for a significant transition in the United Nations role
in Timor-Leste, we must focus on what will promote
lasting peace and security in Timor-Leste for decades
to come.

First, through the Serious Crimes Investigation
Team within UNMIT, significant strides have been
made to investigate and safeguard information into
crimes against humanity committed in 1999. The
team's work has not been completed, however. We
therefore strongly encourage the Secretariat to identify
a path forward for the investigation team to complete its
work. The investigations are important for promoting
reconciliation and continued accountability.

Secondly, we should continue to work with the
Government of Timor-Leste to help bolster human
rights institutions and to infuse human rights into
key institutions, such as the police and military. As
UNMIT withdraws, the United Nations should consider
other ways to assist with institution-building and
provide specialized technical assistance, as needed and
requested by the Government of Timor-Leste.

Finally, we must consider providing the Government
of Timor-Leste with the appropriate United Nations
tools to identify potential rising political and security
tensions. It is crucial for the United Nations to work in
conjunction with the Government to undertake a big-
picture analysis of sources of fragility, in order to foster
reconciliation and social cohesion while preventing
future instability.

This is a positive moment in United Nations
peacekeeping history, and we, as the Council, are
presented with the unique opportunity to study
UNMIT's success story and look for ways to replicate
the lessons learned in UNMIT to help guide Security
Council actions in other post-conflict and post-
peacekeeping missions. As we prepare for a significant
transition of the United Nations presence in Timor-
Leste, we have to look beyond today and tomorrow
and consider the United Nations tools that will most
assist the people and the Government of Timor-Leste
in further advancing peace, stability and development.

The United States applauds the Timorese people
and its leaders for the progress they have achieved in
building their country and joins other Council members
in welcoming the developments that make it possible
for Timor-Leste to enter a new phase in its relationship
with the United Nations.

