Mr. Jaime Calderon (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): El Salvador reaffirms its commitment
to peace, unconditional respect for human rights,
international law and the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. It also reiterates its hope
that a peaceful solution to the conflict between Israel
and Palestine can be found.

El Salvador vigorously condemns and rejects the
armed attacks by Israel against the Gaza Strip, which
have increased during the past week and led to the loss
of human lives, hundreds of wounded and the flight of
thousands of Palestinians from their homes, as well as
serious material damage.

El Salvador believes that the exercise of States'
right to legitimate self-defence, as set out in the
Charter of the United Nations, does not justify the
disproportionate use of military force against another
State, and even less against its civilian population.
That is not only a breach of the spirit of the Charter but
also a flagrant violation of the norms of international
humanitarian law.

We urge immediate, continuous, unrestricted
and unhindered access for the people of Gaza to
humanitarian assistance and basic supplies. In that
regard, we are very optimistic about the meeting that
the Human Rights Council will hold soon to assess the
situation of civilians in the Gaza Strip.

El Salvador calls for the strict implementation of
all of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly relating to the peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine, which stress,
inter alia, respect for the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people.

On that basis, El Salvador reiterates its call for the
immediate cessation of armed aggression and requests
the Security Council to play a more active and central
role in finding a peaceful solution to the conflict.

El Salvador calls for the full restoration of calm
to pave the way to resolving all issues peacefully.
We therefore support and urge the various actors that
have been accompanying the parties in their quest for
peaceful solutions to intensify their diplomatic actions
in the short term and to give priority to the voice and
rights ofpeoples in search of peace.

