Mr. Jingree (Mauritius): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting in order to
take stock of the outcome of the mission of
Ambassador Gambari, Under-Secretary-General and
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General. My
delegation also thanks Ambassador Gambari for his
very comprehensive briefing this morning.

We note from Ambassador Gambari's briefing
that the Government of Angola is fully committed to
achieving national reconciliation. Likewise, we
welcome the willingness of civil society and the
churches to participate in the peace process. Mauritius
believes firmly that the Government, civil society and
the churches must be encouraged in their efforts
towards national reconciliation.

The conflict in Angola has been dragging on for
almost a quarter of a century now. We are convinced
that there is no military solution to the conflict and that
the Lusaka Protocol provides the basis for its
resolution. It is most unfortunate that UNITA refuses to
abide by the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol. Instead,
UNITA continues on the path of violence. Over recent
months, several terrorist acts have been committed by
UNITA. The people of Angola have suffered for too
long, and they cannot stand it any longer.

The Council must, in the light of the mission of
the Special Adviser, take the appropriate measures to
address the situation. We note from Ambassador
Gambari's briefing that there is a convergence of
opinion that the United Nations should play a more
proactive role. Such an opportunity must be seized to
make progress in the peace process.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
delegation is seriously concerned about the gravity of
this problem, with the number of internally displaced
persons having reached 4.1 million in Angola. For my
delegation, it is very clear that UNITA is mainly
responsible for this situation. We welcome the
enormous efforts of the Government of Angola to
alleviate the plight of internally displaced persons.
Mauritius joins the others in the call for the
international community to help improve the
humanitarian situation in Angola, with special
assistance to the internally displaced persons.

As mentioned by Ambassador Gambari, the
technical mission of the Secretariat will be dispatched
shortly to Angola to undertake discussions with the
Angolan authorities on the engagement of the United
Nations on a number of issues. My delegation
expresses its full support for the technical mission and
looks forward to a programme of action that would
translate the window of opportunity into concrete
measures.

