Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): Thailand welcomes
the timely convening of this open debate, as this year
marks the seventieth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations. We thank the Secretary-General for his
informative briefing.

The four main purposes for the establishment ofthe
United Nations are clearly and well set out in Chapter
I of the Charter. During the past 70 years, the United
Nations has experienced both successes and failures
in achieving its original objectives. While we have
made considerable progress on the development front,
the maintenance of peace and security in many parts
of the world and the promotion of respect for human
rights and for fundamental freedoms for all, without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, seem
to have met serious challenges. History has shown
that success or failure in achieving the objectives
of the United Nations heavily depends upon two key
questions, among others. First, does the United Nations
live up to its responsibility? Secondly, do Member
States respect the principles and fulfil their obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations? Allow me to
give some examples.

Massacres in various countries could have been
prevented if the United Nations had transcended
political divides so as to undertake swift responses, or
if it had had adequate resources to fulfil its mandates.
They could have also been prevented if the relevant
Member States had adhered to the principles of the
Charter to respect human and equal rights and to abide
by international law. Lessons learned from those tragic
incidents compel us to do our utmost not to let history
repeat itself. In that respect, Thailand commends the
Secretary-General for his Human Rights Up Front
initiative, and the relevant United Nations mechanisms
for their continued efforts to protect civilians and to
prevent the repetition of such horrible tragedies.

We are witnessing emerging and chronic
intra-national and international conflicts caused by
acts of aggression, disrespect for State sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and intolerance of religious
faiths and cultural differences. Many innocent people
are deliberately executed simply because they profess
different religions, faiths and beliefs. Villagers are
forced to leave their homes merely because they are of
different races and tribes. Perpetrators have not been
brought to justice. There continue to be the unilateral
use of force and military intervention without the
Security Council's authorization. All of those examples
serve to clearly demonstrate that we have not yet
achieved the noble goals of the United Nations and that
the Charter has not been fully observed and respected.

The priority of the United Nations and the
international community of today is to achieve social
equality, respect for and promotion of human rights,
sovereign equality and tolerance to prevent the spread
of extremism and terrorism. To address those key
issues, some may believe that the Charter, which first
came into force in 1945, may be outdated and no longer
relevant. Thailand believes otherwise. The principles
and provisions stipulated therein remain universal,
applicable and relevant. To deal with those pressing
issues effectively, what we need are new working
methods, approaches and measures, in accordance with
the Charter and international law. Thailand encourages
continued discussion in various forums among Member
States, the relevant United Nations organs and civil
society on this important topic.

National interest remains the supreme and
uncompromising goal of every country and is often
referred to when foreign, military, economic and
even cultural policies are being formulated. However,
one possible approach to prevent conflict and uproot
terrorism and extremism is to realize and attach more
importance to the term "mutual", where we regard equal
sovereignty and rights and appreciate different values.
The world today is in real need of mutual interest,
mutual respect and mutual understanding.

In conclusion, Thailand has always believed
that the four original objectives of the founding of
United Nations can be achieved if all Member States
fully respect and adhere to the principles enshrined
in the Charter. I should like to reaffirm Thailand's
commitment to fulfil our obligations as set forth by
the Charter for our joint effort to maintain peace and
security and to allow peace to prevail.

