Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): I wish to join previous
speakers in welcoming you, Sir, to New York to preside
over this important meeting. We pay tribute to you for the
consistent efforts your country has been making in the
interests of peace.

Looking back over the progress that has been made
in the two years since the conclusion of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, we can see that, indeed, much has been
achieved. Bosnia and Herzegovina is today a very
different place than it was in 1995, with far greater
stability, far less violence, and the promise of a brighter
future. These positive developments are due in large part
to the coordinated involvement of a host of international
players operating in the region, including the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the High
Representative and his staff, the courageous men and
women of the Stabilization Force, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the United Nations
specialized agencies and a range of non-governmental
organizations. The Republic of Korea greatly appreciates
all their dedicated efforts to advance peace and stability
in the war-ravaged country and pays high tribute to those
who have made the ultimate sacrifice and lost their lives
in that noble process.

In assessing the overall situation, my delegation
recalls the High Representative's report in April of this
year, which outlined three courses of action in Bosnia to
be avoided or prevented: first, the military option;
secondly, the option of secession; and thirdly, the option
of domination by one ethnic group.

It is encouraging to note that the military option is
now neither feasible nor realistic, and that no ethnic group
considers it a serious or attractive alternative at this stage.
However, there is a risk that some party may once again
come to favour this option if the commitment of the
international community to peace in Bosnia wanes or is
withdrawn entirely.

The option of overt secession, we are pleased to
note, also appears to have lost its appeal for all involved.
A danger persists, however, of slow creeping secession
and we need to continue our vigilance in this regard.

As regards potential dominance by a single ethnic
group, we are also pleased to see that common
institutions comprising all three major ethnic groups are
now in place in Bosnia and that the danger of dominance
by one over another has receded. Nonetheless, the current
operation of those common institutions reveals that
smooth cooperation and coordination among the leaders
of the three groups has yet to take shape.

Having said that, the Republic of Korea reiterates its
conviction that the implementation of the Peace
Agreement is the only way to attain a comprehensive

 

solution. Under the direction of the Peace Agreement and
the guiding principles and conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Council's successive meetings, multi-ethnic
political and social structures need to be created and
economic rehabilitation fostered.

In this context, we wish to highlight six areas in which
we believe further and more focused action is clearly
warranted.

First, urgent action must be undertaken by the
concerned parties to ensure that refugees and displaced
persons can safely return to their homes, including to those
areas in which they are the minority, and that their property
rights are sufficiently protected.

Secondly, all parties must redouble their efforts to
cooperate with the International Tribunal with a view to
strengthening a sense of justice and the rule of law in their
homeland. Peace in Bosnia cannot endure if it is not a just
peace. For the sake of the Victims in the region, and
because of the terrible precedent it would set, war criminals
must not be allowed to go unpunished.

T hirdly, full respect for human rights, irrespective of
ethnicity, by all parties concerned is an essential
prerequisite for the creation of a multi-ethnic, democratic
Bosnian State.

Fourthly, common institutions in the central
Government must function effectively in order to
reintegrate Bosnian society and reconcile people of all
ethnicities. The leaders of the respective ethnic groups need
to show greater flexibility in taking step-by-step action to
that end. At the same time, the results of municipal
elections held in September of this year must be fully
implemented without delay.

Fifthly, international economic assistance should
continue to be linked to the degree of compliance by the
various authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
obligations and conditions set out in the Peace Agreement
and subsequent relevant international meetings. Economic
reconstruction and the political democratic process must go
hand in hand.

And, sixthly, it is essential that local police
restructuring, which was so capably undertaken by the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), be further pursued
and that this crucial process be combined with
comprehensive judicial reform. The IPTF' s recent initiatives
aimed at tackling financial crime and corruption also
deserve the support of the international community.

Finally, we believe that, building upon the significant
progress that has been achieved thus far, the United
Nations and the international community can and should
do a good deal more to bring about durable peace and
stability, not only in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but
throughout the Balkan region. The continuation of a
credible international military presence there will be
pivotal towards that end. Let us hope that the substantial
time and energy we have invested will produce further
dividends of peace for its war-weary people.

