Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like once again to thank you, Mr. President,
for coming to chair the Security Council debate here in
New York. This bears witness to your and your country's
dedication to and support for this organization and for
humanitarian issues and conflict prevention, as well as the
maintenance of international peace and security.

I would like to start by saying that we deeply
appreciate the Secretary-General's decision to order an
inquiry into the actions of the United Nations in Rwanda
during the 1994 genocide. As far as we are concerned,
this is an exemplary gesture.

I would like to particularly pay tribute to you,
Mr. President, for having taken the initiative of organizing
an open debate on the report of the Independent Inquiry,
which was chaired by Prime Minister Carlsson and
included Minister Sung-loo and General Kupolati. It is a
comprehensive and objective report. Without doubt it will
be a fundamental landmark for the Council's work,
because without forgetting the past, it looks towards the
future.

It is essential, I believe, that all of us, without
exception - the Security Council, the other bodies of the
Organization and the United Nations in general, as well
as the international community as a whole - should
think about our mistakes, our failings and our lack of
resolve in Rwanda. We must do so with humility and
with a deep sense of self-criticism. The United Nations
did nothing, or at least not enough, to prevent or halt the
genocide in Rwanda. We abandoned the Rwandese people
at the time they needed us the most. Perhaps this was
because we were not prepared from the military and
political point of view, but perhaps also because we were
not psychologically prepared to confront the events which
developed in Rwanda six years ago.

I do not think it is helpful to begin to allocate blame,
but we must take into consideration that following upon
this bitter lesson, the peoples of the world will not forgive

 

us if in the future we fail to prevent or to rapidly and
effectively respond to a genocide or to a massive violation
of human rights.

The Rwandese tragedy inescapably leads us to think
about three fundamental and interrelated issues: conflict
prevention, peacekeeping operations, and the strengthening
of international standards of protection for human rights
and humanitarian law.

As the Secretary-General pointed out in his report on
the work of the Organization for 1999:

"The main short- and medium-term strategies for
preventing non-violent conflicts from escalating
into war, and preventing earlier wars from
erupting again, are preventive diplomacy,
preventive deployment, and preventive
disarmament." (A/54/1, para. 36)

The United Nations of the twenty-first century must
gradually become a source of preventive measures.
Preventive diplomacy calls for an accurate assessment of
events, economic resources and, most importantly, political
will. We believe these factors were lacking in Rwanda in
1994.

As regards peacekeeping operations, there are four
points that I consider essential.

First, peacekeeping operations must be endowed with
a clear, realistic mandate commensurate with the established
goals and backed by the necessary political, military and
moral decisions.

Secondly, financial resources must be dependable and
adequate. Voluntary funding can be a useful tool, but never
a substitute for regular contributions.

Thirdly, there must be reasonable security guarantees
for United Nations, associated and humanitarian personnel.
In this regard, we would like to reiterate our call for the
ratification of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel in peacekeeping
operations, and we recall presidential statement
S/PRST/2000/4, adopted on 9 February 2000 following the
open debate held by the Security Council on this topic.

Fourth, in cases such as that of Rwanda, the mandate
must include clear rules for the protection of civilians.
When any deliberate attempt to carry out serious attacks on
the civil population occurs, the United Nations cannot
remain indifferent - it has a moral imperative to act.
Security Council resolutions 1270 (1999) and 1291
(2000), establishing the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and extending the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC), respectively, are a step in the right
direction. They enable the Blue Helmets, in specific
circumstances, to act under Chapter VII of the Charter to
defend the civilian population. I think this is one of the
lessons learned in Rwanda and Srebrenica. A false idea of
impartiality must not be allowed to prevail when genocide
or crimes against humanity are being committed. It is
against this background, and within a broad interpretation
of the idea of international peace and security, that we
must understand the concept of human security, and the
open debate proposed by Canada for 19 April on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is an initiative
that we unequivocally support.

The need to strengthen standards for the protection
of human rights and international humanitarian law is
another element that must be studied, following the
Carlsson report. It is clear that with certain limitations,
there is already an adequate normative framework. The
fact of the matter is, however, that there is a wide gap
between the existence of these legal standards and their
observance. This is why it is indispensable to establish
appropriate national and international machinery to fight
impunity. Justice is an essential component of a stable
peace. The genocide in Rwanda and other crimes against
humanity must not go unpunished. In this context, we
support the work of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda, and we are convinced that the entry into force
of the Rome Statute establishing the International
Criminal Court will contribute to creating an awareness
that impunity will not be tolerated.

The Argentine public learned yesterday, through the
Buenos Aires newspaper Clarin, of the moving
declarations of General Romeo Dallaire, Force
Commander of United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda. Referring to the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, he
said: "I know that God exists because I have shaken
hands with the devil." The events in Rwanda must move
us all to deep reflection and analysis. As the Secretary-
General has said in his report on the fall of Srebrenica,

"The United Nations global commitment to ending
conflict does not preclude moral judgements, but
makes them necessary." (A/54/549, para. 506)

 

