Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let me first
congratulate you, Madam President, and the Swedish
delegation on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July.

In the year of the centenary of our former President
Nelson Mandela, it is instructive to draw on his wisdom
when he remarked,

"Our children are our greatest treasure. They
are our future. Those who abuse them tear at the
fabric of our society and weaken our nation."

Today's debate is extremely relevant and timely,
particularly given the rise in the incidence of violations
of the rights of children not only in armed conflict
but also in terms of emerging asymmetrical threats to
global peace and security, such as terrorism. The debate
should also be seen within the context of preventative
measures and addressing the root causes of conflict.
The involvement of children, the most vulnerable
group of victims, in armed conflict is tantamount to
sowing the seeds of war, which will bear insidious and
destructive consequences in later years.

We commend the work of the Secretariat and the
briefings by Ms. Gamba, Ms. Fore and Ms. Londofio
in bringing to the attention of the Council the grave
violations that continue to be perpetuated by State
and non-State actors alike. Indeed, it is a most vital
responsibility of the Council to respond to those
violations and hold those responsible to account.

The fact that those violations have increased is
a matter of serious concern, which indicates that our
efforts so far have not been completely effective.
Nevertheless, the work of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict is admirable and we
applaud the delegation of Sweden, as the Chair of the
Working Group, for its continued efforts in moving
forward the children and armed conflict agenda.
However, we believe that more resources and attention
could be assigned to the agenda.

Addressing the root causes of conflict, the
effectiveness of long-term peacebuilding and the
preventative diplomacy approach hinge strongly on the
protection of children from the adverse influences and
grave violations committed against them during armed
conflicts. It is vital that we not lose sight of the fact
that today's children could become future rebel leaders,
who would have learned that in order to fend for
themselves in an environment of little-to-no legitimate
economic opportunities and political marginalization,
they would have to take up arms. Instead, we should
create a conducive environment where today's children
can play a positive role in society.

In that regard, South Africa would like to
emphasize the recommendation made in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/465) that the funding
gap for the reintegration of children recruited by armed
groups back into normal society be urgently addressed.
We fully support the establishment of the multi-year
funding mechanism, which will allow for the early
release of children into long-term viable alternatives to
military life.

South Africa underscores the importance of
addressing the present problem of grave violations
against children during war times as a critical
prerequisite of future sustainable peace. In that regard,
South Africa fully supports the strengthening of
mechanisms for the protection of children in armed
conflict. That could take the form of specific provisions
in United Nations peacekeeping missions, as well
as the engagement of the United Nations with armed
groups on the matter. We also welcome adoption this
morning of resolution 2427 (2018), which condemns the
attacks and the threats of attacks, in contravention of
international law, against schools and health centres.
We need to ensure the safety of children in schools and
health facilities during conflict. Therefore, we call for
the urgent and imperative need to hold accountable all
perpetrators of human rights violations and abuses and
international humanitarian law Violations, irrespective
of their status or political affiliation.

To further that aim, South Africa welcomes the
Secretary-General's call for cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations in coordinating efforts
to address violations against children in armed
conflict. We would also like to highlight the need for
dedicated child protection capacities within regional
mechanisms and to encourage further engagement with
the United Nations to prioritize the development of
tools to forestall grave violations, including through the
adoption of prevention plans aimed at institutionalizing
preventive measures.

In conclusion, we believe that the Security Council
should take firm and concrete action to ensure that our
children, and youth in general, are shielded from the
horrors of conflict and other violations that threaten to
undermine our future prospects for the maintenance
of international peace, security and development. That
stance should be applied consistently, devoid of double
standards, to ensure that children are protected no matter
where and in what context they may find themselves.

