Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Kubis, for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan.
Azerbaijan highly values his tireless work and the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in promoting peace and
security in the country. I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement, which clearly outlines his
Government's views and analysis ofthe latest processes
concerning Afghanistan.

In just a couple of weeks, Afghanistan will
enter a final and momentous year in its political and
security transition. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/721) identifies progress in some areas during
the period under review. It also depicts complex
challenges that the country continues to face and the
efforts undertaken by Afghanistan, with the support of
the international community, to address them. In light
of the difficulties of the transition period, it is critical
to step up the implementation of mutual commitments
between Afghanistan and its international partners.
The international community should remain actively
engaged in the long-term stabilization process in
Afghanistan. Predictable assistance should be ensured
to that end.

The year 2014 will signify several milestone
events in the process of consolidating Afghanistan's
sovereignty and national unity, which will determine
the future of the country. In particular, the upcoming
presidential and provincial council elections will
further strengthen the political foundations of peace,
stability and development in the country. We welcome
important advancements and steps taken in the run-up
to the elections, such as the finalization of the list of
candidates and measures to encourage the registration
of female candidates, promote voter inclusiveness and
enhance the security of the electoral process. We join
the Secretary-General's call on all parties to commit to
a peaceful conduct of the elections and to respect the
right of the Afghan people to exercise their vote.

Ensuring national peace and reconciliation
constitutes a fundamental element of durable stability
and unity in Afghanistan. The efforts undertaken by
the Government in that regard, including through
the outreach activities of the High Peace Council
and the implementation of the Afghanistan peace
and reconciliation programme, are commendable.
At the same time, we note the lack of progress in the
establishment of a formal peace process and underline
the necessity of creating the proper conditions for
inclusive talks. This process must be based on the full
respect for the Constitution of Afghanistan and must
preserve the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned Character.
No attempts to undermine Afghanistan's independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity and to reverse its
years-long democratic achievements must be allowed.

Afghanistan's strengthened dialogue and
cooperation with its immediate neighbours and other
regional counterparts on a wide range of issues,
including peace and reconciliation, regional security
challenges, economic development and humanitarian
assistance, are essential for the peaceful and stable
future of the country and the region. Having said this,
we welcome Afghanistan's active interaction with
its various partners within bilateral and multilateral
frameworks.

We also stress the importance of the Istanbul
Heart of Asia Process as a unique regional platform for
dialogue and partnership aimed at promoting security,
confidence and cooperation, with Afghanistan at its
core. The effective realization ofpractical activities and
projects within all six confidence-building measures
requires thoroughly elaborated alternative funding
modalities, and we look forward to receiving the results
of an expert study at the next senior officials meeting,
to be held in January in New Delhi.

Azerbaijan and Afghanistan share strategic and
fraternal relations with solid bilateral cooperation. As
the international security forces prepare to withdraw
next year, Azerbaijan will continue to strengthen those
relations by providing capacity-building assistance and
training programmes to Afghanistan in many areas
of mutual interest. Our long-time participation in the
International Security Assistance Force and declared
intention to partner with NATO in a post-2014 training,
advice and assistance mission derive from our regional
security concerns and strong willingness to work
towards the establishment of stability in Afghanistan
and the region. Azerbaijan will continue to be a part
of collective efforts in Afghanistan and is capable of
contributing significantly in terms of troops, training
and financial assistance, as well as its growing transit
capacity.

I want to conclude by stressing that Afghanistan is
no longer at the crossroads. It has made an irreversible
choice to pursue the path ofbuilding a secure, self-reliant
and self-sustainable State. The Afghan people have long
struggled and have made significant sacrifices for that
cause. I want to reaffirm my country's strong support
for Afghanistan's sovereignty, territorial integrity and

unity, and our resolve to stand by the brotherly Afghan
nation in its aspirations.

