Mr. Slade (Samoa): We thank you, Sir, and we
thank the Council for the opportunity to take part in
this open meeting. Samoa has sought to be heard in the
debate as a contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and because of our unalterable faith in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). My country has been active and committed in its
support for the establishment of the Court and remains
actively engaged.

Our concern is that the draft proposal before the
Security Council in connection with the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina will, in our view,
undermine the purpose and meaning of the Rome
Statute. It will also raise rather fundamental issues that
touch on the obligations and responsibilities of States
under international law and, to our mind, will have
reflections on the role of the Security Council.

We believe that every State, whether a signatory
or ratifier of the Rome Statute, is under obligation not
to act in contradiction of the Statute. Indeed, by the
terms of the Vienna Convention, we would regard
States as duty-bound by treaty law to ensure the
integrity of the Statute and not to undermine it in any
material way.

The draft we have seen proposes to exempt
peacekeepers from the jurisdiction of the Court by way
of blanket immunity. Respectfully, we say that such
exemption would be unnecessary and would set the
wrong standards. Furthermore, we cannot see how that
can be viewed as being consistent with article 16 of the
Rome Statute, as the draft asserts, when the very
purpose of the Statute is to put an end to impunity.

More seriously, the draft purports, pursuant to
article 16, to grant immunity on a permanent basis. Yet
it is apparent on the face of the article that the true
meaning and intent is to enable the Security Council to
judge each case on the basis of its particular
circumstances. There is clearly no ground for a
determination in advance, and then in perpetuity. Our
contention, therefore, is that the purported use of
article 16 would be plainly ultra vires. I believe there is
an abundance of material from the negotiation process
that would support such a contention.

So, too, in the absence of a situation threatening
or breaching international peace and security, would
we question the vires in the purported use of Chapter
VII of the Charter. In our view, it seems very doubtful
that the requisite circumstances exist in this case to
bring into play Article 39 of the Charter and Chapter
VII.

We do recognize and we do respect the concerns
of the United States. At least initially, others shared the
essential point of their concern. At all times throughout
the negotiations the most serious and conscientious
effort was made by all concerned to find the right
accommodation. The United States played an important
part in that effort. The consensus reached, by way of
the provisions on complementarity, is enshrined in the
Rome Statute. Fundamentally, they reaffirm and leave
to national courts the primary responsibility for the
prosecution of their nationals. We believe these
provisions offer protection and substantially address
the concerns expressed.

As I close, may I note the Secretary-General's
letter of 3 July, which has been circulated to the
Council, and his advice on pragmatic solutions for
consideration. We would respectfully recommend to
the Council the type of options suggested by the
Secretary-General. They correctly focus on the crucial
objective of ensuring the stability and the security of
Bosnia. Putting the Rome Statute at risk in the process
cannot be an option.

