Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to thank
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), Ambassador Konuzin, for his comprehensive
presentation of the work of the Committee, as foreseen
in resolution 1535 (2004). As a member of the Bureau
of that Committee, I wish to associate myself with his
words, which will help to shorten considerably my
comments this morning. I would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome the Executive Director of the
newly established Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), Ambassador Javier
Ruperez of Spain. I wish him well in his new job.

The most relevant challenge facing the CTC and
the CTED is to persuade countries that it is in their
own interest to take advantage of the various sources of
cooperation made available to them. It is our view that,
up to now, the potential for cooperation with the CTC
is underused. It is not our objective this morning to
exhaust the reasons why the results have been so, but
one issue to which we would like to draw attention is
the lack of stronger feedback mechanisms to ensure
that the cooperation provided by third parties to
countries and to the CTC is fully satisfactory.

We also wish to stress that the CTC and the
CTED are structures designed mainly to shelter States
that are willing to cooperate but, for various reasons,
are unable to do so. We would therefore like to reiterate
that the CTC and, by extension, the CTED, is neither a
sanctions committee nor a court of justice - not even
a police precinct. The work of the Committee is to be
carried out within the limits foreseen in resolution
1373 (2001) and 1535 (2004).

The sense of ownership of what is being done by
the Committee should be strengthened among other
United Nations members. In that regard, the
establishment of direct contact with Member States in
fulfilment of the work of the Committee is a most
useful working method. We especially welcome all
efforts to bring transparency to the work of the CTC.
When it comes to cooperation, creative solutions are
always in order.

In conclusion, I wish to note that the repudiation
of terrorist acts is one of the guiding principles of
Brazilian foreign policy. We are of the view that the
fight against terrorism is to be conducted within the
requirements of due process, human rights and civil
liberties.

