Mr. Matjila (South Africa): First, we would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. The matter of the working methods of
the Council remains one of the most pertinent issues
before the Council, as it relates to the manner in which
the Council seeks to resolve crises affecting the entire
globe. We therefore welcome this open debate, which
itself is in keeping with the provisions of the note
by the President S/2017/507, which calls for greater
involvement by non-members of the Council in its work
and for creating transparency.

From its inception, the structure of the Council has
been contested particularly because it charges 15 of the
United Nations States Members with the responsibility
to pursue and maintain peace and security on behalf
of 193. Furthermore, it allows for only five to prevent
progress on any matter, thereby securing the interests
of one at the expense of us all. Each Member State
of the United Nations has very specific contextual
circumstances, and restoring or maintaining peace in
each of our States and/or regions requires an awareness
and account of the particular complexities entailed.
Therefore, transparency and inclusiveness do not come
as a matter of courtesy, but necessity, if the Council is
to be effective.

The newest iteration of note 507, issued in 2017,
further improves the work of the Council. However, the
test is not what is in the concept note itself, but rather
the test is whether the Council is willing to implement
what is contained therein. South Africa stresses that
note 507, as well as the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, should become permanent so that
this organ can be more effective, accountable and
predicable, with well understood rules. It is our strong
belief that the more the Council shares information,
consults and accepts the Views from those relevant to
a particular conflict, the more operative, accountable
and transparent it will be. Further to that, the more
responsive the Council becomes, the better placed it will
be to meet the challenges presented by a continuously
more complex world.

In that regard, my delegation would like to thank
Portugal, Argentina, Angola and Japan for their sterling
work in moving that matter forward as respective Chairs
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
other Procedural Questions. We welcome Kuwait in
assuming that role, and we pledge our full support to
Kuwait's chairmanship of the Informal Working Group.
I would like to highlight four practical suggestions
that South Africa believes can help to develop a more
effective Security Council.

First, I would like to see the implementation
of the commitment in note 507 for more regular
consultations and coordination between the Council
and troop- and police-contributing countries. That is
specifically necessary when considering the renewal
of mandates. Such consultations are vital mechanisms
to ensure peacekeeping mandates are informed by the
knowledge of realities on the ground that the troop- and
police-contributing countries have and that expectations
are realistic and well understood. Such consultations are
also important throughout the life cycle of a mission, as
well as in the planning and transition phases.

Secondly, the importance of annual joint
consultative meetings and informal dialogues with the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union (AU)
is quite essential. The Council has consistently agreed
to continue to expand consultations and cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union, as set forth in note 507, undertaking
to invite relevant organizations to participate in
the Council's public and private meetings, when
appropriate. Additionally in note 507, the Council
commits itself to continue to informally consult
with regional organizations when drafting, inter
alia, resolutions, presidential statements and press
statements, as appropriate.

The African Union and other regional bodies have
the comparative advantage of a nuanced understanding
of their own region and being able to respond quickly to
crises as they occur. We should avoid a practice where
the Council is selective in its approach and relationships
with regional bodies are merely utilized in times of
political convenience. The language in note 507 could
therefore be strengthened to emphasize the necessity of
such cooperation, in the light of Council resolutions,
such as resolution 2033 (2012), adopted subsequent to
the issuance of note 507, which provides an array of
strategies that could ensure strategic coherence. We
therefore thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for
putting more energy into strengthening the relationship
between the United Nations and the AU on many fronts
in order to deal with the issues of peace and security.

Thirdly, South Africa stresses the need to continue
enhancing the relationship between the Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). In its
advisory capacity, the PBC serves as a platform that
contributes to improving coordination and enhancing
coherence among the United Nations, the AU and other
international actors in the areas of sustaining peace in
Africa and preventing the region from relapsing into
conflict. We also believe that the Council could do
more to draw on the expertise of the PBC, in particular
during the renewal of mission mandates.

Fourthly, in note 507 the Security Council commits
itself to seeking the views of Member States that are
parties to a conflict and/or other interested and affected
parties. That commitment should be applied uniformly.
Therefore, it is necessary for the Council, as a matter of
principle, to always consult with all the relevant parties
to a conflict before deliberating on a matter, to ensure
that it has at its disposal all the relevant facts.

In conclusion, while we fully support the
implementation of working methods that improve
the inclusivity and transparency of the work of the
Council, those incremental changes do nothing to
address the Council's structural problems. While it
still remains that the membership of the Council and
the right to the veto are determined by long-outdated
historical circumstances, no number of changes to its
methods will prevent the interests of a few hindering
the maintenance and pursuit of peace and prosperity
for all. There needs to be a comprehensive reform of the
Security Council. The goal of African countries is to
be fully represented in all the decision-making organs
of the United Nations, in particular in the Security
Council. We must therefore stress the fundamental need
to urgently reform the Council if we are to avoid further
erosion of not only the legitimacy and credibility of this
organ, but also its ultimate effectiveness in a world that
is very different from the one that existed when the
United Nations was founded, over 70 years ago.

