Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) (spoke in French):
Permit me at the outset, Mr. President, to say how
grateful I am to you and to the other members of the
Security Council for having convened this public
debate, making it possible for all Members of the
United Nations to hear a very important briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

(spoke in English)

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union-
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association country member of the European
Economic Area Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.
On behalf of the European Union, I would like to
welcome Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and to thank him
for the briefing he delivered today. We are grateful for
the positive work done so far by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his team
and for their determination to implement the mandate
of the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET).

As reiterated this month by the Council of
Ministers of the European Union, the European Union
reaffirms its policy of solidarity with the people of East
Timor and its support for UNTAET in its effort to meet
one of the greatest challenges facing the United
Nations: leading East Timor towards independence.

Eight months ago, the Security Council
established UNTAET with the responsibility for the
administration of a territory that had been vastly
devastated by those unwilling to accept the results of
the popular consultation. The mandate embraces a
number of tasks: security and maintenance of law and
order, the development of civil and social services,
humanitarian assistance, support of capacity-building
for self-government, rehabilitation and development
assistance, among other areas of responsibility. In fact,
the scale of this challenge should not be
underestimated, in particular given the legitimately
high expectations the East Timorese have about their
future; their future depends greatly upon the United
Nations.

Therefore, the support and assistance of the
international community for the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the territory will be essential.
UNTAET needs funding to be effective. It also needs to
manage carefully the resources that have already been
allocated. The European Union stresses the urgent need
for pledges made at the December 1999 donors
conference in Tokyo to be delivered and disbursed
quickly, and considers that the donor community
should give full support to the East Timor consolidated
budget for the fiscal year 2000-2001. We urge the
Secretariat and UNTAET swiftly to take concrete steps
to overcome any barriers to disbursement.

Bureaucracy should not be allowed to become a
major obstacle to getting things done in the field. The
European Union stresses the need to reinforce
coordination efforts within the United Nations system,
with UNTAET, with the World Bank and also with non-
governmental organizations working in the field.

The European Union reiterates its commitment to
assistance to the territory's reconstruction process. The
European Union is contributing through its financing
proposal of 39 million euros- 19 million euros in
2000 and 20 million in 2001 - with a total
contribution of 60 million euros envisaged over the
next three years. These funds are intended to support
the programme for rehabilitation and reconstruction in
East Timor, through the trust fund set up by the World
Bank. Overall, European Union aid amounts to 162
million euros already paid. That figure does not include
the significant contribution that European Union
member States are providing on a national basis to the
existing trust funds and through other mechanisms.

In this first phase of the transitional
administration, East Timor has faced serious obstacles:
the total lack of infrastructure as a result of the massive
destruction, extremely high levels of unemployment;
the continuing crisis of the refugees, and the
threatening militia incursions from West Timor.
Despite many improvements, there are still reasons to
be concerned.

The situation of the tens of thousands of East
Timorese refugees in West Timor needs an urgent
solution. The European Union commends the efforts
being made by UNTAET, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and non-governmental organizations working in the
field in this regard.

The initiatives of the East Timorese leadership,
particularly through Xanana Gusmao, in supporting
assessment visits to East Timor in a spirit of
reconciliation, and those of the Church- namely, the
recent visit of Bishop Basilio do Nascimento to West
Timor - are welcome. The overwhelming reception in
all the refugee camps visited by Bishop Nascimento
has made clear the desire of thousands of East
Timorese to return to their own country.

The European Union understands that, after
continuous harassment of its personnel, UNHCR has
decided to suspend its humanitarian work in three
camps located in the area of Kupang, housing more
than 24,000 East Timorese refugees. Once again, this
clearly shows the pressing need for decisive measures.
The unacceptable campaign of misinformation and
intimidation in refugee camps where militias continue
to hold influence must come to an end.

The European Union urges Indonesia to make
good its commitment to assist those who want to
return. We welcome the assurances given by the
Indonesian authorities to the international community.
To that end, we consider of the utmost importance the
immediate removal from the refugee camps of the
military and the militia, the isolation of all militia
leadership and assurances that those who obstruct
repatriation operations will be held accountable. The
response regarding the pensions issue is also a major
element to be considered as part of the overall solution
of the refugee problem.

For those Timorese who would like to stay in
Indonesia and become Indonesian citizens, the
European Union stresses the importance of a balanced
and responsible resettlement programme. We believe
that any attempt to resettle those who decide to stay in
Indonesia near the border of East Timor can pose
serious threats and could become an unnecessary
source of conflict in the near future. These matters
were discussed in constructive meetings early this
month in Jakarta between the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Portugal, Mr. Jaime Gama, in his capacity as
President-in-Office of the Council of the European
Union, and the Indonesia President, Mr. Abdurrahman
Wahid, its Foreign Minister, Mr. Shihab, and the
Attorney-General of Indonesia. The European Union
welcomes the cooperation that has been shown by
Indonesian high-level authorities and hopes that it will
continue.

The efforts being made by the Indonesian
Attorney-General concerning the investigation of
human rights violations in East Timor, as well as the
spirit of cooperation with UNTAET under the
Memorandum of Understanding signed with the United
Nations transitional authority, are highly appreciated
by the European Union, but the investigation process
and the bringing to account of all those involved in the
atrocities that followed the popular consultation must
not be delayed. In this context, the European Union
also encourages the Indonesian judicial authorities to
continue their cooperation with the office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

The efforts to accelerate the "Timorization" of the
Transitional Administration are strongly supported by
the European Union. It is essential to involve the East
Timorese in a broad representative manner, including
women and youth, in the policy-making and
administrative structure at a higher-level during the
transition period.

It is legitimate, as Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello has
said, that the East Timorese should seek gradually to
acquire ownership of their future independent country.
In this context, we urge UNTAET to improve its policy
of information and transparency with a view to
involving all sectors of the population in the
construction of their future independent State in order
to avoid undesirable misunderstandings between the
transitional authority and the local population. The
European Union encourages UNTAET to accelerate the
training process of the East Timorese civilian police in
order to guarantee a gradual increase in local
ownership in the area of security that would enable the
reduction of UNTAET's military component.

The European Union takes note of the decision
announced here today by the Secretary-General's
Special Representative to establish benchmarks for the
Transitional Administration to achieve before
transferring power to the East Timorese. As we stated
at the donor's conference in Lisbon, the European
Union considers that certain objectives should be
attained before independence and that a roadmap
should be defined in such areas as the pace of
reconstruction, the setting-up of mechanisms that are
indispensable for the management of a modern and
democratic State, the evolution of the political process
and the safeguarding and security of the borders.

Considering the need for a swift transition, we
also deem it convenient that, at an appropriate moment
and after consultations with the parties concerned, a
tentative date for the independence of East Timor
should be fixed. Therefore, we fully support the
indicative period announced here today by Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello.

There is now a more stable situation in East
Timor. Conditions are in place for East Timorese to
pursue a strong and true national reconciliation process
that will enhance the rehabilitation of East Timor. It is
also vital that the international community continue to
show its commitment to supporting East Timor's
recovery and development. The European Union
believes that the transitional period is entering a crucial
phase. The United Nations mission, together with the
East Timorese, must play a critical role in the
development of a new democratic State, in which the
rule of law will be one of its main foundations, as well
as in the creation of an independent State fully
integrated into its region and in peace with all its
neighbours.

