Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting and also to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing
on the strategic review of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
for the work he is carrying out along with his team.

Although what he has told us indicates that there has
been a significant improvement in the security situation
in Darfur, we must, however, express our concern at the
threats posed by certain militias that remain active to
the return of internally displaced persons to their places
of origin. The international community must redouble
its efforts to address humanitarian needs and to protect
the human rights of the more than 2 million internally
displaced persons in the Sudan. Specifically, in order
to bring about such return and, ultimately, sustainable
peace in Darfur, there is a pressing need to build
police capacity, promote the rule of law and provide
basic services such as water, food and health care. To
that end, over and above the achievement of relative
stability, there must be a commitment of all parties
to the conflict and the broadest possible participation
of the population in order to effectively deal with the
root causes of the crisis, promote inclusive institutions
that are able to resolve disputes and mitigate the threats
posed by climate change. We regret that despite the
efforts of the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, it has still not been possible to reach agreement
with the armed groups that are not signatories to the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

We regret also that the Property Claims and
Restitution Committee of the Voluntary Return and
Resettlement Commission was not able to complete
its work because of a lack of funding. We stress
that the distribution of land and natural resources,
including water, remains the main cause of conflict
between communities, particularly since global
warming is worsening the situation and leading to
increased desertification.

We welcome the fact that the phased withdrawal of
UNAMID from its team sites has not led to a reduction
in security in those areas. However, it is ofconcern that
there has been a reduction in the capacity to monitor

the humanitarian and human rights situation there. It
is also concerning that, as a result of the handover at
the team sites to formed police units, the current police
strength of only 140 officers is not sufficient to serve
the camps and support individual police officers.

Peru supports the proposed substantive investment
in peacebuilding, recovery and development in Darfur
in order to continue to promote the peace process.
We believe that the presence of the African Union
and the United Nations must adapt to the current
needs of the population. We therefore support the
new mission concept, which involves readjusting
UNAMID's priorities in order to transition towards
withdrawal over a two-year period. In order to achieve
this goal, we would like to cite three elements key to
building sustainable peace in Darfur, including the
return of displaced persons to their places of origin
on the basis of a permanent agreement on a cessation
of hostilities between the Government and armed
groups, the full implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur and financial support from the
international community.

First, there must be fluid communication and
cooperation between UNAMID and the United
Nations country team, with a view to implementing
the stabilization and peacebuilding strategy agreed
upon by the Council. Secondly, we must ensure local
capacity-building and inclusive institutions in order to
provide security and judicial services and to promote
sustainable development. And finally, progress
must be made gradually, assessing the impact on the
population of the phased withdrawal of UNAMID. We
must avoid a rushed exit, which would undermine the
relative stability we have gained. On the other hand,
we hope that the withdrawal of the mission reflects the
attainment of sustainable peace.

