Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I thank the Council for
having convened this meeting. I would like to reiterate
our deeepest condolences to the families and friends
of those who were killed. Today, all of Ukraine is
mourning. Ukraine is approaching the embassies of
the Netherlands, Malaysia. Australia, Indonesia, the
United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium, the Philippines
and Canada in order to lay flowers and to express its
sorrow.

We would like to thank the delegation of Australia
for having proposed resolution 2166 (2014) on the
investigation of the downing of the civilian aircraft
on an international flight, Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-l7, in the Donetsk region of Ukraine, which the
delegation of Ukraine co-sponsored. We believe that
the resolution will help to facilitate a full, thorough
and independent international investigation into the
incident in accordance with international civil aviation
guidelines.

Having shown our utmost openness, the same
day, immediately following the crash, Ukraine
invited the International Civil Aviation Organization,
INTERPOL and representatives of all countries that
lost their nationals in the tragedy, as well as the Russian
Federation, to participate in the investigation. Some of
them have already arrived in Ukraine and started their
work in Kharkiv.
President Poroshenko gave the order that all military
activities immediately cease in the 40 kilometre zone
surrounding the crash site to allow for the security and
safety of the international investigation. We therefore
call on the Russian Federation to use all its influence
on the pro-Russian armed groups operating illegally in
the Donetsk region in order to stop military activities
on their side and ensure secure access to the crash site.
We assume that the investigation should be allowed to
establish not only the technical cause of the crash but
also the other important circumstances, namely, who
had actually fired the missile and how the high-precision
long-range weapons got into the hands of illegal armed
groups. Where did the weapons come from?

In accordance with the Chicago Convention on
International Civil Aviation, as was mentioned in the
statement by the representative of France, Ukraine has
a right to head the investigation procedure. It is also
our right to share that leadership. The Prime Minister
of Ukraine, Mr. Arseniy Yatsenyuk, stated today in
an address that Ukraine is ready to transfer the role of
coordinator in investigating the crash of the Malaysia
Airlines Boeing 777 to the Kingdom ofthe Netherlands,
at that country's request. In his remarks, Prime Minister
Yatsenyuk said,

"as the side that suffered the most, the Netherlands
may lead the investigation in close coordination and
cooperation with all other parties. All Ukrainian
law enforcement bodies and international
partners are already involved in conducting an
all-encompassing, transparent and full-fledged
international investigation of the tragedy".

We particularly strongly condemn the morally
repulsive acts committed by illegal armed groups
controlling the crash site. According to the reports
of local citizens of Alchevsk, in the Luhansk region,
valuables belonging to the victims of the plane crash
were brought by terrorists in a previously stolen
ambulance to the city, where they boasted about their
trophies - children's bags, suitcases and foreign
currency that they managed to collect and steal
from the crash site. That demonstrates the lack of
humanity of those who call themselves "the People's
Republic". The fact that during the last three days the
illegal armed groups were impeding the appropriate
investigating authorities, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and others from gaining
safe, secure and unrestricted access to the crash site
and the surrounding area is proof that they are trying to
hide evidence from the international community.
Let me quote the President of Ukraine:

"Having shot down the aircraft, militants
committed three crimes - the terrorist act of
firing a missile at a civilian aircraft; offensive
mistreatment of dead bodies, particularly their
removal; and the destruction of evidence and the
hindering of the work not only of the Ukrainian
Commission of Inquiry but also of the international
experts of the International Civil Aviation
Organization Commission".

The so-called Luhansk and Donetsk Republics must
be recognized as terrorist organizations, not only in
Ukraine, but throughout the world. Cooperation with
them must be considered a support for terrorism.

The persistence of illegal terrorist military activity
has been possible only with the Russian Federation's
direct and overt support, despite continued calls by
Ukraine and the international community to stop.
Although officials in Moscow have constantly and
tirelessly insisted that they were not involved in the
situation in Donbass region, the irrefutable facts clearly
indicate the opposite.

Russian citizens are members of the leadership of
the terrorist groups. Heavy armaments and ammunition
continues to be supplied from the Russian side of
the State border. Just yesterday, a column of heavy
armoured battle vehicles attempted to break into
Ukraine through the border with the Russian territory
at border checkpoint Izvarino. Russia is financing the
terrorists. Numerous provocations are happening on the
Russian-Ukrainian border.

What Russia is declaring thus does not square with
its actions. Ukraine demands that the Russian side
immediately cease provocations on the State border
with Ukraine, stop hindering efforts of the Ukrainian
side and the international community to put an end to
terrorism and other violence in Donetsk and Luhansk,
which are Oblasts of Ukraine, return to President
Poroshenko's peace plan, withdraw its forces from
the Ukrainian border and stop threatening peace and
security in our country, the region and the world as
whole.

