Mr. Neculaescu: I would like to thank you, Sir, for
the opportunity to address the Security Council today in
my capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). The PBC congratulates Peru on taking the
initiative to organize this debate on an important and
timely issue.

The PBC recognizes the indispensable role young
people could play in any effort to build and sustain
peace and welcomes the presentation of the independent
progress study on youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86), which offers insight into and an opportunity
for Member States to analyse and review means of
engaging with young people in the areas of peace and
security, thereby enriching our discussions.

According to the study, the consistent exclusion
young people experience and the mistrust they express
for national and international authorities should be a
wake-up call for all of us. The PBC notes that young
people's favourable participation in peacebuilding is at
the same time a right and a demographic necessity in
making our societies more inclusive and peaceful. If
we are to achieve inclusive, sustainable development
and build and sustain peace, we simply cannot afford
to lose the largest generation of young people the world
has ever known. The PBC recognizes the importance
of mainstreaming young women and men into
peacebuilding and of seeing young people as partners
to engage.

The PBC has heard directly from young people
about their peacebuilding work in contexts as diverse
as Burundi, Liberia, Kyrgyzstan and Solomon Islands,
and has experienced first hand the resourcefulness
and resilience of young people in the face of conflict
and violence. We recognize that the majority of young
people strive for peace and should be given meaningful
opportunities to participate in peacebuilding efforts.

The study says that trust in, not fear of, youth
must guide our work. That means giving youth the
right opportunities and ensuring that quality education
is available at the primary, secondary and tertiary
levels, including in refugee and displaced settings. It
also means providing young people with appropriate
employment opportunities.

The PBC expresses its support for peacebuilding
initiatives with positive reflections undertaken by
young women and men in conflict-affected countries.
Such activities are often launched with limited
funding assistance and recognition by national and
international actors alike. The PBC recognizes that a
lack of adequate funding of youth-led organizations,
in part because of the challenges youth organizations
face in accessing existing funding streams, limits the
contribution young people make to peaceful societies.
Significantly, initiatives such as the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative allocated
nearly $50 million dollars to youth and peacebuilding
programmes in the past two years, including direct
funding to non-governmental organizations. Some
40 per cent of the budget was allocated to local civil
society organizations. We also welcome PBF efforts
that promote initiatives supporting the involvement of
young people as contributors to political processes.

The PBC encourages the Security Council to
take into account the role young people could play
in peacebuilding. The PBC intends to continue and
expand its direct engagement with young people both in
the countries and regions it supports and in its meetings
here in New York.

