Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to join you, Madam President,
in congratulating and thanking the delegation of the
United Kingdom for its work during its presidency of
the Security Council last month. I wish you, Madam
President, and your team every success in your work on
behalf of the entire Council.

I thank you for your team's work for the drafting
of the provisional programme of work. I see that we
have a rather broad agenda covering many topics this
month. Some of them are related to my region. Others
include Haiti, the adoption of a draft resolution and
the possibility of expanding the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, as well as the
issue of South Sudan and the proposal of the presidency
of convening a meeting during the high-level week to
discuss the situation in Iran, among many others.

We agree with a majority of the chosen topics but,
as we have expressed throughout the drafting of the
provisional programme of work, we believe that the
desired meeting under the item of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security with regard to the situation in Nicaragua
should not be addressed within the Security Council
primarily because, as we have expressed on other items,
the situation in Nicaragua does not constitute a threat
to international peace and security. We believe that it
is important for the Security Council to clearly adhere
to what is stated in the Charter of the United Nations,
which is that its primary responsibility is to maintain
international peace and security. We support the policy
of the Secretary-General with regard to preventive
diplomacy, but preventive diplomacy must be used
within a framework of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States Members of the United
Nations and where all States are on an equal footing.

Furthermore, as we have said clearly in the past,
the work being done by regional and subregional
organizations is very important, but the Security
Council should limit its efforts to addressing cases that
represent a threat to international peace and security.
The United Nations system is broad. It is not limited to
the Security Council. If there is a situation related to
human rights, we have the Human Rights Council, and
the membership as a whole elects the members of the
Human Rights Council. The same goes for other topics
that are, of course, important.

I should also say that we will be leaving the Security

Council in a few weeks, and we are concerned about
the possibility that we are giving the Security Council
more power than the Charter of the United Nations
itself entrusts to it. That would weaken the multilateral
system and empower an organ that, as we have said
many times before, is not democratic or transparent and
in many cases does not represent the interests of the
entire membership.

