The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I thank the Special Representative for his briefing
and all the work that he and his team do on the ground.
I also thank our colleague on the screen for all the
great work that the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) does and the sacrifices of the AMISOM
troop-contributing countries, alongside the Somali
national security forces, as they fight Al-Shabaab. And
I am very grateful to our civil-society briefers.

I would also like to join others in extending
the United Kingdom's condolences to the family of
Ms. Almaas Elman, the aid worker and advocate for
survivors of sexual violence in Somalia who was so
tragically killed yesterday. As others have noted, her
sister Ilwad was here in the Council just two days ago
during our meeting on the importance of peace and
reconciliation (see S/PV.8668). Our deepest sympathies
and condolences go to their family.

I can be brief, because many colleagues have drawn
attention to the points that I wanted to make. We are
very worried by the floods and the people affected and
displaced by them. We are supporting Somalia in relief
efforts by contributing drinking water, hygiene supplies
and health services, and we will continue to be a friend
of Somalia in that regard. We hope that Member States
will provide sustained humanitarian funding.

We have been watching the Somalia Partnership
Forum carefully and hope that it will now work
closely with the international community to implement
the milestones agreed on. The United Kingdom's
total spending for next year in Somalia is more than
$400 million. We therefore hope that the commitments
that Somalia has made on debt relief, security-sector
reform, operations from force generation and the
electoral law and constitutional review will be fulfilled.
We commend Somalia's ambition to fully re-engage
with the international financial institutions and hope for
further progress. I believe that there have been recent
positive discussions between the ministers of finance
of the Federal Government and the federal member
states, which shows that cooperation can happen.

I want to concentrate my remarks on the elections.
We are at a critical juncture. The citizens of Somalia,
as we heard from Mr. Moallim, have asked for
one-person-one-vote elections in 2020 and 2021. It
is Vital to ensure that there is no delay in delivering
peaceful, inclusive, credible and transparent elections,
in line with the provisional Constitution, as we heard
from the Special Representative. Specifically, and as the
Special Representative said, we agree that an affordable
and implementable electoral model should be signed
into law by the end of this year, which was agreed to
at the Somalia Partnership Forum. We also need to
see an amended political parties act. And we believe
that those laws should be based on a broad national
consensus agreed to by the Federal Government and
federal member states.

I was pleased that so many colleagues drew
attention to the issue of the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women at all stages, and that is something
that we too feel is important, alongside freedom of the
media, which is another vital cornerstone of a credible
and peaceful election. Above all, we join others in
calling for sustained dialogue and cooperation between
the Federal Government and the federal member
states. That will not only aid the elections but will help
complete the journey towards debt relief. We urge all
the parties to engage in dialogue to resolve the situation
in Jubaland and make progress on reconciliation efforts
and the organization ofregional elections in Galmudug.

The United Nations and the African Union and their
member States, as well as the European Union, have
an important role to play in Somalia, but the initiative
on dialogue must come from Somali leaders at the
Federal and state levels. To end where I began, there
is a huge task coming in future years, which is that of
delivering a transition to Somali-led security. As I said,
the commitment of AMISOM. and the Somali national
forces is to be commended, and we will continue to
support that.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

We will hear from the Special Representative
in consultations, but the representative of Germany
addressed a question to Ms. Ibrahim about elections,
and I give her the floor to answer it.

