Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I would like to thank Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his comprehensive
briefing and Ambassador Tanin for his remarks.

We continue to welcome the encouraging
signals from Afghanistan in the fields of security,
democratization, good-neighbourly relations and
regional cooperation. Yet political, economic, social,
security and humanitarian challenges remain, as do
perceived uncertainties about the future. Addressing
those uncertainties will be crucial for building a
sustainable and confident Afghanistan at peace with its
neighbours and the world.

Let me emphasize that lasting peace and stability
in Afghanistan can be maintained only by the
Afghans themselves in a spirit of national unity. Good
governance, the rule of law and protecting human rights
can meaningfully improve only on that basis. Efforts
towards a level of relative economic self-reliance are
also crucial. Looking at the current state of affairs, we
are glad to see that a conscious strategy that draws its
strength from local ownership and seeks to put together
various strands of efforts into a meaningful whole is in
place.

The April 2014 elections are approaching. The
acceptance and legitimacy of those elections will be
crucial to ensuring the well-being and sustainability of
the Afghan State, based on local ownership. Therefore,
keeping the elections fair, inclusive and free from
internal and external interference and fraud will be key.
The positive momentum in the technical preparations
for the 2014 elections is well noted. The three main
challenges are security, accessibility and inclusiveness.
Robust domestic and international observation will be
essential before and during the elections to identify and
address those challenges.

Following the elections, international support
for democratization and institution-building should
continue. The United Nations should continue its
assistance in terms of capacity-building and technical
support. Addressing grave human rights matters,
particularly violence against women and girls, and the
issue of civilian casualties should be another priority
in the short and long runs. Long-term solutions can be
reached only through inclusive, Afghan-owned and led
reconciliation. The focus should remain on that issue,
with the facilitating role of the United Nations and the
help of Afghanistan's regional partners.

As international forces withdraw, regional
cooperation grows in importance for sustainability in
Afghanistan and beyond. We are glad to observe the
increased momentum in the Istanbul Process, and we
look forward to its next ministerial meeting in China.
We also welcome all trilateral, quadrilateral and
multilateral initiatives centred around Afghanistan
and the constructive role played by the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. We support efforts to
enhance regional connectivity and economic growth,
and attach particular importance to the completion and
maintenance of local railroad and land routes and the
enhancement of civil aviation capabilities.

Afghanistan has come a long way. When in doubt
about the future of Afghanistan, we should remember
the achievements of the past 12 years, as well as the
strength and resilience of the Afghan people as they
strive for better tomorrows, no matter what the
conditions are. That being said, the continued display
of will on the part of the international community will
strengthen the hopes of the Afghan people for the future
and help ensure a smooth transition.

I would like to stress in particular that ensuring
that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has the necessary resources to
fulfil its mandate will be key both during and after the
transition. Turkey will always remain in solidarity with
the Afghan people and continue to contribute to a safe,
secure and prosperous Afghanistan, as we have done
for many decades.

In conclusion, I would like to voice our strong belief
that the United Nations will continue to play a crucial
role during and after the transition. I would particularly
like to commend the valuable efforts of the United
Nations, and UNAMA in particular, and to express
our heartfelt gratitude to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kubis and his hard-working team.

