Mr. AlShamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the Arab Group, I commend New
Zealand for its assumption of the presidency of the
Council in the month of July. We thank His Excellency
Mr. Murray McCully for chairing this open debate, and
we wish New Zealand great success in presiding over
the work of the Council this month. I also thank and
commend New Zealand's predecessor, the delegation of
Malaysia for its successful management ofthe Council's
work last month. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his efforts, as well as Mr. Mladenov for his briefing
and for his tireless efforts to attain peace in the Middle
East region.

My statement will be brief. A full copy will be
available on our Mission's website. The United Arab
Emirates also supports the statement delivered by the
representative of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.

The briefing this morning has reflected the
worsening humanitarian situation of the Palestinian
people resulting from the measures adopted by Israel,
which violate international laws and norms and
constitute the direct cause for the continued stalemate
in the long anticipated peace talks.

Despite all the international and regional efforts
and initiatives made during the past two decades,
including the efforts of the Quartet and the United
States of America, we continue to witness many
lost opportunities for attaining peace. That not only
prolongs the suffering of the Palestinian people and
increases their economic losses, but also deepens their
frustration, despair and instability. It has also led to
the emergence of dangerous extremism, which is now
threatening our region and the entire world.

The Arab peoples are bearing the onerous burden
of confronting those serious challenges. The Arab
Group strongly condemns the continued illegal
policies and systematic violations committed by
Israel, which include the expansion of its illegitimate
settlements deep inside the Palestinian territories and
within Al-Quds and the adoption of measures against
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Holy City. That includes
the confiscation of properties, the demolition of homes
and buildings, the displacement of people, including
the arbitrary transfer of 7,000 Palestinian Bedouins and
shepherds from 64 residential areas in the West Bank,
and the illegal planning and division of the Palestinian
territories. Those measures have made it practically
impossible for the Palestinians to exploit their lands or
build in Area C in the West Bank. All those measures
violate international law and ignore the wishes of the
majority of the international community.

We welcome the recent report of the United Nations
Independent Commission of Inquiry into possible
human rights violations and war crimes in Gaza
(A/HCR/29/52), which reflected the unprecedented
levels of suffering and hardship experienced by the
unarmed Palestinian people, and we call for the
implementation of an accountability system that would
bring those responsible for war crimes to justice.

We also urge the donor countries to fulfil their
commitments announced last year at the Cairo
Conference on Palestine: Reconstructing Gaza in order
to ensure the necessary financing for reconstruction
in Gaza. We stress the shared responsibility of the
international community towards lifting the Israeli
siege imposed on Gaza and providing the necessary
support for United Nations programmes, especially the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which we strongly support.

We also reaffirm before the Council our full
and continuing support to the Palestinian Unity
Government. We urge the international community to
increase its support for this Government in order to
enable it to fulfil its responsibilities and take a leading
role in restoring its control over Gaza, including its
border crossings, and also to support its efforts towards
achieving national reconciliation.

The Arab Group believes that the continuation of
the historic injustice done to the Palestinian people
by Israel is one of the main causes for the current
deterioration in peace and stability in the region and
for inflaming tensions, with terrible consequences
throughout the region and the entire world. Therefore,
the failed negotiation process should not become
a vicious circle, reaching a dead end without the
adoption of effective international efforts to eliminate
the causes of that failure, for which Israel is fully
responsible. Therefore, we ask, now more than ever,
that the Council's efforts not be limited to holding these
routine periodic briefings, despite their importance,
but that the Council also play a leading role by taking
the necessary steps towards the immediate cessation
of all violations committed by Israel, according to the
principles and terms of the peace process, in order to
create an appropriate environment for resuming peace
negotiations.

We hope that the international Powers will support
the efforts of the Arab Ministerial Committee tasked
with ending the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories so as to ensure the launch of serious
negotiations. That would make a difference. We also
hope that the Council will respond to the repeated calls
and initiatives made by the Arab Group since last year
for the adoption of an effective resolution that would
salvage the peace process and determine the basic
terms of reference and principles of negotiations based
on the two-State solution. Such a resolution should be
fully implemented in accordance with relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and
the Arab Peace Initiative. It should be a resolution that
can ensure the possibility of reaching a comprehensive,
just and lasting settlement within a specific time frame
and of ending every aspect of Israel's occupation,
including its full military withdrawal from all the
territories that have been occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem. We also hope that such a resolution will
enable the establishment of an independent, sovereign,
viable and internationally recognized Palestinian
State with Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side
with Israel in permanent peace and security. In that
context, we would like to express our support for the
efforts of some of the members of the Security Council,
particularly France.

We regret that the Syrian crisis is now in its fifth
year, and we reiterate our support for all efforts to
reach a political solution to it, particularly those of
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, aimed at achieving positive results
that can help to realize the Syrian people's aspirations
for a democratic political transition and the restoration
of stability and security in the country. Until that goal
is achieved, we urge the international community to
increase its assistance to those Syrians who have been
affected and displaced or who have fled the conflict,
and to share the burden of sheltering Syrian refugees
with the country's neighbours, especially Jordan,
Lebanon and Iraq.

In conclusion, we hope our debate today will
contribute to advancing international efforts aimed
at resolving the Palestinian question and ending the
Syrian crisis so as to bring peace and stability to the
region.

