Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Some colleagues have insisted in their
statements today on addressing the situation in my
country under the agenda item "The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question".
Although some countries have meant well while others
did not, it is deeply saddening that none of the speakers
has mentioned the terrorist attacks that took place in my
country today, including in ancient city of Homs, where
36 people were killed and 85 injured, most of them
children. That was just one incident among many. In
the Al-Shaghour district of Damascus, a mortar attack
on a school killed 24 children and injuring 86. These
were just some of the children who lost their lives today
while speakers spread false fears. I have provided the
Council with photographs of some of the victims.

Once again, some delegations have insisted on
delivering elaborate statements about the situation
in my country, Syria, under the agenda item "The
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question". Their misleading and provocative statements
only contribute to extremism and terrorism in Syria
and the region at large and distract from the essence
of the item, which is to find a way to put an end to
the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including
the Syrian Golan. In that respect and in connection
with the pictures that I distributed earlier, the armed
terrorist forces that killed dozens in Damascus and
Homs today are described by some colleagues as part
of the "moderate opposition", and those colleagues
provide them with arms.

In that respect, I would like to point out that Saudi
Arabia, Qatar and Turkey and other Council members
from the West contributed to that dubious approach by
asking last month to convene two meetings on Syria
in the General Assembly. The first coincided with
the Security Council meeting devoted to the periodic
briefing by the Secretariat on the situation in the
Middle East (see S/PV.7118) and the second coincided
with the meeting of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
They thereby attempted to distract attention from the
Palestinian question, under the item concerning the
situation in the Middle East, and to play a negative role
in the Syrian question.

That is clear evidence of their hypocrisy. Refusing
to be a part of those outrageous attempts to silence our
conversation today, which sould be chiefly devoted to
putting an end to the Israeli occupation, once again
I will not reply under that item to delegations that
violate the Charter and the principles of international
law by providing shelter to and supporting, arming
and training terrorists and mercenaries; by facilitating
their infiltration into Syria across its borders with
neighbouring countries while spreading terrorism,
destruction and extremism in my country; and through
their earnest attempts to undermine any Syrian-led
peaceful solution.

It is absurd that some delegations of States that do
not even have a constitution or a parliament, and where
women are deprived of their fundamental rights, should
speak about the importance of establishing democracy
in Syria, whose Vice-President is a woman. Some
delegations that have become addicted to shedding
Syrian blood over the past three years have been
competing in calling for conferences, sessions and
meetings to be held to spread misleading reports on the

situation in Syria. Some have resorted to crying wolf
today in a theatrical, amateurish and inaccurate manner
about the situation of the Syrian people. Meanwhile,
they have said not one word about putting an end to the
Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan, as if reclaiming
the Golan were not a right of the Syrian people and as
if the Golan were not an occupied Syrian territory on
which a number of resolutions are issued yearly calling
upon Israel to withdraw from it to the borders of 4 June
1967.

With regard to Israeli settlements and the suffering
of the Syrian people under occupation in the Golan
for the past 50 years, why do those States not mention
the heinous suppression and racial discrimination
there, or the detention, torture and deprivation of
natural resources, including oil, gas and water? A
Syrian citizen under occupation in the Golan will not
be treated in Israeli hospitals if he refuses to carry an
Israeli identification card. He cannot study in schools in
Arabic, in accordance with the Syrian curriculum, if he
does not hold an Israeli identification card. Education
in Arabic, be it according to the Syrian or any other
curriculum, is prohibited there. In addition, the Isreali
occupation forces do not allow the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent to work in the occupied Golan or to establish
clinics and hospitals there, pursuant to the resolutions
of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, which dates back to 1919. Moreover, the
occupation forces have built a racist segregation wall
east of the Syrian village of Majdal Shams and refused
to provide international organizations with maps of the
landmines they planted in the Golan, which have killed
more than 726 Syrian citizens, including 227 children.

Israel's assistance and support to terrorist groups,
including those affiliated with the Al-Qaeda in the
disengagement area in the occupied Syrian Golan,
are a flagrant violation of resolution 350 (1974),
the mandate of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, and international law. Israel has gone
so far as to build a field hospital near the separation
line in the Golan. Its Prime Minister visited injured
terrorists treated in Israeli hospitals and insisted on
their return to the separation line in the occupied
Syrian Golan to continue their terrorist activities there.
Israeli assistance to terrorists endangers the lives of
United Nations staff working there and undermines
their effectiveness. These are members of the so-called
moderate opposition, as I said earlier. Those terrorist
organizations have repeatedly abducted peacekeepers,
including the Filipino batallion. We have sent reports
about it to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
with all the details, and called for official investigations
in that regard. However, to date the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has provided us with no
results of such investigations, assuming they have even
carried them out in the first place.

Israel has not only provided logistical support to
terrorists, but it has directly interfered with military
forces more than once. For example, last month,
it shelled a school and a mosque in the village of
Al-Hamidiyah in the occupied Syrian Golan, in flagrant
violation ofinternational law, which exposes once again
the coordination between the Israeli occupation forces
and terrorist groups, just like that arranged by Saudi
Arabia, Qatar and Turkey. There is a clear alliance
between those three countries, on the one hand, and
Israel on the other, all of which are cooperating with
several terrorist groups in an attempt to destroy Syria,
shed the blood of its people and suppress the prospects
of establishing an independent Palestinian State. A
colleague who spoke before me described my country
as a brotherly country; he is a liar, because we in Syria
do not want that alleged fraternity; we do not want him
or his regime, which sheds the blood of our people. We
do not want a terrorist, criminal fraternity.

We should not deceive ourselves or the world.
Everybody knows for sure that Israel, an occupying
Power that is based on occupation and expansion,
has never been concerned with peace. It occupied the
Syrian Golan and Jerusalem. It has encroached upon
various countries of the region, relentlessly violated
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
and attacked the holy sites of Muslims and Christians
alike. Now it is trying to usurp the Al-Aqsa Mosque
in an attempt to establish a Jewish State of Israel, to
drain Palestine of its population and to put an end to
the right of return. It manipulates peace negotiations
and initiatives under the pretext of so-called security
concern in order to devote its efforts to occupation and
to overturning a status quo that cannot be changed.
How can Israel speak about peace after all that? How
can it evoke peace when it engages in all those practices
that undermine the basic principles of peace? Is it not
insolent for Israel to claim that the removal of any
settlement is a painful matter that it cannot tolerate,
while the persecution of the whole people of Palestine
is acceptable?

