Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madam President, for organizing this open
debate on the protection of journalists, media and
communication professionals and associated personnel.
On the basis of our commitment to the freedom of the
press in general, we value the possibility of addressing
the issue with specific reference to conflict and post-
conflict situations. We are grateful for the eloquent
presentations of Deputy Secretary- General Jan Eliasson
and Ms. Kathleen Carroll, Mr. Mustafa Haji Abdinur,
Mr. Richard Engel and Mr. Ghaith Abdul-Ahad.

The topic of the protection of journalists is part
of a long-standing debate, accentuated in recent times
by explosive advances in information technology and
news dissemination - for good or for evil. Although
article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
has been interpreted in many circles as an unlimited
endorsement of the freedom of opinion and expression,
other voices have tried to qualify that endorsement,
invoking issues ranging from security concerns to
respect for traditions and cultural norms. Those subjects
have been amply debated in many global forums,
including the Human Rights Council, the General
Assembly, and above all UNESCO. Today's debate is
focused on the protection of journalists in conflict and
post-conflict situations - a topic that is clearly within
the purview of the Council.

Journalists in situations of armed conflict face very
particular circumstances. First, unless they are fully
serving a party to the conflict and are perceived as
adversaries by the opposing party, they form part of the
civilian population not directly involved in the conflict
and are therefore subject to international humanitarian
law.

Secondly, they represent an especially vulnerable
segment of the civilian population, not only because,
through their exposure to the battle field, by definition
they risk involvement in potentially dangerous activity,
but also because they also risk exposure to potentially
serious human rights violations inflicted by repressive
Governments or armed militias. Either may lead to
harassment, intimidation, incarceration, kidnapping
and even violent death.
Thirdly, journalists play an especially important
role by reporting events on the ground, particularly if
they do so with objectivity and professionalism. We
have heard eloquent examples of all three situations
described by our four briefers from the profession.

As with the entire civilian population, the primary
responsibility for the protection of j ournalists falls to the
Government of the country in conflict, as highlighted
in resolution 1738 (2006). But the international
community can and must contribute to creating an
environment that offers incentives to Governments and
societies in conflict to respect the right ofjournalists
to carry out their mission of informing, while it weighs
consequences for those who seek to compromise that
right. In other words, my delegation feels totally aligned
with the aforementioned resolution, as well as with the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/2) adopted on
12 February, especially its reference to acts of violence
against journalists.
Despite the Council's pronouncements, we note
that, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists,
the situation has not improved; rather, it has worsened.
There are alarming reports of imprisonment, beatings,
disappearances and even violent deaths. Of similar
concern are attacks against women journalists, who are
even more vulnerable during armed conflicts.

Further, as Jan Eliasson and other colleagues
have observed, the impunity rate for crimes against
journalists continues to be very high. According to
information from UNESCO, on average only one in
ten cases of crimes committed against journalists over
the past few years has led to a conviction. It should be
recalled that journalists, as civilian persons, are also
protected by international criminal law. Thus the Rome
Statute classifies grave violations of international
humanitarian law as war crimes. In the same vein,
the Assembly of State Parties to the Rome Statute
has in various resolutions acknowledged the need for
States and other parties to armed conflicts to protect
journalists as civilians, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.

Finally, we recognize the fundamental role played
by the communications media, which are exposed to
the brutal reality of war. The protection ofjournalists
must continue to be part of the global strategy to
promote the protection of civilians while also bringing
the horrors of war before public opinion. That is why
this Council must persist in the defence ofjournalists in
situations of conflict, an undertaking to which we are
fully committed.

