We sincerely thank you, Sir, for organizing this briefing, which is without a doubt very timely and relevant in light of the current circumstances. We thank Mr. Grandi very much for his briefing today. His briefing and the Global Trends: Forced Displacement in 2019 report launched today provide us once again with a very sobering account of the unprecedented total of nearly 80 million people displaced, of whom almost 30 million are refugees and others forcibly displaced outside of their countries. These figures seem to have become the barometer of our collective inability to prevent, contain and resolve conflicts. We should not forget that behind each one of these figures, we find the hopes and fears of a woman or a child. Flows of refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) are all too often a direct consequence of blatant and repeated violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law. Respect for international humanitarian law by all parties to conflicts would, without any doubt, help decrease forced displacement and better manage internal displacement. Respecting international humanitarian law means facilitating humanitarian assistance to displaced persons and protecting them. Respecting international humanitarian law also means not bombing entire cities or spaces and infrastructure essential to the survival of the civilian population, and thus helping to create an environment conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return of refugees and IDPs. These issues of return and reintegration must form an integral part of every peace process, accompanied by measures such as transitional justice to achieve reconciliation and sustainable peace. We are particularly struck by Mr. Grandi's accounts of the dramatic increase of refugees and IDPs over the last couple of months in the Sahel; of the horrifying violence, including gender-based violence, against vulnerable populations; and of the risk of the conflict spilling over into neighbouring countries, not to mention of the compounding effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on this already dire situation. These elements, including refugee and IDP flows, are indeed often an alarm signal or an early warning for emerging, re-emerging or worsening situations of violence and conflict, and should be analysed as such in reports to the Security Council in order to enhance our capability to react and prevent. Finally, this staggering figure of almost 80 million forced displacements represents a major question mark about the current international and regional cooperation on the matter. Better and purposeful cooperation between the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union is needed. Belgium is grateful for the creation of the High-Level Panel on Internal Displacement and encourages the Panel to keep up the good work despite the hurdles that COVID-19 is presenting. Belgium also supports Mr. Grandi's efforts to call for renewed momentum for solutions and for efforts to build sustainable peace, as this is key to resolving refugee flows and internal displacement. We agree that the global compact on refugees is a useful tool in that regard. Noting that 85 per cent of refugees are in developing countries, the Pact rightly prioritizes support for host countries, the sharing of responsibilities and burdens and the quest for durable solutions. Finally, we want to commend Mr. Grandi and all staff of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) around the world for their robust engagement in the response to complex emergencies, especially now, in the face of the COVID-19 crisis. We are proud and grateful to count UNHCR as one of our most important humanitarian partners and hope to continue our financial support this year at the same level as in previous years - approximately $21 million. We also want to thank Mr. Grandi for the annual Global Trends report, launched today. I would like to ask the following questions. As Mr. Grandi mentioned, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross called the COVID-19 crisis a "protection crisis" when he briefed the Council a few weeks ago (see S/2020/465). Based on Mr. Grandi's assessment of the impact of COVID-19 on the protection needs of refugees and IDPs, could he elaborate on how UNHCR has adapted its strategies to tackle those challenges? What is his assessment of the impact of climate change on the already existing vulnerabilities of refugees and IDPs displaced by conflict? How is UNHCR adapting its work to better take into account the effects of climate change as an increasing driver of displacement and conflict?
