Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine sponsored
and voted in favour of draft resolution S/2017/884,
on renewing the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, in order to ensure that the Mechanism
continues its crucially important work. Considering
the scope of investigations, the gravity of the crimes
and the large number of questions still pending, we
believe that nothing should impede the activity of the
Mechanism as an independent and unique tool for

investigating the confirmed - and I stress the word
"confirmed" - cases of the use of chemical weapons
in Syria.

However, in spite of overwhelming support for
the draft resolution, one Council member continues to
block each and every decision that could move us closer
to bringing the perpetrators of those terrible crimes to
justice. It is not about the visit to the sites in Syria or
other manipulations with this particular effect; we all
know that there was no need to conduct such a visit. It is
not about the final conclusions of the Mechanism, which
will be presented later. It is not even about politicizing
the whole process or creating purely artificial obstacles
for an objective and thorough investigation.

Today's voting has demonstrated a much more
dangerous tendency - one in which fundamental
international norms are cynically ignored and
independent structures are held hostage. Today's voting
has demonstrated once again the increasing abuse of
the right to veto. Today, the Council has failed to do
its job again. The Mechanism's mandate ends on
17 November. That means that there about three weeks
left to find a solution as to how the Mechanism can be
preserved. We think it is still doable, and it is necessary.
We cannot fail and send to the world a completely
wrong signal with far-reaching consequences for
the existing non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction regimes.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that it is the
ultimate responsibility of the Council to defend and
restore respect for justice and international law,
notwithstanding any attempts of reactive manipulation
or altering the facts.

