Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank everybody for
today's very difficult and unfortunately unproductive
day. We voted for the Russian Federation's draft
resolution (S/2018/322) on sending a fact-finding mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) as soon as possible because, as we
said yesterday in raising this very simple question, we
need to know what happened on the ground.

Yesterday we were also very clear when we said
that there were different and conflicting reports about
the number of casualties and even about the very fact
that the chemical attack had taken place. We requested
and supported the important proposal that a fact-finding
mission should go to Douma to establish the facts on
the ground. We are not talking right now about who did
it, but we are talking about the fact of the event itself.
We needed to understand what was there and what had
happened there. Sending a fact-finding mission was
very important to us and to all the delegations that do
not have a presence there to understand the objective
reality of the place. Even if the only information
obtained is about the kind of substance that was used,
that would be very useful for us to understand who the
perpetrators might be and at the very least establish the
fact that a chemical attack took place. In this kind of
understanding, we very much support sending OPCW
experts to investigate on the ground in order to give us
information on which we can base an objective opinion
about the situation.

We are not taking sides here, and we were very
clear about that yesterday. We would like to receive
full, objective, transparent and unbiased information
about the facts that we are addressing here. We are
therefore glad that the OPCW is sending a group to
Douma, regardless of the results of today's voting on
draft resolutions. We are hopeful that we can at least
get this preliminary information about the situation
in Douma. I would like to say once again that we in
the Security Council should be objective and base our
decisions on the simple facts that may be presented to
us by the independent organizations that will determine
whether there was a chemical attack or not.

