Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Our
delegation would like to begin by thanking the
presidency of the Council for organizing this meeting
with the Force Commanders, to whom I pay special
tribute. We would also like most especially to thank
Mr. Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his participation in and guidance of this
discussion's success.

My delegation values the important work
undertaken by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Force Commanders, their staff and the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, led by
Ambassador ngu of Nigeria, who have made
valuable contributions in that field.

One challenge that is the subject of ongoing
interest is improving the synergy among the
Secretariat, the Security Council and troop-
contributing countries. We have made progress in that
regard. At the same time, we would suggest that the
Council continue enhancing that interaction, which we
believe to be vital. Similarly, we underscore the
progress made in developing doctrine and improving
the operations of United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The dynamic of operations in the field and
the United Nations logistical capacity to ensure the
security and well-being of staff on the ground are
thereby improved.
With regard to the West Africa Coast Initiative to
tackle international organized crime in that region,
Columbia believes it very important to offer our
experience in that area, having deployed national
police units to work with Guinea-Bissau and Sierra
Leone. We also have an active presence in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

One challenge facing us is improving the capacity
to mobilize United Nations troops on the use of and
doctrine of using rotary-wing aircraft, helicopters and
fixed-wing aircraft. In that regard, we propose further
analysis of logistical, human and technological
capacities in order to optimize their results. We need to
procure high-technology teams for peacekeeping
operations, in particular in communications,
intelligence and observation in the field, for early
warning and forecasts of violence.

Finally, we recognize the need to prioritize the
protection and defence of civilians by United Nations
forces, just as we have prioritized upholding the
principles and mandates enshrined in the
Organization's Charter. Only thereby can we strengthen
the relationship between the United Nations and the
forces that represent it and the populations on the
ground.

