Mr. Giacomelli Da Silva (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): 1 would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate. We are also grateful for the
briefings presented in this debate.

Brazil is of the View that resolution 2250
(2015) was a landmark resolution in that it
recognized the need for a comprehensive and
positive approach to the role of youth in preventing
armed violence and conflict and in peacebuilding.
Young people make up the majority of the population
in countries in conflict and suffer disproportionately
from its effects. It is estimated that young men make up
90 per cent of fatalities in conflicts today.

Conflicts and armed violence also affect young
people by disrupting their access to education and
economic opportunities, which has a lasting impact
with direct negative consequences on peacebuilding
and the prospects for sustainable development of
future generations. Young people are also particularly
vulnerable to violent extremism and organized crime.
However, we must refrain from stereotypes associating
youth with violence, as well as hasty and repressive
responses. As recognized in resolution 2250 (2015),
we need an approach that is not only reactive, but
also preventive. In particular, the international
community should focus on addressing factors that
contribute to the involvement of young people in
violence, such as poverty, the lack of educational
opportunities and social and cultural exclusion.
It is also essential that young people play an active
role in post-conflict settings through mechanisms that
ensure the participation of young people in all stages of
the peace process.

From a broader perspective, it is necessary to
create conditions to ensure the representation of
young people at all levels of governance. As noted
in the progress report, young people have been fully
demonstrating their capacity for leadership for peace
in a wide range of contexts - from preventing violent
extremism, political conflicts and organized crime to
activism in the area of nuclear disarmament and small
arms regulation.

Although Brazil has not been affected by armed
conflict on its territory, the country is still responsible
for promoting progress on the issue of youth, peace and
international security. During its chairmanship of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Brazil sought to prioritize
youth by paying attention to their specific needs and
challenges in conflict and post-conflict contexts, while
encouraging their active participation so as to achieve
lasting and inclusive peace. We remain firmly committed
to the empowerment of young women and men through
projects aimed at building their capacity and at income
generation in the framework of the chairmanship of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Those initiatives, supported by Brazil,
also reflect the goals that the country seeks to reach
domestically, with the broadening of opportunities for
young people.

We are pleased that the Council and other United
Nations entities involved in peacebuilding are lending
special attention to the issue of youth, peace and
security. However, we believe that we must strengthen
our cross-cutting approach to the matter, including by
incorporating it into the mandates of peacekeeping
missions, preparing annual reports on the subject and
bolstering the direct engagement of young people in
the decision-making and principal organs of the United
Nations system.

