Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): We commend your delegation,
Madam President, for its initiative in convening this
important debate to explore ways by which the rule
of law can be more effectively mainstreamed into
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his opening
remarks.

Respect for and observance of the rule of law is
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. It is
also a fundamental concern of both national and
international jurisprudence. The Security Council and
the wider United Nations system have had this cardinal
subject on their agendas for years, as illustrated by the
number of resolutions and presidential statements of
the Council, resolutions of the General Assembly and
the outcomes of high-level meetings, including the
Millennium Declaration and the 2005 World Summit
Outcome. Specifically, in September 2012, the General
Assembly adopted the Declaration of the High-level
Meeting ofthe General Assembly on the Rule of Law at
the National and International Levels. It is a landmark
document containing all of the essential elements of
the rule of law at national and international levels. It
affirms that the rule of law applies to all States and to
international organizations and that

"respect for and promotion of the rule of law and
justice should guide all oftheir activities and accord
predictability and legitimacy to their actions".
(General Assembly resolution 67/1, para. 2)

Nigeria believes that the Declaration, adopted
at the highest political level by Heads of State and
Government, should continue to serve as the core
values and principles of the rule of law. There should
be no derogation from them. They should not be applied
selectively, nor in a discriminatory manner. Nigeria
continues to support the observance of the rule of
law in all such human rights situations as have been
agreed to by all Member States, properly enunciated
in existing treatises and arrived at through inclusive
intergovernmental processes.

Issues pertaining to international peace and
security, peacekeeping operations, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, women and peace and
security, children in armed conflict, terrorism and
transnational crimes, good governance, accountability,
impunity, democratic practice, security sector reform,
sexual violence in armed conflict and a host of
other subjects have intrinsic to them respect for and
observance of the rule of law. It is therefore an all-
encompassing topic with wide-ranging implications to
the work of the United Nations.

In the management of the transitional period in
the immediate aftermath of conflict, United Nations
operations in the countries concerned should be
given explicit mandates to support the rule-of-law
architecture of the host countries. They should assist in
building rule-of-law mechanisms that can enjoy public
confidence.

When necessary, it would be advisable to deploy
experts who would primarily provide technical
assistance in relevant fields, especially in the police and
the prosecutorial, judicial and corrections sectors. They
must be neutral, apolitical and responsive to national
requests and must always bear in mind the need for
national ownership of the mechanisms being instituted.

The training of national experts and institution-
building to support the rule of law at the national level
should follow in the wake of peacekeeping operations
in fragmented or weak States. Security sector reform
should aim to establish civilian oversight and control
over the armed forces, the police and security agencies
in post-conflict societies.

It is necessary to adopt a comparative approach
to guiding efforts to build a strong rule-of-law
architecture. Governmental and non-governmental
sectors should both benefit from the process of building
national capacities. We believe that each country should
determine the focus of its national priorities regarding
activities that promote and support the rule of law.
During the transitional period, leaders and Government
officials should exercise their authority under the law as
they manage the human, material and natural resources
at their disposal.

Evidence shows that the refusal of leaders to respect
the rule of law and to subject themselves and their
actions to the scrutiny of the law has led to conflict and
crises. In the transitional period, efforts should be made
to eliminate tendencies to adopt policies and practices
that discriminate against women. It is important to
adopt laws and promote practices that will protect the
rights of women and other vulnerable groups in society.
Respect for the rule of law will ensure access by the
underprivileged to justice mechanisms and help secure
their dignity and empowerment.

We wish, at thisjuncture, to commend the Secretary-
General for his untiring advocacy and support for the
rule of law. We note his various reports and initiatives
in that regard, which have added considerable value to
our appreciation of the importance of the subject.

We also appreciate the recent formulation of the
"Rights up front" initiative, which seeks to address
early response to threats to national and international
peace and security and the protection of vulnerable
groups in conflict situations. The lives, rights and
dignity of women and all other vulnerable groups must
be protected under all circumstances, especially in
conflict situations. That is a requirement not only of the
rule of law, but also of basic human decency. Children
must be shielded from the excesses of conflict and must
not be treated in a degrading manner. The use ofrape as
a weapon of war in conflict must be punished wherever
it occurs.

Nigeria remains deeply committed to the observance
of the rule of law, as clearly evidenced by the
participation of His Excellency President Goodluck
Ebele Jonathan in the high-level meeting on the rule of
law in September 2012.

We consider justice as a fundamental prerequisite
for the establishment of the rule of law and as the basis
for peaceful coexistence in the prevention of armed
conflict. We are convinced that, while discussing

practical approaches to improving the overall impact
of rule-of-law mandates, we should also consider how
to effectively measure the impact of the efforts made in
promoting the rule of law. That would require adopting
a yardstick to ascertain the success of our collective
efforts in that regard. There should be generally
acceptable parameters to measure the impact on the
world of United Nations efforts to promote the rule of
law. We believe that that is relevant to the debate taking
place today.

As the Secretary-General has indicated, he intends
to develop strategies for the United Nations system.
We encourage Member States to look forward to his
proposals, subject them to robust deliberations and
agree on the way forward. Respect for the rule of
law at all levels is essential for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The aspiration to
achieve a global system based on the rule of law, where
accountability and social justice are the foundations for
durable peace, should be a source of inspiration to all.
To that end, addressing the global rule-of-law deficit
should be a priority for the international community,
for world leaders and for citizens.

