Mr. Deng (South Sudan): I thank you, Mr. President,
and members of the Security Council for giving me the
opportunity to address the Council on the critically
important issues concerning our country. As this is
the first time I address the Security Council under
the presidency of the Republic of Korea, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and to assure you
of our support and cooperation. I would also like to
commend your predecessor for successfully steering
the Council during the month of April.

My delegation and I have listened with keen interest
to the deeply moving statements presented and the
concerns raised this afternoon by United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay, and by
the United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide, my successor and younger brother, Adama
Dieng, and the members of the Security Council. I
would like to thank both the High Commissioner and
the Special Adviser for having visited our country and
for giving the current crisis such high priority. I want to
assure them, and indeed all the members of the Council,
that we sincerely appreciate and genuinely share their
deep concerns and commitment to see an end to the
violence.

As I have previously stated to the Council, while
it is painful to listen to accounts of the tragic situation
in our country, our response is not to be defensive or
in denial. We recognize that the motivation behind the
accounts is to help South Sudan address the crisis in
cooperation with the international community. That
is why we have consistently expressed our sincere
appreciation to the Security Council specifically,
and the international community generally, for their
steadfast engagement and support.

No one who believes in the ideals of human rights
and in the prevention of genocide and related atrocities
can quarrel with the pleas and warnings made by
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide and by members of the Council. As I have
repeatedly stated, our people struggled for decades
against discrimination and gross violations of human
rights. Ours was a struggle for equality and human
dignity, which constitute the foundations for human
rights. Those principles should guide us in building our
nation.

While the tendency towards moral equivalency may
be understandable as a tactic, and even a strategy, for
engaging the parties on the basis of mutual recognition
and respect, it risks equating rights and wrongs in a
way that clouds the situation on the ground. It is of
course indisputable that the Government must bear
the primary responsibility for protecting its citizens
without discrimination on ethnic or any other ground
and be accountable in that regard. However, that cannot
justify placing a democratically elected Government on
the same moral, political and legal grounds as a rebel
group using violence to overthrow the Government.

The President of South Sudan, Mr. Salva Kiir, told
me today that he had said to the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide that ifthey had time to spend in
the country, he would grant them full and unhindered
access to establish the scope of the violence in order to
gain a deeper understanding of the situation and of who
is doing what. The President also spoke to me about
the constructive discussions he had with United States
Secretary of State John Kerry, to whom he expressed his
willingness to meet with the rebel leader Riek Machar
in the interests of bringing a speedy end to the war.

We recognize that people do not take up arms to kill
and risk being killed without some cause or grievance
that should be addressed. That is why our Government,
in particular President Kiir, has repeatedly reaffirmed
his commitment to dialogue with the rebels to bring a
swift end to the violence and promote peace, unity and
national reconciliation.
On specific issues raised by the High Commissioner
and the Special Adviser in their briefings, the allegation
that both sides are recruiting child soldiers is an example
of the moral equivalency that clouds the facts and of the
need to place responsibility where it belongs. It is well
known that since 2003 the Sudan People's Liberation
Army (SPLA) has ended recruiting or deploying child
soldiers. That has indeed been acknowledged by the
relevant United Nations bodies, which have applauded
South Sudan for that action. Although the demands of
the war have recently necessitated army recruitment,
especially with the defection of large numbers of soldiers
to the rebels, it has not at all entailed recruiting child
soldiers. As a prominent member of the Government
told me recently, our problem is the reverse, namely,
that we have an ageing army. In contrast to the
Government, the rebel army is known for its recruiting
and deploying child soldiers, its "White Army" being a
notorious example.

On the issue of human rights violations in general,

President Kiir has condemned it unequivocally and, in
response to the recent developments, has created a high-
level committee chaired by the former Chief Justice
to investigate gross violations of human rights and to
hold accountable those found responsible. During the
eruption of violence in Juba on 15 and 16 December,
the President went as far as to say that anyone targeting
members of the Nuer community in his name was
against him. The Government has also welcomed and
pledged support for the African Union commission
of inquiry on South Sudan under the chairmanship
of former President of Nigeria Olusegun Obasanjo,
charged with investigating human rights violations
resulting from the current crisis. That contrasts sharply
with the situation of human rights on the part of the
rebels, where massive abuses and ethnically targeted
massacres have become a conspicuous part of their war
strategy, with scarcely a condemnatory word from its
leadership.

It is unfortunate that the very regrettable incident
of the youth attack on the United Nations compound in
Bor is being equated with atrocities committed by the
rebel army in Bentiu and Malakal. The Bor incident,
which was strongly condemned by the Government,
was provoked with the youth of the town of Bor heard
internally displaced persons in the United Nations
compound celebrating the capture of Bentiu by the rebels
who had only recently destroyed Bor and massacred its
inhabitants. The incident was initially intended as a
peaceful rally to submit a protest letter to the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS), requesting that the internally displaced
persons be removed from Bor where they were now
perceived by the youth as a source of provocation.

A peaceful protest got out of hand when the
peacekeepers fired shots into the air to stop the youth
from entering the camp, which was construed by the
youth as an attack on them, provoking them to force
their way into the camp. I would like to note that local
Government authorities had informed UNMISS of the
intentions of the youth to demonstrate and that the
SPLA, in collaboration with UNMISS, work together
to calm the situation. That is a clear indication that
the Government sees UNMISS as a critical partner in
South Sudan.

In Bentiu, the rebels massacred hundreds of
civilians, including people who had sought shelter
or refuge in churches and mosques and patients who
were receiving care in hospitals, as was noted in
today's briefings. That has been strongly deplored and
condemned by our Government.

Before I conclude my remarks, I would like
to highlight two points that I consider crucial to a
constructive response to the crisis in our country.

First, we very much appreciate the concerted
efforts of the international community in support of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development/African
Union peace process. We would urge continued, and
indeed stepped up, engagement at the highest level to
accelerate an early end to this devastating and senseless
violence.

Secondly, we all recognize that, after the long
war in the Sudan, South Sudan has been weakened
and has very limited capacity for ensuring internal
peace, security and stability. Its capacity to
deliver social services and generate and sustain
badly needed socio-economic development is also
severely constrained. That was indeed the reason
for the ambitious, multifaceted support that created
UNMISS. The current crisis is weakening, and indeed
diminishing, the limited capacity of the State even
more. It is understandable that the United Nations
must reconsider it priorities in the light of the crisis,
in particular to support the peace process, protect
civilians, deliver humanitarian assistance and promote
respect for human rights.

But South Sudan also needs support for capacity-
building now, even more than it did before. Withdrawing
that support, whether for lack or resources or as a
punitve measure, can only compound the crisis. The
United Nations needs to consider maintaining strong
capacity-building, even if it is not within UNMISS.
Furthermore, greater confidence-building mechanisms
need to be put in place for the collaboration work
between the Government of South Sudan and UNMISS.
My Government continues to remain committed to
working with all humanitarian actors in assisting us
alleviate the dire conditions our our people. What South
Sudan needs is understanding, compassion and support
in building a nation that can ensure peace, security,
stability and development for all its people.

Let me end with some final comments on the
nature of our quest for peace. Although our country
is now acutely divided, we believe that our culture is
one in which conflicts can be ultimately resolved by
balancing accountability with mutual accommodation,
forgiveness and reconciliation. It was the pursuit of
those values that made President Kiir grant amnesty to
militias, mostly Nuer, and absorb them into the army, to
the extent that they eventually constituted the majority
of the armed forces. Although most of them have now
joined the rebellion, President Kiir continues to call on
those values as the pillars of our peace process and has
expressed his willingness to take any steps that would
accelerate the way forward towards an end to the war.

In that connection, I would like to report that
President Kiir graciously granted me permission to
meet with the four detainees in Juba and the seven who
had been released and placed under the protection ofthe
Government of Kenya. All of them opposed the use of
violence to overthrow the Government, but supported
dialogue to address the concerns of the rebels and other
opposition groups to end the war and restore peace and
national reconciliation. As the President stated, one of
the reasons that the charges against the four accused
were eventually dropped was to foster efforts towards
peace and national reconciliation.

I would like to conclude by once more reiterating
our trust and deep appreciation for the understanding
and unwavering support of the United Nations for our
country as one united nation that aspires to be at peace
with itself and to promote development and prosperity
for all its people.

