Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour of speaking on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria and Romania -
and the associated country Turkey align themselves
with this statement.

The European Union is extremely concerned at
the grave crisis in the Middle East. In the Declaration
of Barcelona of 16 March, the European Union
reiterated its appeal to both parties to take effective and
immediate action to halt the bloodshed. There is no
military solution to this conflict. We said so in
Barcelona and we will repeat it now. Peace and
security can be achieved only through negotiation. To
find a solution to the current situation, it is essential to
address the security, political and economic aspects as
inseparable and interdependent elements of a single
process.

In light of the events which are taking place in
the Palestinian territories, the European Union today
issued a declaration condemning in the most
categorical terms the terrorist attack perpetrated this
morning in Jerusalem, reiterating its demand to the
Palestinian Authority and to its President, Mr. Arafat,
that they adopt all possible measures to stop the spiral
of violence and to prevent the initiators and
perpetrators of the terrorist attacks from going
unpunished.

The European Union has also categorically
condemned the brutal terrorist attack in Netanya last
Wednesday. However, the legitimate fight of Israel
against terrorism and the reaction to the brutal attacks
must be compatible with an effective operating
capacity of the Palestinian Authority and its President,
the legitimate representatives ofthe Palestinian people.

Therefore, the European Union urges an end to
the attack against the headquarters of the Palestinian
Authority in Ramallah and calls for the immediate
withdrawal ofthe Israeli Defence Forces from that city.

The European Union reiterates the need for an
immediate application of a ceasefire that takes into
account only the conditions already envisaged in the
Tenet Plan and those expressed by the United States
Special Envoy, Mr. Zinni, which should be the basis of
an agreement without delay between the parties.

The resolution of the Arab League in Beirut is a
solid basis for progress towards a political perspective
for a fair and comprehensive peace in the region and
the establishment of normal relations between Israel
and the Arab world, safeguarding the security of all
countries involved and offering them a future of
stability and prosperity. A sound political perspective
needs to be restored, and political and security
measures must be implemented in parallel and in a
mutually reinforcing way. In this regard, the European
Union warmly welcomes the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002), which reflects the
commitment of the international community. That
resolution must be urgently implemented, in particular
its demand for an immediate cessation of violence,
including acts of terror, provocation, incitement and
destruction; and its call for the Israeli and Palestinian
sides and their leaders to cooperate in the
implementation of the Tenet work plan and the
Mitchell report recommendations with the aim of
resuming negotiations on a political settlement.

The indiscriminate terrorist attacks today and
over the past days and weeks that have killed innocent
civilians must be condemned. As the legitimate
authority, the Palestinian Authority bears the
responsibility for fighting terrorism with all legitimate
means at its disposal. It must do everything possible to
put an end to terrorism, dismantle all terrorist
networks, including Hamas and the Islamic Jihad, and
arrest and prosecute the perpetrators of terrorist acts.
Its capacity to do so must not be weakened.

Israel, notwithstanding its right to fight terrorism,
must immediately withdraw its military forces from
areas under the control of the Palestinian Authority,
stop extra judicial executions, lift the closures and
restrictions, freeze settlements and respect international
law. Both parties must respect international
humanitarian standards. The use of excessive force
cannot be justified. The actions against medical and
humanitarian institutions and personnel are absolutely
unacceptable. They must be able to fully perform their
functions.

Resolution 1397 (2002) also affirms the vision of
a region in which two States, Israel and Palestine, live
side by side within secure and recognized borders. The
European Union fully shares this vision and its two-
fold objective: the creation of a democratic, viable and
independent State of Palestine, bringing to an end the
occupation of 1967, and the right of Israel to live
within safe and secure boundaries, guaranteed by the
commitment of the international community, and in
particular the Arab countries.

The European Union is determined to play its
role, together with the parties, the countries in the
region, the United States, the United Nations and
Russia in the pursuit of a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution to the conflict. A solution
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002) and on the principles of the
Madrid Conference, Oslo and subsequent agreements.

We remain particularly convinced that a third-
party monitoring mechanism would help both parties to
pursue their efforts to that end and we urge them to
consider proposals to accept observers. The European
Union and its member States are prepared to participate
in such a mechanism.

The European Union recognizes and praises those
who continue to work tirelessly for peace within the
peace camps of Israeli and Palestinian society and
supports the direct contacts and dialogue that both
parties are conducting.

Following on its present effort, the European
Union will make a substantial contribution to peace-
building in the region with the aim of improving the
living conditions of the Palestinian people,
consolidating and supporting the Palestinian Authority,
strengthening the economic basis of the future State of
Palestine and promoting development and regional
economic integration. In this perspective, the European
Union stands ready to contribute to the reconstruction
of the Palestinian economy as an integral part of
regional development.

In conclusion, the European Union remains
convinced that, in order to be durable, peace in the
Middle East must be comprehensive.

