Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank the
three briefers for having shared their insightful analysis
on the latest developments in Afghanistan. We were
touched by the impressive pictures of the peace march
that Special Representative Yamamoto just showed us.

We align ourselves with the European Union
statement to be delivered later in the debate.

Last week my Minister for Foreign Affairs, Steph
Blok, visited Afghanistan. The message he consistently
heard from many Afghans was one of peace and
reconciliation. One Afghan youth wisely told him:

"Blood cannot be washed away with blood".

These words coincided with powerful images of
hope at the end of Ramadan, showing Afghans uniting
for peace. I thank Mr. Yamamoto for sharing these
pictures as well. Afghans celebrated the first peaceful
Eid al-Fitr since 2001, and there were marches for peace
throughout the country.

The Afghan people clearly want peace, not tomorrow
but today. But their call for peace is still not heeded by
all. Brutal and heinous attacks continue. The Taliban
has not reciprocated the extension of the ceasefire by
the Government of Afghanistan. The Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province is still carrying

out deplorable acts of terror. Yet there remains space for
accelerated momentum and hope. That is what we as a
Council need to rally behind, using all of our leverage,
bilaterally and collectively.

In this context, I will touch on three points: first,
the peace process; secondly, the elections; and, thirdly,
the nexus between crime and terrorism.

My first point concerns our collective responsibility
for an inclusive and Afghan-owned peace process,
which is the only way in which true stability in
Afghanistan can be realized. Our Minister for Foreign
Affairs reassured President Ghani last week of our
strong support for his courageous efforts in pushing the
peace process forward.

Neighbouring countries should also shoulder
their responsibility by actively contributing to the
momentum, and we very much welcome the progress
reported in this regard.

As the Council we continue to be united in our
messaging, as we were in our statement to the press
issued last week. Our unity is crucial.

The Taliban should accept the offer by the
Afghan Government to engage in direct peace talks
without any preconditions. All parties should respect
international humanitarian law and put the protection
of civilians first.

We commend the comprehensive, integrated
approachjust described by Mr. Yamamoto of combining
peace, security and development in policies. Nationally
the Kingdom of the Netherlands is ready to do its
part as well in an integrated manner. Our bilateral
development cooperation with Afghanistan continues,
and our Government decided last week to substantially
increase its support for Afghanistan with additional
military and police advisers in the Resolute Support
Mission. We will also extend the mandate of the whole
contingent until the end of 2021. And, of course, we
support the election process.

That brings me to my second point: progress
in preparing the elections. It is important that the
Council pronounce itself on this. The first phase of
registration has been concluded successfully, which
is very encouraging. At the same time, the Afghan
Government and the Independent Election Commission
will need to step up their efforts. Reforms and
preparations need to stay on track. The credibility ofthe
Independent Election Commission in this is key. Trust
in the Commission in large part will determine the trust
of the Afghan people in the results of the election, and
any issues arising in that regard need to be dealt with
transparently, swiftly and effectively.
Furthermore, women's participation in the elections,
as voters and as candidates, is crucial. Political and
decision-making processes are incomplete without the
involvement of women. That was the message we heard
from the civil society briefers during the previous
debate on Afghanistan in March (see S/PV.8199). We
also heard it during the Council's visit to Afghanistan
in January.

Young people have a crucial role in building a
culture of peace. That was reaffirmed by resolution
2419 (2018), adopted this month, on youth, peace and
security. Investing in Afghan youth will bring stability
to the country. We are pleased with the election in
Afghanistan last week of the first ever Afghan Youth
Representative to the United Nations. My Minister was a
proud member of the jury, together with Mr. Yamamoto.

My third point concerns the nexus between
organized crime and terrorism. Terrorist groups, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
Province and Al-Qaida remain active. They undermine
State security, stability and development, and often
conditions for organized crime and violent extremism
converge. The Government of Afghanistan, in our View,
should continue to address the nexus between these two
phenomena, for example by strengthening capacities,
including border control. In general, we believe that
the nexus between organized crime and terrorism is an
important topic for the Council.

In conclusion, the Afghan people need a workable
peace deal. That will require political courage,
perseverance and the continued unity of the Council.
Galvanizing the momentum of the Afghan-owned
peace process is our collective responsibility. We should
remain clear in our joint message on the importance of
credible elections with strong participation of women.

Finally, I want to thank the Special Representative
and his team for their tremendous efforts in assisting
Afghanistan in often difficult circumstances. They
deserve our full support. The Afghan people should be
able to count on the Council. Let the Council answer the
call for peace, as expressed in the impressive Afghan
peace march, and let the Council be a beacon of hope
for the people of Afghanistan.

