The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Norway.
Norway appreciates the participation here today
of Deputy Prime Minister Covie as a key actor in our
work on Kosovo and as a prominent representative of
the democratic leadership in Belgrade, with which my
country has excellent relations.

Like others, we welcome the election of a
President and a provisional Government in Kosovo as a
major step in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). For the Kosovo structures to function
effectively, cooperation is needed involving elected
representatives, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
Belgrade.

Norway encourages dialogue between the Return
Coalition, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Steiner and Kosovo leaders to ensure full
Kosovo Serb participation in the provisional
Government structures. The involvement of Belgrade is
important, and we encourage Mr. Covie to work with
constructive Kosovo Serb leaders to achieve solutions
that will be in the interests of all Kosovo Serbs.

Norway welcomes the active and constructive
role of Belgrade in recent months, which was
demonstrated again yesterday by the release of
Kosovar Albanian detainees from Serbian prisons.

Cooperation between UNMIK and the Yugoslav
authorities can, however, be further developed. The
High-Ranking Working Group should be used as a
mechanism for constructive dialogue between
democratically elected leaders in Pristina and Belgrade.

The overall decline in violent crime and murder
in Kosovo over the last year gives grounds for
optimism, but not for complacency. The security
situation for ethnic minorities continues to be of
concern. The strengthening of law and order in Kosovo
is necessary. This is not only a minority issue but a
civic issue affecting all segments of Kosovo's
population.

Organized crime and illegal trafficking are of
great concern, not only for Kosovo but for the region
and Europe at large. Norway supports the initiative by
Special Representative ofthe Secretary-General Steiner
to confer greater powers on the UNMIK police to
combat organized crime in Kosovo. We also support
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General's
veterans' amnesty programme and urge Kosovo leaders
to work with UNMIK for its success.

The return of internally displaced persons
remains an important challenge. Greater efforts must be
made to create conditions for sustainable return. This
will be an important measure of the Kosovo leaders'
commitment to safeguarding the human rights of all
inhabitants in Kosovo. International engagement will
also continue to be required in order to facilitate
minority returns.

Norway emphasizes that the newly elected
provisional Government of Kosovo must respect the
border demarcation agreement of 23 February 2001.
Elected representatives in the Kosovo Assembly, as
well as provisional Government authorities, must
strictly abide by Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and the Constitutional Framework.

Norway welcomes the agreement reached
between Montenegro and Serbia on a constitutional
arrangement between the two Republics. The
agreement contributes to regional stability and shows
that political negotiations can result in mutually
acceptable arrangements. It also contributes to a more
stable environment for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) in Kosovo.

Through the Secretariat, I should like to convey
to Mr. Steiner Norway's full support for his efforts, and
we look forward to seeing him here in the Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Spain. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

