Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories.

The Middle East is at the heart of international
politics and the region is plagued by a multitude of
crises - old and new alike. In recent days, tensions
have risen in the Persian Gulf. In our View, they are
being artificially heightened. The crisis jeopardizes
regional peace and security, as well as international
efforts to settle regional conflicts. Amid an ongoing
exchange of accusations, military presence is being
built up, including by States beyond the region, which
creates the risk of an armed confrontation. Any incident
could spark a conflict with devastating consequences.

We call on all stakeholders to undertake measures
to de-escalate the situation and resolve their problems
through political and diplomatic means. Above all,
that presupposes an end to ultimatums, sanctions and
threats. It becomes all the more necessary to build a
sustained mechanism for collective security in the
region on the basis of equitable dialogue. The relevant
Russian initiative is indeed geared towards breaking
the deadlock in those conflicts and crafting confidence
and oversight measures.

However, at the centre of the issues faced by the
region is the Middle East settlement. For our part, we
are sparing no effort to advance a settlement of the
range of complex issues of the Middle East crisis and
call on all stakeholders to do the same. We stand ready
to host a meeting of the leaders of Israel and Palestine
in that regard. We are taking steps to help restore
inter-Palestinian unity and we welcome the efforts of
our Egyptian colleagues to that end.

Proactive international action is required to
alleviate the dire humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip. At the same time, any assistance to the area
should be coordinated with the legitimate Palestinian
authorities under President Abbas and must align with
the task at hand of restoring Palestinian unity.

Against that backdrop, we must send a long-
overdue Security Council mission to the region. It
must be designed to build trust and facilitate the
resumption of negotiations between the parties
in order to prevent the collapse of efforts already
undertaken by the international community to ensure
conditions conducive to the implementation of the
sole viable settlement based on international law.
That basis was devised by the Security Council; that
is the very international consensus, the lack of which
was mentioned by the representative of the United
States. This international consensus is international
law because Security Council resolutions constitute
international law; they simply need to be complied
with. Any revision of this international consensus is
also in the hands of the Security Council. The issue lies
not in the absence of international consensus, but in the
United States utter disregard for it. I wonder whether
the representative of the United States understands how
far he will get with such mediation, such an approach
and such a foundation.

We reject the practice of monopolizing political
and diplomatic efforts. We propose to return to the
proven practice of multilateral efforts, including
the involvement of the Middle Eastern Quartet of
international mediators as a unique mechanism to
advance a Middle East settlement. No unilateral steps
can replace the key principles of a two-State solution,
land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, or change
the status of the occupied territories, including the
Syrian Golan.

We will continue to contribute to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). The activities of UNRWA are not
only humanitarian but also political in nature, given
their important stabilization effect on the Palestinian
territories and the countries of the Middle East.

Along with the Palestinian issue, new-generation
regional crises are still awaiting resolution. The Counter-
terrorism operations in Syria, with the participation of
Russian aerospace forces, has helped to make headway
in the fight against terrorism. The eradication of
terrorist hotbeds in Syria is in the interests not only
of Middle Eastern and North African States, but also
of the countries of Europe, as it reduces the level of
terrorist threats and the flow of migrants. President
Putin's initiative to forge a broad anti-terrorism front
remains relevant.

We are currently working to establish a political
settlement in Syria in conjunction with the United
Nations and within the framework of the Astana format.
We are in favour of combining regional efforts. It is now
critical to tackle issues of socioeconomic revival in the
Syrian Arab Republic without preconditions. We must
also solve problems related to refugees and abandon the
practice of forcibly detaining them in third countries.

General attention is currently focused on the
situation in Libya. We continue to believe that the only
way to help the Libyan people extricate themselves
from the crisis is by consolidating the positions of
international players. The current situation reflects
the consequences of foreign military interventions.
Although intended to oust an undesirable regime, they
lead to the total dismantling of statehood. We urge
all Libyan stakeholders to cooperate with the United
Nations and to refrain from advancing a unilateral
agenda, and call on external players to play by the rules.
The Libyan crisis has led to the emergence of
new phenomena, such as migratory waves. However,
this problem should not be solved by combating
migrant flows, but rather by creating acceptable
living conditions for them in their homelands. Such
an approach is equally relevant in relation to Yemen,
where all parties must act under the unifying initiatives
of the United Nations in order to achieve a political
settlement and revive statehood.

The recent Security Council mission to the Middle
East demonstrated that Iraq requires close international
attention and assistance in many areas of sociopolitical
life. Another important outcome of the mission was
the clear signal to us all that regional parties need to
contribute to the de-escalation of the situation in the
Persian Gulf. No one wants or needs a war there.

Russia maintains friendly and constructive
relations with all countries of the region without
exception. We will actively contribute to stabilizing the
situation in the Middle East and stand ready to act with
all interested parties to do so. We call on all to engage
in collective efforts.

