Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, are grateful to the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), Ambassador Nishida, for his briefing on the
work of the Committee over the past three months. We
deeply appreciate his efforts in chairing the Committee,
which has done a great deal of work in that time in
various areas of its mandate. The Committee has
strictly discharged its mandate, and it is important that
it continue to do so in the future.

We welcome the establishment of the Panel of
Experts, which will provide the Committee with
professional support. We expect the Panel to do
practical work in implementing, under the guidance of
the Committee, the tasks assigned to it. All members of
the international community must strictly abide by
Security Council resolutions and the sanctions regime
with respect to Iran and not to go beyond those
boundaries.

With respect to the current situation of the Iranian
nuclear programme, our position remains unchanged.
We have consistently called for a solution to the
problem through dialogue and interaction with the
Iranian side. The foundation of our approach is the
continuation of the talks towards a diplomatic solution
 

and to work with Tehran while ensuring the full
cooperation of Iran with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA).

We welcome the Geneva talks on the Iranian
nuclear programme held on 6 and 7 December with the
European Union High Representative for Foreign
Policy, Baroness Ashton, with the Secretary of the
Supreme National Security Council of Iran, Mr. Jalili,
and with the political directors of the E3+3. The
discussions resumed after a long break, and the parties
took a close look at issues of mutual interest, including
the situation of the Iranian nuclear programme as well
as matters of global security and the strengthening of
the non-proliferation regime.

Some steps were identified to enable the
continuation of the dialogue with the aim of furthering
cooperation and seeking common approaches. It is
important that an agreement was reached in Geneva on
future meetings, such as that planned for January in
Istanbul. We hope that these talks will enjoy further
momentum and that all interested parties will continue
to interact in the interest of finding an exclusively
peaceful and political settlement of the situation of the
Iranian nuclear problem.

