Mr. Dieng: First, I would like to thank the President
ofthe Security Council, Ambassador Oh Joon, and other
Council members for inviting me to brief this meeting.

The Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, asked
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay,
and I to travel to South Sudan this week to follow up on
the recent brutal attacks against civilians that took place
in the northern town of Bentiu, including in places of
worship and hospitals, and within a United Nations base
where internally displaced persons were sheltering, in
Bor. We are very grateful to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Hilde Johnson and the staff of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
for the support they provided to our very brief but
intense mission. I will restrict my remarks to elements
that are relevant to my mandate.

The violence that broke out on 15 December
2013, following a power struggle within the ruling
Sudan People's Liberation Movement between former
Vice-President Riek Machar and President Salva Kiir,
has quickly degenerated into ethnic violence. The recent
brutal attacks in Bentiu, in Unity state, and Bor, in
Jonglei state, seem to have changed the trajectory ofthe
conflict, and if such attacks are not immediately halted
they could plunge the country into serious violence that
could spiral out of control. In the current situation, we
see elements that we could categorize as risk factors for
genocide and other atrocity crimes.

In Bentiu, more than 200 civilians of Dinka
ethnicity were massacred and more than 400 others
wounded, reportedly by opposition forces allied to
former Vice-President Riek Machar. According to
United Nations reports, the attackers separated ethnic
Dinka from ethnic Nuer civilians and then executed the
Dinka and others perceived to support the Government.

In Bor, armed elements reportedly affiliated
with the Government forced entry into the UNMISS
camp, in which displaced persons had been sheltering.
They killed more than 50 civilians, mostly of Nuer
ethnicity, and wounded around 100 others. That attack
was allegedly carried out in revenge for the capture of
Bentiu town by opposition forces. In our meeting with
the internally displaced persons in Bor, they expressed
fear that the attacks could recur at any time and pleaded
with the United Nations to relocate them to somewhere
safer, preferably Akobo. They said that they knew some
of the perpetrators and that they did not feel safe in
Bor, where they risked being targeted simply because
they were Nuer. The UNMISS commander in Bor
corroborated the statements of the internally displaced
persons and informed us that the recent attack was well
organized and that the attackers included individuals
in uniforms of the army of South Sudan, the Sudan
People's Liberation Army (SPLA).

Another cause for serious concern has been the
reported use of radio in some areas to spread messages
constituting incitement to violence against all those
perceived to support the Government. It was reported
that, in Bentiu, fighters allied with Mr. Riek Machar
incited the civilian population to attack the Dinka, even
encouraging their supporters to commit acts of sexual
violence against women. That is totally unacceptable.

In our consultations with senior Government
officials in Juba and with Mr. Machar, we noted with
concern that both sides either denied attacks against
civilians or justified them on the grounds that they
were carried out in self-defence against a vengeful
group. If we are to ensure the protection of the civilian
population in the country, the State must acknowledge
that it has the primary responsibility to protect all
South Sudanese, irrespective of nationality, ethnicity
or political affiliation, and prioritize that responsibility.
Blaming one group or another is simply irresponsible
and dangerous.

UNMISS is doing its best in very difficult
circumstances and should be commended. A11 leaders
in South Sudan must assume greater responsibility to
ensure that those under their authority do not commit
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. They should send strong messages to
call for the unity and respect of all South Sudanese and
take immediate measures to end the violence. I am glad
that, in our meetings this week, both President Salva
Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar affirmed their will to do so.
I hope that they will now take concrete steps to act on
their commitments.

Reports of the homogenization of security forces
by both camps are worrying as we consider the risk of
atrocity crimes. The perception that those supporting
Riek Machar are predominantly ethnic Nuer and
those supporting President Kiir are predominantly
Dinka has heightened the risk that individuals could
be systematically targeted on the basis of ethnicity.
That polarization is further compounded by reports of
exclusion and discrimination on the basis of ethnicity.
For example, in Bor the internally displaced persons
reported to us that they had been denied access to
medical care by Government officials because they
were Nuer.

The culture of impunity in South Sudan has
contributed immensely to the current crisis. As we
search for peace in that young nation, we must also
ensure that those responsible for crimes committed
there are held to account. There can be no peace
without justice. The current culture of impunity will
only undermine our efforts. We have learned this the
hard way from events in other places, including the
genocide of the Tutsis that took place 20 years ago in
Rwanda. To the survivors of the genocide, we owe a
pledge to take all possible measures within our power
to protect populations from another Rwanda. There is
no excuse for inaction.

In this regard, I welcome the mediation efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the role of the African Union's commission
of inquiry on South Sudan, which aim to end the
violence and to bring justice to the victims. Both
President Kiir and Riek Machar informed us that they
were investigating any serious violations committed by
their respective forces and that those found responsible
would be held accountable. We should hold them to that
commitment.

In our meeting with the members of the African
Union commission of inquiry on South Sudan,
I reiterated the expectations of the international
community that the work of the commission would be
independent, thorough and credible, and stressed that
they should ensure that the commission not only seeks to
pursue measures for reconciliation and national healing
but also places emphasis on accountability measures.
The members of the African Union commission of
inquiry requested technical assistance from the United
Nations, in particular the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. We should do
all we can to support their work. I was encouraged to
note, from my discussions with IGAD, that the IGAD
mediation envoys believe that accountability should be
part and parcel of any agreement reached to end the
fighting.

To conclude, we must continue to follow the situation
in South Sudan closely, take whatever measures are
most appropriate to protect the population from further
suffering and prevent the situation from spiraling out
of control. The risk that it could do so is clearly high,
based on the risk factors that I have highlighted today.
UNMISS has saved lives by opening its gates to protect
the population in Bentiu, Bor, Malakal and other places.
The Mission is under stress, however, and troop-
contributing countries should expedite the deployment
of additional troops as part of the UNMISS force surge
to enhance its capacity to protect the population.

If the parties do not clearly demonstrate their will
and intention to end the violence and attacks against
civilians, including incitement to commit violence, I
believe the Council should consider taking additional
measures against the parties to prevent the situation
from deteriorating further. We should all support efforts
aimed at holding accountable those responsible for
serious violations. The findings and recommendations
of the report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, which is about to be released, and
other human rights reports must be acted on, including,
first and foremost, by the national authorities.

Finally, the issue of weaknesses in governance must
be addressed by development partners. In addition to the
seeming disregard for the condition of the population,
authorities have turned a blind eye to corruption. That
corruption has also created a clear motivation for others
to take up arms so that they can also access national
resources for personal gain. Today's violence in South
Sudan is not motivated by the desire to change the
country, but rather by self-interested goals related to
accessing oil wealth and development resources. The
international community must not be complicit in this
agenda. The prevention of further violence therefore
requires a coordinated international response that
includes a new posture by development partners. Any
resolution should take this into account.

We must uphold our collective responsibility to
protect the populations of South Sudan from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity and their incitement. Ethnicity must not be
used as an excuse to incite violence or to demonize,
exclude or attack any community or section of the
population in South Sudan.

