Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock,
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra and UNICEF
Executive Director Henrietta Fore for their briefings.

China commends the tireless efforts of the United
Nations and other humanitarian actors in advancing
the political process in Yemen and alleviating the
country's humanitarian situation. China welcomes the
recent positive progress made in the redeployment of
troops, commends the Yemeni parties for recommitting
themselves to the Stockholm Agreement and supports
the parties in their bid to agree, through consultations,
on the next steps in the continued implementation of the
redeployment plan.

China supports the continued mediation and good
offices of the United Nations on the Yemeni issue aimed
at facilitating the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement and finding a political solution.

In our view, the Yemeni parties should put the
interests of the country and the people first, work
towards the greater good that is regional peace and
stability and push ahead with political dialogue and
negotiation in a sustained and effective manner. The
priority now is to carry on with the consultations
and agree on the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement and other concrete arrangements,
including prisoner exchanges and the memorandum of
understanding on Taiz.

In the longer term, it is imperative to relaunch
political talks in order to find a durable, holistic
solution to the issue of Yemen. The international
community should respect and preserve the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Yemen
and support efforts to achieve a broadly inclusive
political solution on the basis of the relevant Council
resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanisms, and the outcome
of the National Dialogue Conference.

Since the Stockholm Agreement was signed
five months ago, the Council adopted a resolution
endorsing it, decided to deploy to Yemen the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
and issued a number of press statements urging such
implementation. The Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) recently
visited the countries of the region and held a useful
dialogue with the parties concerned.

The Council must remain united, push for the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, respect
the positions of the country concerned and other
countries in the region, and lend political support to
the intra-Yemeni dialogue and play a constructive
role therein.

The escalation of conflict in some parts of
Yemen has led to the displacement of civilians. This
is compounded by outbreaks of cholera, the threat of
famine and the dire economic situation, which have
brought the people of Yemen abysmal suffering. We
are deeply concerned about by the dire situation in
Yemen. The international community must step up its
humanitarian assistance to Yemen, and the aid pledged
must be disbursed so as to provide the support needed
on the ground, both financial and in-kind, including
food and medicine. It must also pay particular attention
to the humanitarian needs of vulnerable groups such as
women and children.

China has kept up its food aid to Yemen. Since
mid-March this year, China has shipped 1,200 metric
tons of rice to Yemen. Another shipment of 1,200 tons
of rice will be arriving in Aden by the end of May.

Last but not least, I would like to reiterate
China's readiness to maintain, along with the rest of
international community, its support for a political
solution to the Yemeni issue and to continue to help the
Yemeni people to the best of its ability.

