Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing
to consider the biannual report on the activities of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) in Libya. We
commend Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
Court, for her detailed briefing. Cote d'Ivoire would
like to assure her of our full support and to urge all
States, including States that are not party to the Rome
Statute, to fully cooperate with the ICC in order to
end impunity.

My delegation notes with concern that since the
previous report of the Prosecutor (see S/PV.8523), the
security situation in Libya has deteriorated considerably,
owing to the ongoing violence that began on 4 April
between the forces of General Khalifa Haftar and those
of the Government of National Accord led by Prime
Minister Faiez Serraj. The deterioration in the security
situation has allowed the Libyan branch of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant to take root. The attack
in Benghazi on 10 August that claimed the lives of
three members of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) demonstrates the need to draw
the attention of both the Council and the International
Criminal Court to the activities of that terrorist group.

My country is therefore concerned about the
decision taken by the European Union, in a context
marked by continued violations of the arms embargo
on Libya, to temporarily suspend the deployment of its
naval assets in Operation Sophia, starting on 27 March
of this year. It is also troubling that the efforts to secure
a ceasefire and bring the parties to the conflict back
to the negotiating table may be futile. In that regard,
Cote d'Ivoire hopes that the upcoming international
conference on Libya to be held in Berlin will help to
silence the guns and sustainably revive the political
process with a View to ending the crisis. A stable
security environment is key to ensuring more effective
cooperation between Libya and the ICC.

C6te d'Ivoire notes with regret that the ICC's
arrest warrants for Libyan nationals have not yet been
executed, due mainly to the current security situation,
which is affecting the institutional capacity of the
Government of Nation Accord to fulfil its obligations
under the Rome Statute. We therefore call on the Libyan
parties to remove all the obstacles to full cooperation
with the ICC in order to bring the alleged criminals
to justice before the relevant international tribunals.
My country continues to believe that the fight against
impunity must be an integral part of the process of
national reconciliation if we are to create the conditions
for lasting peace in Libya. In that connection, we
welcome the statement by the Prosecutor on 8 May
(see S/PV.8523) with regard to continuing to search for
evidence of alleged crimes against migrants, since the
extension ofthe ICC's jurisdiction to crimes committed
against migrants is proving crucial. We welcome the
progress made by the Office of the Prosecutor in
that area.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its
commendation and support to Prosecutor Bensouda
and her Office for their perseverance in implementing
the principle of accountability for crimes under the
Court's jurisdiction. We also commend the excellent
work done by UNSMIL, which has provided valuable
assistance to the investigations of the ICC. Finally, my
country calls on the United Nations, and the Council in
particular, and the African Union to join forces in order
to achieve a swift end to the clashes in Tripoli and the
surrounding areas, and to enable peace to be restored in
Libya and the Sahel.

