Mr. Clinton: Let me first of all thank you,
Mr. President, for having brought this issue before the
Council and for Colombia's genuine friendship with
the people of Haiti. You mentioned the police officers
from Colombia; they are part of a contingent of 49
nations providing police, and then there are the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
forces, about 18 nations. Your country has also
disbursed 100 per cent of its pledged aid and helped
the Haitian people to rebuild their economy,
particularly through the work you have done through
the coffee sector. For all that, we are very grateful.

I would also like to thank President Preval for
many things, but one I think is important. Every day
we pick up the newspaper with worry about what is
happening in cote d'Ivoire, or whether more civilians
have been killed in Libya. Haiti, for all of its troubled
past, is overseeing now the peaceful transfer of power,
after a devastating earthquake which took out virtually
20 per cent of all the public employees of the entire
country and devastated more than half its gross
domestic product (GDP). Sometimes we focus so much
on the problems that we forget to acknowledge the
small miracles of human nature in concern for the
future of a country. I personally believe that this is a
remarkable thing, and I thank you, President Preval,
and the people of Haiti for undertaking this election
with hundreds of thousands of people living in tents
and under tarps, with the almost impossible task of
verifying where people live and getting their
identification up. It is a remarkable thing.

On most days, I have been grateful to the
Secretary-General for asking me to be the Special
Envoy to Haiti, although it has turned out to be a more
challenging task in the aftermath of the quake. I am
very grateful to President Preval for asking me to serve
as the co-Chair of the Reconstruction Commission,
with his Prime Minister, Jean-Max Bellerive. I will do
what I can if the new Government wishes me to
continue, but my position on this has always been that
the future of Haiti should be for the Haitian people to
determine.

Having said that, let me make a few observations
about the questions that have brought us here today.

We were making good progress on development
after the Secretary-General asked me to work in Haiti,
before the earthquake. Let me remind the Council that
before the earthquake, there had been a series of

hurricanes that had taken out about 15 per cent of
Haiti's GDP, which occasioned the involvement of the
United Nations there and MINUSTAH before the
quake. The quake was a dramatic setback to daily life
and to development, but it also presented some new
opportunities.

In a little less than eight months, the
Reconstruction Commission established by the
President and the Parliament has taken a number of
important steps. First, for the members of the Security
Council who have not followed this, this is really a
unique body, because it is the only one, in my
experience, in which one half of the members of the
Commission represent every major element of Haitian
society, including local governments, the private
sector, the non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and the legal sector, and one half of the Commission
represents the international community - the major
national donors and the multinational donors.

The Commission seeks to approve all substantial
projects that are a part of the reconstruction, including,
voluntarily, the projects undertaken by NGOs in Haiti.
There has never been any attempt before to coordinate
the work of the Government of Haiti with that of the
donors and the NGO community. We have approved
more than 87 projects that, when completed, will help
2 million Haitians.

The idea is to take the Haitian Government's own
development plan and make sure that all the projects
approved are consistent with that, then to offer
transparency through a website that will show what
projects have been approved, who is funding them,
who got the money and what the progress of the project
is, and offering a performance audit at the end of that.
This is essentially modelled on what was done through
the Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Agency (BRR)
in Indonesia after the tsunami in South Asia. Because
the burden imposed by the earthquake on the capacity
of the Government of Haiti was so much greater, I
think that, with all of its frustrations, it has worked
pretty well.

The Commission does not have the authority to
implement projects, only to approve them. There are
several significant questions which, quite properly,
have been left to the Haitian Government, for example
how to resolve the land issues, which the Secretary-
General mentioned, necessary to do large-scale housing
construction outside the area impacted by the quake.

Other questions include: what will be the basic
economic structures? What kind of energy sector will
they have, what kind of education sector will they
have, what kind of health-care sector will they have,
what kind of array of ports and airports will they have?
There are some other questions that I think are very
important, for example, the granting of dual citizenship
to the Haitian diaspora, which I believe would
dramatically increase the level of investment and
involvement in Haiti - something that President
Preval has supported but which requires a specific and
rather extended constitutional process.

I have worked on this through the office of
Special Envoy, through the staff resources of my
foundation, and through the fund I established at
President Obama's request with former President Bush.
We have now, with the approval of the Haitian
Government, established the beginnings of a mortgage
process, which the Haitians have never had before, and
a systematic small-business loan process. Haiti has had
microcredit and big finance, but never really a vigorous
small-business loan system. So my goal and that of
President Bush is to make this work and then give it to
the people of Haiti - give it to a bank, or whoever the
Haitians determine after a couple of years.

Through the Global Initiative, we have a business
group there headed by Denis O'Brien, the head of
Digicel, who just funded the restoration of Haiti's
remarkable Iron Market. It was restored to the
condition it was in in 1891, and there are now nearly
100 people who make a living there every day thanks
to the support of the Government. You may think these
are symbolic things, but it is quite a symbol. If you
have seen it, it is a stark contrast to the abject
difficulties people are facing.

We are also working with Partners in Health and
the Ministry of Health to help Haiti rebuild its health
system. I would say to all present that, notwithstanding
the cholera epidemic, that Haiti is probably further
along in building a sustainable health system than in
any other major challenges, in terms of modernizing
the educational system and making it universal and the
energy system and doing some other things that have to
be done. So I am very grateful for what has been done.

Mr. President, you wanted to talk about
peacekeeping today. That is not my purview. I do want
to say, however, that I think that MINUSTAH has done
a great job, under the leadership of Brazil and
supported by the Argentines and so many other
countries. They have been great. I agree with you, Sir,
that one cannot have peace over the long run without
development. I leave it to others to decide how the
allocation of responsibilities should be done, but I will
say to Mr. Mulet and all the other people who work
there on a daily basis that I think they have done
remarkable things to try to help deal with the
emergency situation.

I would like to offer a few brief recommendations
before other speakers take the floor.

Once a new President is inaugurated and a new
Administration has responsibility for reconstruction, I
think it will be more important than ever that we keep
up the coordination that President Preval has endorsed
between the Haitian Government, donors,
non-governmental organizations and, increasingly,
when we begin building houses, the many people who
will have contracts to build them. It is very important
that all this be done in a way that builds the long-term
capacity of the Haitian Government and that includes
the transparency set up by the Commission, so that
donors have real confidence and the people of Haiti
can see the houses going up, the Haitians being hired
and the Haitian businesses being brought into
partnership. This is an enormous opportunity to rebuild
the Haitian economy even as we move people out of
tents. But I think that it is important that we do it in a
way that strengthens the capacity of the Government of
Haiti and the confidence of people in the process.

That means that we also will need some more
funding. As I have said, the Commission has approved
87 projects, which are valued at $3.26 billion. In
fairness to donors, our goal has always been to have
the Commission ahead of donors. Otherwise, we would
be failing. If we could not do that, we could not
coordinate, we could not give any direction to donors
and we could not follow the lead of the Haitian
economic plan. I am not being critical of the fact that
we have approved more money than has been
provided - that is what we are supposed to do. On the
other hand, once it happens, we need the funding.

Participants should have before them a one-page
document from the Office of the Special Envoy that
states that 37.2 per cent of the money pledged more
than a year ago here in New York has actually been
disbursed. Now that there has been an election and the
international community has accepted the results and

verified and participated in the oversight of it, I think
greater donor disbursements are important. I think they
go a long way towards speeding up the reconstruction
and delivering other improvements.

The Haitians have an education plan for the first
time that would put all their children in school and give
them one nutritious meal daily. In the past, no more
than half the kids have gone to school. Many of those
here today, and many Members of the United Nations,
have talked to me over the years about the so-called
restavec system, where Haitian children are in effect
sold into labour for other families, often just so that
poor families in Haiti can send the rest of their kids to
school and feed them. If Members implement and fund
this education programme, which the Haitian
Government has recommended, 90 per cent of the
restavec system will vanish in a matter of weeks. So
we have to begin this.

There are other things that everyone is concerned
about, such as housing. It always takes longer to
address housing than anything else, but the Haitian
Government has approved a process that includes a
housing exposition. We have already had one big
meeting on housing in Haiti. There will be an
exposition in a few weeks' time that will include actual
demonstration homes, with priority on earthquake and
hurricane resistance. This is the first time we have ever
had a building code - ensuring energy efficiency;
providing sanitation; looking at alternatives to
centralized electricity and sanitation systems that work
and that are more cost-effective; and making maximal
use of recycled materials, including the rubble that is
now being crushed neighbourhood by neighbourhood
in Port-au-Prince.

All of this is going to be done. After the
exposition is over and people have made their
presentations according to the standards established by
the Commission and the Government of Haiti, it will
be very important that we begin to move. We can move
hundreds of thousands of people out of tents in a hurry
once the exposition is over and people are approved for
final consideration as contractors. I urge that this be
done.

Secondly, I would urge donors, insofar as they
possibly can and consistent with their own policies, not
to earmark the contributions that they make to the
reconstruction fund, but to allow the Haitian
Government to spend funds in support of the goals

established in coordination with the Reconstruction
Commission, which, as I said, includes all the major
donors.

For example, debris management is not a
particularly glamorous topic. This may be the first time
that the Security Council has ever discussed it. But if
one spends any time in Port-au-Prince, they will know
that Haiti cannot bring the country back until all the
rubble has been crushed and either used on site as a
base to rebuild streets or homes, recycled as building
material or carted away. We cannot build schools,
organize the energy system or decide on the most cost-
effective way to do good sanitation so that there will
never be another cholera outbreak unless we get the
rubble out of the way. As the Secretary-General has
said, 2 million cubic metres have been removed, but
we have a lot left to go. We can destroy it all much
quicker than anybody thinks, and use it in the
reconstruction process. But we have to have the
machinery to do it. Bringing rubble to rock crushers
also provides work for the people of Haiti, which we
are trying to do on a neighbourhood-by-neighbourhood
basis.

Thirdly, while most large non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) have been registering their
projects with the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission,
I once again ask all NGOs to do so. NGO involvement
in Haiti has been remarkable and a blessing in many
ways, but also occasionally a curse, because the
President has never had a comprehensive record of all
NGO activities in Haiti.

The great thing that happened after the tsunami in
Indonesia was that, for the first time, NGOs came
forward to say, "Okay, we want to be helpful here, but
we want it to be consistent with the Government's
plan". I think that it is really important that the
Commission is trying to leave the Haitian Government,
when we are all gone, with the capacity to coordinate
further NGO activities and adequately run the country
and have in place a transparency system that the whole
world accepts as not just adequate but good.

Finally, let me say that I think that donors, the
Government, NGOs and United Nations agencies will
have to continue to work together. I think we still do
not know exactly how we are going to resolve all these
questions. I am convinced, if one looks at the progress
that has been made - the hospitals that are being built,
the health networks that are being built out, the
education plan that the Government has adopted and
the options that Haiti actually has to set a model for the
Caribbean when it comes to a mixed energy system
that will be largely self-sufficient and less
expensive - that these are really important things.

The Caribbean as a whole - and the members of
the Security Council may find this surprising - has
the highest electricity rates in the world, because it has
no indigenous energy sources. But most Caribbean
islands, including Puerto Rico, which is part of the
United States, where I have worked, and Anguilla,
where I have helped people, and others, could almost
all be energy self-sufficient. Haiti can lead the way. It
has sunshine, wind and the capacity for biomass, which
can all be employed.

I ask everyone here to think about this. We are
not just helping Haiti here if we support the plan; we
may be helping the developing countries of the world
to imagine a whole different way of building
sustainable economies. It could be relevant to Africa; it
could be relevant to South-East Asia; it could be
relevant to all kinds of places. And it is really
important that we do it in a way that empowers both
local communities as well as the national Government.

As I said, I think we are doing well with health
care. They have a really good education plan, but it is
not funded. They are doing much better with the
economy. President Preval announced recently, along
with the United States and a Korean company, the
biggest investment in Haitian history and the first ever
textile mill onsite in Haiti.

I think we can do much better with tourism and
other things, but a good beginning has been made.
None of this is going to happen unless we get rid of the
rubble and start building the homes and clean out the
tents. That will do more than anything else to empower
people and to make them believe that this whole thing
is real.

Again I say, the democratic transition of power,
for any one who understands the history of Haiti, is a
cause for celebration. And as we all see in Cote
d'Ivoire, the people who are leaving probably deserve
more credit than the people who are coming in.
I think that this Commission will work, but only
if it is funded. If anyone has any suggestions for how
we can do better, I would be glad to have them.
