Mr. Hill (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to contribute to this important
debate. Australia remains deeply concerned about the
plight of children affected by armed conflicts, and we
remain dedicated to ensuring the protection of all
children from harm and exploitation.

We welcome Council's adoption on 19 June of
resolution 1820 (2008), recognizing that children in
situations of armed conflict are vulnerable not only to
recruitment as child soldiers but also to other grave
violations, including rape and other acts of sexual
violence. We echo the call in that resolution for all
States to comply with their obligations regarding
prosecuting persons responsible for acts of sexual
violence.
28

Children in armed conflict and children displaced
by conflict are vulnerable, as noted, not only to
recruitment as child soldiers but also to other grave
violations, including killing and maiming, abductions
and attacks on schools and hospitals. They may also
suffer as a result of the denial of humanitarian access.
The United Nations system must continue to coordinate
its efforts to address all these egregious violations, and
monitoring and reporting mechanisms should be
triggered when any of them occur.

Many of the parties who commit violations
against children in situations of armed conflict have
been cited repeatedly in reports of the Secretary-
General. We encourage the Security Council to
continue to call on relevant States to prepare time-
bound action plans to stop violations against children
and to consider targeted measures which may be taken
against those persistent violators of child rights. On the
tenth anniversary of its creation by the adoption of the
Rome Statute, we also stress the important role of the
International Criminal Court in investigating and
prosecuting violations against children in armed
conflict that fall within its jurisdiction.

We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict for
her continued commitment to her mandate, and we
welcome her recent efforts to shed light on the
situation of children in Afghanistan. We encourage the
Council to maintain attention and seek further progress
on those areas where children continue to be affected
by armed conflict, including in Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Somalia.

Australia welcomes the progress made on the
issue and encourages all key stakeholders to continue
their efforts to ensure that all children are protected
from harm and exploitation and to hold those who
would abuse them to account.

