Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We express our appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Ambassador Zahir Tanin,
for his briefing on the latest situation in Kosovo and the
activities of the Mission. I also welcome the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolie, President of the
Republic of Serbia, at today's meeting and would like to
thank him for his statement. I also thank Ambassador
Citaku for her statement.

Since this is the first time that we are speaking
on this issue, we would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm our support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Serbia, for the peaceful and
amicable resolution of all outstanding issues and for
the scrupulous observance and implementation of the
Brussels Agreement. We believe that resolution 1244
(1999) remains an important framework for resolving
the Kosovo issue through dialogue and negotiation.

We welcome the progress made in the
implementation of the agreement reached within the
framework of the European Union-facilitated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, specifically in the areas
of integration of the judiciary, freedom of movement
and telecommunication.

However, we also take note of what the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/95/Rev.1) states with
regard to the lack of progress on the establishment
of the Association/Community of Serb-majority
municipalities in Kosovo and the delays in the
implementation of the agreement on freedom of
vehicular movement.

It is important that the parties remain fully
committed to implementing the agreement that they
have reached through the European Union dialogue
process for the sake of promoting lasting peace and
stability in Kosovo and the region as well as the building
of trust and the normalization of their relations.

The report about the tense political situation
between Belgrade and Pristina, on the one hand, and
the strained relations between the governing and
opposition parties and between parties within the
governing coalition in Kosovo is a matter of concern.
All parties need to refrain from escalating tension
and seek peaceful avenues and dialogue to address
any disputes.

We take note of what the Secretary-General stated
in paragraph 37 of his report with regard to some
leaders who show

"sincere commitment, courage and the Vision of a
better future, free of the zero-sum approach that
undermines the real interests of the people that
they serve".

We believe that this is the kind of spirit that should
guide all the parties in addressing difficult and sensitive
issues in order to reach a fair compromise.

The growing threats of terrorism and violent
extremism have been a recurring theme over the course
of this month, including during the debate on conflicts
in Europe and the briefing on the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. Kosovo and the
region are not an exception to this, as highlighted in
the report of the Secretary-General. The recruitment of
fighters for the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the arrest of several individuals suspected of planning
terrorist attacks, as well as the weapons and explosives
seized by the Kosovo authorities, are a clear indication
of the seriousness of the threat, which needs to be given
particular attention.

Finally, we appreciate the efforts of UNMIK in
engaging all the parties and communities to promote
security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo and the region. We believe that the role of the
Mission remains important in addressing current and
emerging challenges on the ground. In this regard,
we welcome the continued engagement of UNMIK
with Belgrade and Pristina as well as the communities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors in
carrying out its mandate.

