Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, I also want
to join the previous speakers in congratulating the
Uruguayan presidency for its leadership and to thank
it for organizing this debate. My appreciation also goes
to all the briefers for their valuable contributions earlier
today.

Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. In my
national capacity, I would like to make the following
brief comments, while the full text will be made
available.

More than 15 years have passed since the Security
Council held its initial open debate on the issue before
us (see S/PV.3980). Yet as we speak, millions of people
worldwide are suffering from the dire consequences
of armed conflict, which deprives them of their
fundamental rights and freedoms, separates them from
their families and forces them out of the places of their
permanent residence. The task of protecting civilians
in conflict remains challenging. From Syria to Iraq,
Yemen and Libya, to the Central African Republic and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nigeria, South
Sudan, the Sudan, to Ukraine, civilians caught up in
armed conflict are being killed and injured. The scale of
brutality is often beyond the scope of our imagination.
It is the collective responsibility of the United Nations,
in particular of the Security Council, to undertake all
the necessary measures to protect civilians and ensure
their basic rights.

Another vital issue is the ability of the international
community to address the human rights situation in
areas where the official authorities cannot exercise
their sovereign rights and which are under the
effective military control of an occupying Power.
In such situations, international human rights and
humanitarian law should nevertheless operate without
any impediment in order to provide a minimum level
of protection for the civilian population. Safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian actors to reach
people in need of protection and assistance is another
important element. It is imperative that populations
residing in conflict-affected areas be provided with
unhindered humanitarian aid and that, to that end, the
relevant international organizations be allowed to carry
out their activities.

The issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is of particular concern to me as a
representative of a country that has had to withstand a
full-scale military aggression against its statehood and
independence in the recent past. More than seven years
after Russia's military invasion of my nation, 20 per
cent of our sovereign territory remains under illegal
military occupation, in blatant violation of Russia's
own obligations under international law, including the
12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement. The population
currently residing in Georgia's occupied regions is
deprived of basic human rights and minimal safeguards
for their lives, not to mention their civil, socioeconomic
and cultural rights. Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands
of Georgian internally displaced persons and refugees
are doomed to protracted displacement.

Over the past several years, the occupation regime
has been installing barbed wire fences along the
occupation line to divide families and communities and
to prevent people-to-people contacts. That is happening
against the backdrop of continued militarization and
the complete absence of any international monitoring
mechanism inside the occupied regions - a situation
that has in fact been reflected in General Assembly
resolutions and reports of the Secretary-General and
of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of internally
displaced persons. Notably, after having been repeatedly
denied access to territories, the former United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay,
referred to the occupied Georgian regions as "a black
hole" and "one of the most inaccessible places on Earth,
with no access permitted for international agencies."

A detailed account of what I have just mentioned
can also be found in one of the quarterly reports on
the human rights situations in the occupied territories
of Georgia issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
which are also issued as official documents of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, for those
who are interested.

The only international monitoring mechanism
currently on the ground is the European Union
Monitoring Mission, but even that mechanism has
been prevented from fully implementing its mandate,
as well as from entering the occupied territories. It
is imperative that the conflict-affected population be
provided with unhindered humanitarian aid and that
the relevant international actors be allowed to carry out
their activities according to their respective mandates.

There is no alternative to strengthening our common
efforts to protect civilians in armed conflicts. We need
to take concrete steps to alleviate the consequences of
armed hostilities for civilians and to safeguard their
rights and freedoms.

In conclusion, I reiterate that Georgia aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union and calls on all the relevant actors to
ensure rapid, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access
to the affected populations in unresolved conflicts
worldwide. For our part, my country stands ready to
contribute to concerted international efforts to ensure
more effective protection for civilian populations
during armed conflicts and in the post-conflict phase.

