Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
condemns the terrorist attack that took place in New
York and expresses its condolences to the victims.

We appreciate the efforts of the French presidency
and congratulates Italy on its assumption of
the presidency.

China thanks Italy for convening today's meeting
and welcomes the Under-Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs of Italy, Mr. Vincenzo Amendola, who has
come to New York to preside over this meeting. We
also thank the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, for his briefing.

The situation of refugees around the world
continues to deteriorate. Armed conflicts and natural
disasters have resulted in an increase in the number
of internally displaced persons. Refugee issues are
complex and have many underlying causes, and have
become protracted and hybrid in nature. Factors such as
terrorism, turbulent regional situations and mixed flows
of refugees and migrants have added to the difficulty of
providing refugees with protection.

Over the past year, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), under the
leadership of High Commissioner Grandi, has actively
pushed for internal reforms, intensifying its coordination
efforts and improving its emergency response capacity,
thereby making significant contributions to protecting
the welfare of refugees and responding to refugee
crises. China appreciates all those efforts and supports
the Office in maintaining its positive role in that regard.

Faced with the complex refugee situation and
related challenges, the international community should
continue to work within the framework of international
law, including the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, and on the basis of
mutual respect. Enhanced international cooperation
will create synergy in addressing the global refugee
problem. The issue requires tackling both the symptoms
and root causes by increasing support and assistance
to host countries and communities, and eliminating
discrimination against and prejudice towards refugees.
We must also focus on the root causes that give rise
to refugees by peacefully settling disputes through
dialogue, increasing development aid to countries in
need of assistance, creating the necessary conditions
for the return of refugees to their homes, and promoting
ongoing development in their countries of origin.

In handling matters related to refugees, the
international community should uphold the principles
of objectivity and neutrality, avoid interference in the
internal affairs of the countries in question and prevent
the politicization and abuses of international refugee
protection mechanisms.

China has long cooperated with UNHCR. In June,
High Commissioner Grandi made a successful visit
to China, where both sides achieved firm consensus
on deepening our ties of cooperation. Pursuant to
the outcomes reached at the Belt and Road Forum
for International Cooperation in May, China will
work with the relevant international organizations in
a joint push to implement a tranche of international
cooperation projects for countries along the Belt and
Road, including providing food, tents, prefab buildings
and other refugee relief items to those countries;
establishing refugee scholarships; and financing the
participation of refugee athletes in international and
regional competitions.

During the leaders' round of the Forum, the
Ministry of Commerce of China also signed a
cooperation agreement with UNHCR, whereby it
pledged $8 million to the Office as an appropriation to
the United Nations Fund for South-South Cooperation.
China will earnestly honour and effectively implement
the aforementioned assistance initiatives. China is
ready to work with all parties in actively participating
in the intergovernmental negotiations on a global
compact on refugees, to be launched next year, so as to
contribute to the improvement in the global governance
of refugees.

The problem in Rakhine state of Myanmar involves
complex historical, ethnic and religious factors. Many
differences and contradictions have been brewing
for a long time. The Government of Myanmar is now
working actively to ease the tensions in Rakhine state,
and the situation there is now moving towards stability.

Myanmar and Bangladesh are now seeking a settlement
of the problem of the Rakhine state through bilateral
negotiations and consultations. The United Nations and
the international community should remain patient and
provide constructive help and cooperation to Myanmar
by working together for an appropriate solution to
the problem.

