Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
initiative of holding this important debate at a time
when United Nations peacekeeping operations are
witnessing accelerated developments and questions
regarding the capability of the Organization to bear the
increasing burden of expanding peacekeeping
operations and implementing their complex mandates. I
would also like to thank the two Under-Secretaries-
General for Peacekeeping Operations and for Field
Support for their briefings on the two Departments'
visions for reform and related ideas contained in the
New Horizon non-paper.
Undoubtedly, the expansion of United Nations
peacekeeping activities during recent years and the
deployment of over 115,000 personnel with an annual
peacekeeping budget of over $8 billion necessitates an
urgent and comprehensive review by the relevant
United Nations bodies. Such a review must examine
ways to respond to the increased demand for
peacekeeping, which shows no sign of diminishing in
the near future. It must also evaluate successes and
failures and must indicate ways for addressing the gap
between mandates decided by the Security Council and
what peacekeeping operations can implement on the
ground. This must be done through a practical vision
that enhances the role of the United Nations by
ensuring clarity in mandates and providing for the
deployment needs of troops in terms of equipment,
finances and logistical support in the field.

How well we address this problem will depend on
how well we identify its causes. Egypt believes that a
major part of what we face is a result of the lack of
success that the United Nations has had in fulfilling its
expected role in terms of preventive diplomacy and
efforts to prevent conflicts from erupting and evolving
to the point where they become threats to international
peace and security. It is also due to the inability of the
Organization to address the root causes of existing
conflicts and to the transformation of peacekeeping
missions into missions for managing conflict.

In addition, there is an increased dependence on
the part of host countries on the role and capacities of
these missions, including their military and police
capacity, in supporting fragile national capabilities in
the areas of defence and internal security. When the
United Nations does not work hard enough at building
the capacities of post-conflict countries in these areas
and other fields of development, peacekeeping
operations end up having to be prolonged, and there is
a lack of strong national alternatives for undertaking
the same tasks, for preserving the stability and security
achieved and for dealing effectively with peacebuilding
and comprehensive economic development.

The root of the problem lies also in the lack of
resources and capacities required to implement
peacekeeping operations, resulting in donor fatigue on
the part of the troop-contributing countries and major
contributors to the peacekeeping budget. This financial
dimension threatens the United Nations ability to
immediately respond to all cases that require
peacekeeping operations. It may regrettably oblige the
Organization to choose between deteriorating
situations in various countries and select only some of
them for peacekeeping operations owing to a lack of
necessary funds. This would threaten the credibility of
the Organization in the field of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Now that we have dealt with our diagnosis of the
problem and the reasons for not achieving the desired
progress, there are a variety of initiatives to address the
issue. These have different objectives and the various
main bodies of the United Nations play their role in
them, pushing for reform and strengthening the
organizational structures to address the issue. This
requires that we unify the Organization under one
vision, as proposed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support in the
New Horizon non-paper, and that we contribute to
discussing and drawing up plans to achieve these
objectives.

Here, Egypt proposes a number of elements that
we hope will be taken into consideration in putting
together the final elements of the non-paper. First, we
must address peacekeeping as one of several tools
available to the United Nations within a series of
political tools including preventive diplomacy,
mediation and reconciliation, peacekeeping. and
peacebuilding and long-term development. Second, we
must ensure the clarity of mandates and cohesive
political and military planning as means for achieving
peacekeeping success and the goals for which these
operations were established.

Third, we must ensure the existence of an exit
strategy and a parallel political process, as
peacekeeping is part of the political solution, not an
alternative to it. United Nations peacekeeping
operations should be accompanied by an active
political strategy that provides tools for support and
backing from the international community so that there
is a peace to keep, as the Secretary-General mentioned
in his report on the work of the Organization to the
sixty-third session of the General Assembly (A/63/l).

Fourth, we must work to enhance trust among
peacekeeping parties represented in the Security
Council, the TCCs and the Secretariat, as well as trust
and consent on the part of the host countries. Fifth,
partnership between those parties is the basis for the
legitimacy and sustainability of United Nations
peacekeeping. That requires more interaction with
TCCs and expansion of their participation from the
outset, as described in the Brahimi report, in reports by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
and in recommendations by the international panel of

09-3860]
experts on African peacekeeping operations. Efforts to
address problems with peacekeeping should not be
limited to its financial aspects but should also seek to
strengthen the link between peacekeeping, financial
and political plans, peacebuilding and comprehensive
development.

Sixth, we must ensure the strengthening of
cooperation on the part of regional organizations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
the enhancement of their capacities to develop
structure and capacities for achieving the peaceful
settlement of conflicts and fulfilling peacekeeping
tasks at the regional level pursuant to a mandate from
the Security Council under the umbrella of the United
Nations and funded by it, particularly the African
Union, which represents an unqualified success.

Seventh, we must ensure the improvement of the
procurement system and mission field support. Eighth,
we must pursue development in the security sector and
increase coordination and interaction between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Field Support and the Department of
Political Affairs.

Ninth, we must avoid addressing the issue of
peacekeeping from the perspective of dispute over
competency between the Security Council and the
General Assembly and instead promote the role of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations as the
main body responsible for peacekeeping operations in
all its aspects in the Organization. We must also
encourage the Security Council not to micromanage the
Secretariat's work.

Finally, Egypt is honoured to be carrying the flag
of the United Nations and to be contributing military
troops and police to nine United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We support improvements in our
Organization and look forward to receiving the New
Horizon non-paper being prepared by the two
Departments and to the start of a substantive and
in-depth discussion in the coming session of the
General Assembly.

