Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. I also thank you and the Chinese delegation
for convening this timely open debate on peace and
security in Africa, under the theme "Enhancing African
capacities in the areas of peace and security".

South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

This debate is timely as it follows immediately on
the successful conclusion of the twenty-ninth African
Union (AU) Summit in Addis Ababa, where the African
Union considered issues that are of utmost importance
to the continent, including the African Union's
aspirations outlined in its Agenda 2063. It is important
for the United Nations at all levels to work closely with
the African Union in achieving our common security
and developmental objectives, as encapsulated in the
African Union Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. It should be noted that the
Summit recommitted Africa to the AU Master Road
Map of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by
the Year 2020. It also declared the month of September
of every year until 2020 as African Amnesty Month for
the surrender and collection of illegally owned weapons
and arms, in line with African and international
best practice.

At the outset, South Africa recognizes that
in terms of the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, as we have frequently reiterated, it is often
regional organizations such as the AU that are the first
responders to conflicts and deploy early in order to
stabilize conflict situations, thereby creating a more
favourable environment for the United Nations to
deploy and for peace processes to start.

This is by no means accidental, as regional
organizations are often better positioned to understand
the root causes of armed conflicts owing to their
knowledge of the region. This advantage benefits all
efforts to influence the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. Furthermore, regional bodies have a
comparative advantage due to their collective political
resolve to address a conflict situation and to prevent
regional instability. It is therefore imperative for
the United Nations to work closely with the AU and
the various regional economic organizations on the
continent to achieve sustainable peace on the African
continent. That would necessitate notjust collaboration
on peacekeeping but also in building capacity in
mediation and peacemaking efforts, as well as post-
conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction.

President Alpha Conde, in his capacity as
Chairperson of the AU, has appointed my President,
President Zuma, to promote partnership between
the AU and the United Nations towards enhancing
African capabilities in peacekeeping operations. In that
regard, South Africa continues to encourage a strong
collaborative relationship between the United Nations
and the AU. In that regard, my delegation would like to
highlight the following four points.

First, the financing of AU peacekeeping operations
remains one of the biggest challenges for peacekeeping
on the continent. As far back as resolution 1809 (2008),
adopted in 2008, the Council recognized the need to
enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility
offinancing regional organizations when they undertake
peacekeeping under a United Nations mandate. South
Africa believes that AU peace operations, authorized
by the Security Council, must be adequately funded and
resourced. In that regard, we support the AU call for the
use of United Nations assessed contributions to secure
predictable, sustainable and flexible financing for AU
peace operations authorized by the Security Council.

Secondly, the mutually reinforcing relationship
between the United Nations and the AU should extend
beyond the period of conflict, to critical areas such as
peacebuilding, and post-conflict reconstruction and
development within the paradigm of security sector
reform. The peace, security and development nexus
underscores the importance of peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction and development in post-
conflict settings. That is in support of strengthening
the resilience of countries through a process of
institutional capacity building to mitigate the risk of a
relapse into conflict. The African Peace and Security
Architecture also provides the continent with conflict
prevention, resolution and management measures, as
well as mechanisms for post-conflict peacebuilding
and reconstruction. South Africa therefore calls on the
international community to strengthen the capacity of
the African Peace and Security Architecture to deliver
to the necessary assistance and support to the affected
countries to ensure long-term, sustainable peace.

Thirdly, we welcome the signing of the joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security by both
organizations this year. The Framework elevates
cooperation between the two organizations to a
higher level. The continent continues to experience
challenges, particularly in combating terrorism, piracy,
transnational organized crime and human trafficking.
We hope that continued cooperation between the AU
Commission and the Secretariat, characterized by
mutual respect and understanding, will thus expand
and strengthen cooperation on many other issues that
the two organizations face.

Finally, we are pleased that many of our proposals
are aligned with the nine areas of reform outlined
by the Secretary-General in a statement made in
early April. In that statement, the Secretary-General
committed the Secretariat to enhancing its technical
cooperation and capacity building partnership with the
African Union Commission to further strengthen the
partnership between the two organizations, especially
regarding political issues and peacekeeping operations
on the continent. He also called for that partnership to
be based on solid, predictable funding, including for
peacekeeping missions ofthe African Union, supported
by the Security Council.

In conclusion, South Africa emphasizes that
debates of this nature should result in practical steps
aimed towards strengthening institutional collaboration
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council.

