Mr. Amil (Pakistan): I have the honour to make
this contribution on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China on the decision by the Security Council to hold a
debate on energy, security and climate.

The Group is of the View that Security Council's
primary responsibility is for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as set out in the
United Nations Charter. On the other hand, other
issues, including those relating to economic and social
development, are assigned by the Charter to the

Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly. The ever-increasing encroachment by the
Security Council on the roles and responsibilities of
other principal organs of the United Nations represents
a distortion of the principles and purposes of the
Charter; it also infringes on their authority and
compromises the rights of the general membership of
the United Nations.

The issues of energy and climate change are vital
for sustainable development. Responsibilities in the
field of sustainable development belong to the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, their
relevant subsidiary bodies, including the Commission
on Sustainable Development, and the United Nations
Environment Programme. Climate change is the
subject of a binding multilateral agreement - the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change - and a supportive protocol - the Kyoto
Protocol. No role was envisaged for the Security
Council.

We are of the view that it is vital for all Member
States to promote sustainable development, adhering to
the Rio principles, especially the principle of common
but differentiated responsibility, and fully implement
Agenda 21 and other commitments related to the
provision of financial resources, transfer of technology
and capacity-building for developing countries,
undertaken at Rio and Johannesburg and at other
relevant United Nations conferences in the economic
and social fields.

The Group has consistently maintained that the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change provides the appropriate forum to consider
risks associated with climate change and actions
needed to address climate change in accordance with
the principles enshrined in the Convention. Developed
countries should take urgent action to fulfil their
commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in
accordance with the Kyoto Protocol. Those countries
that have not yet done so should accede to the Kyoto
Protocol.

The Group also feels that it is inappropriate to
consider the issue of energy in the Security Council.
We reaffirm the key role of energy in achieving the
goals of sustainable development, poverty eradication
and the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals. Therefore, we emphasize the critical role of the
international community in the provision of adequate,
predictable, new and additional financial resources,
technology transfer and enhancing capacity-building
for the developing countries, as agreed in Agenda 21,
the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and the
relevant decisions of the Commission on Sustainable
Development. Also, there is a need for political will
and commitment to explore innovative ways of
applying energy-efficient, environmentally sound, cost-
effective and socially acceptable technologies and
systems.

The Group of 77 and China will continue to
pursue the realization of the goals of sustainable
development and the fulfilment of commitments by
developed countries in all relevant bodies, especially at
the forthcoming fifteenth session of the Commission
on Sustainable Development, and we urge others to do
likewise.

We hope that the decision by the Council to hold
this debate does not create a precedent or undermine
the authority or mandate of the relevant bodies,
processes and instruments which are already
addressing these issues.

