Mr. Lowcock: Geir Pedersen just updated the Security Council on the political and military developments. Let me therefore update the Security Council on the humanitarian situation. In the week since I last briefed the Council on the humanitarian catastrophe unfolding in north-west Syria (see S/PV.8707), we have seen a further substantial escalation. Every morning we wake up to more reports of shelling and air strikes on dozens of communities throughout the north-west. The impact of military operations on civilians has been severe. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has now documented 373 civilians killed since 1 December. Forty-nine deaths were recorded between 1 and 5 February. Three humanitarian workers from organizations that the United Nations works closely with have also been killed in recent days. While many of the attacks have been reported close to front lines, we have also seen an escalation in the major civilian centres in the north-west. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights reported one of the most serious incidents in the last two months on 15 January, when at least 19 civilians are believed to have been killed, and more than 60 others injured, as a result of an air strike that hit the Souq Al-Hal vegetable market in Idlib city. More than 95 per cent of all civilian deaths were in non-Government-controlled areas. The bombing and shelling have forced hundreds of thousands more people to move in an attempt to find safety. We now estimate that 586,000 people have moved in the last two months. They are mostly children. Two-hundred- thousand people moved in the eight days between 26 January and 2 February. UNICEF reports that some 300,000 children in total have left since 1 December. We have all seen chaotic pictures in town after town as vehicles line up in every direction trying to flee. And, as we have told the Council before, the vast majority of people continue to move north and west into the ever-smaller enclave controlled by non-Government groups. Those areas are now dramatically overcrowded, and available accommodation is severely congested. People who have just moved cannot find adequate shelter. The area already hosts large populationsof internally displaced persons (IDPs). There is no unused capacity left in formal camps in Idlib, forcing many IDPs to camp on agricultural land with no infrastructure. Towns and villages in the area are also congested. Approximately 80,000 people are believed to be sheltering in unfinished houses and buildings. We are also seeing more people move north out of Idlib into Turkish-controlled areas in Afrin, Azaz and Al-Bab. Approximately 144,000 people have now moved into those areas. The United Nations has continued to work with the Russian Federation to try to agree pauses in hostilities along pre-identified routes to allow those fleeing to reach temporary safety. From 27 January to 2 February, approximately 4,000 people were supported by local non-governmental organizations during the pauses to move from Ariha, Saraqib and Sarmin to areas closer to Turkey. Civilian infrastructure also continues to be damaged and destroyed, or otherwise affected, by the fighting. The World Health Organization reports that 53 medical facilities have stopped operations, either owing to the direct impact of fighting or because the doctors themselves need to move to safer places. Of the 53 facilities, three were affected by air strikes or shelling, including two attacks on 26 and 30 January in and around Ariha in south-east Idlib. The World health Organization reports that those two attacks killed 10 people and injured 30 others. As health-care services break down, the danger of new disease outbreaks grows. Approximately 26 immunization centres have had to close down since | December 2019. As Geir Pedersen noted, the Secretary-General spoke once again about these issues earlier in the week. He has been very clear. The attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure taking place in north-west Syria are unacceptable; they must be brought to an end. As the Secretary-General has also said, we need an immediate cessation of hostilities. While localized pauses have helped some civilians to flee - and we will continue to work with parties to the conflict to see pauses continue - millions of people continue to face some of the most severe protection challenges that we have seen in all the years of the Syrian crisis. A broader ceasefire continues to be the only way to ensure that civilians are protected. The United Nations and the broader humanitarian community are doing everything possible to address the significant needs of approximately 3 million people who need help in north-western Syria. In January, 1,227 trucks of humanitarian assistance were sent from Turkey through the Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam border crossings. Nearly 900 trucks carried food assistance for some 1.4 million people. Other trucks carried health supplies for almost half a million people, and non-food items for more than 230,000. That is the most aid that the United Nations has sent across the border in any month since the operation was authorized in 2014. The cross-border operation remains essential to the relief effort in Syria. It is still the only way to reach people in need in Idlib. My team has also this week released another humanitarian readiness and response plan for north- west Syria, requesting an additional $336 million for the next six months to address the massive displacement that we have seen since | December 2019. The greatest need is for shelter and protection against the harsh winter conditions - tents, plastic sheeting, stoves, warm clothes and fuel. We announced in December 2019 the release of $44 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund, which I manage, for the Syria crisis, both to meet needs in refugee hosting countries and for humanitarian activities across Syria. That was the largest-single allocation from the Central Emergency Response Fund for the Syria crisis since the war began. As of today I am releasing an additional $30 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund as the first resources for the new response plan in Idlib. I once again thank the donors whose contributions make this possible, but I also note that the Fund's resources are limited. I urge others to provide money for the new plan as soon as possible. We are also continuing our dialogue with all parties to seek cross-line access. We will use all options available to us to reach people in need, but there has been no substantive progress on cross-line access since I updated the Council last week. Finally, let me reiterate that, despite the efforts of humanitarian organizations, needs are growing exponentially. There are still hundreds of thousands of civilians in what appears to be the area at risk from the current fighting, in addition to all those who have fled since December 2019. What we have been warning Council members about is therefore happening. How severe the crisis becomes will depend on whether a solution can be found to ease the situation for those whoremain in harm's way and those crammed into an ever- smaller area in the north-west of Idlib. Time is short. The front line has now moved to within a few kilometres of Idlib city, the largest urban centre in the north-west. I therefore echo Geir Pedersen's appeal for an immediate end for the hostilities and for a serious international effort to cooperate on Idlib. It is indeed a humanitarian imperative. A ceasefire would be a first step, and compliance with international humanitarian law to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure remains fundamental. As Mr. Pedersen also outlined, however, what is needed is a genuine dialogue by the parties to the conflict towards a sustainable political solution pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015).
