Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Allow me to first thank
all delegations for their support of the resolution and
for the relevant and constructive contributions they
made during the negotiations. Today, the Council has
unanimously renewed the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for
another year. That is a major outcome, which
acknowledges the key stabilizing role that the United
Nations mission has played in the region. One year on,
we can say that UNIFIL has been successful overall in
guaranteeing stability and security in southern Lebanon
and along the Blue Line, thus making a vital
contribution to the quest for peace in the Middle East.
It is also crucial that the resolution reaffirms the target
of a permanent ceasefire and of a long-term solution.
We are convinced that the full stabilization of southern
Lebanon is strictly linked with the fundamental aim of
ajust and lasting peace in the Middle East.

UNIFIL has not had an easy task. It faces many
challenges and risks, as recent tragic events have
unfortunately proved. In that regard, I wish to take this
opportunity to pay tribute once again to the
peacekeepers from Colombia, France and Spain who
lost their lives in Lebanon. It is fundamental the
UNIFIL be provided with the necessary assets to face
the existing risks and threats. We are sure that the
Secretary-General will keep working on the measures
best suited to guaranteeing full security for the
mission's personnel.

Realizing the importance of UNIFIL's task and
the relevance of the challenges it faces, we have
worked from the beginning for prompt, consensus
approval of the resolution. We therefore particularly
welcome today's vote and the renewal of the mandate
the mission was given in 2006. Coming as it does well
in advance of the expiration of UNIFIL's mandate and
with the unanimous support of the Council, it sends a
strong message of support to UNIFIL and to the
Department for Peacekeeping Operations, highlighting
the consensus in the Council and in the international
community on the effective and irreplaceable role of
UNIFIL.

