Mr. Al-Hamadi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to congratulate
you on your presidency of the Security Council this
month and for the work that you are doing, particularly
in convening today's meeting. I would like to thank
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his briefing this morning. I
welcome the presence of Mr. Riad Malki, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine.

Last year, we saw a historic turn when Palestine
was granted the status of non-member observer State
by the General Assembly, following the recognition
of the State of Palestine by a majority of States in the
world. Although that event was long delayed, it did
take place, and in the right forum. However, that is
still not enough. Consensus on finding a solution for
the question of Palestine and for achieving peace in the
Middle East through the two-State solution requires
the recognition of Palestine as a full State Member of
the United Nations. We therefore invite the Security
Council to support those efforts.

Despite that international consensus, the
Government ofIsrael has not expressed a sincere interest
in the two-State solution or a genuine desire for peace
based on it. The strongest proof of Israel's reaction to
Palestine being granted observer State status was its
stepping up its illegal settlement activities, causing
14 members of the Security Council to reject those
measures, which clearly stand in the way of peace.
Accordingly, we invite the Security Council to meet in
order to explicitly condemn illegal Israeli settlements
and to promote the peace process in accordance with
instruments of international legitimacy and terms of
reference, and to generate the political will likely to
result in ajust and lasting solution.

In addition to settlements, Israel is treating the
issue of East Jerusalem in a way that does not serve the
cause of peace. We would again insist that measures
taken by the Israel to Judaize Al-Quds and suppress
that holy city's Arab and Islamic identity are null and
void and without legal effect. Al-Quds will remain an
Arab, Islamic and Christian city with its mosques and
churches. There will be no Palestinian State without
Al-Quds and there will be no Al-Quds without the
Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Security Council must therefore
adopt a decision or resolution that establishes an
international committee to investigate unjust Israeli
practices and all measures undertaken by Israel to
eliminate the Arab Islamic identity of Al-Quds.

A number of Palestinian prisoners have higlighted
their suffering by undertaking a hunger strike. We ask
that an end be put to their suffering and that Israel be
obliged to release them. We also call for the lifting of
the economic siege and of the withholding of tax and
customs revenues imposed on Palestinians and on the
Palestinian Authority. Israel's unfair policies do not
serve the cause of just and lasting peace in any way
whatsoever. We hope that the new Israeli Government
will adopt an approach that is in harmony with the
peace process and in accordance with international law.

In that regard, we reiterate that the solution to the
crisis in the Middle East depends on Israel's withdrawal
from the occupied Palestinian territories, the occupied
Syrian Golan and the remaining Lebanese territory
occupied by Israel, as well as an end to Tel Aviv's
violations of Lebanese sovereignty. The State of Qatar
is committed to supporting the brotherly Palestinian
people in order that it may obtain its full inalienable
rights.

The State of Qatar contributes to the relief efforts
in Gaza through reconstruction efforts following the
Israeli aggression. We note in that regard the visit to
Gaza of His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa
Al-Thani, Amir of the State of Qatar, who expressed
the solidarity of the Government and the people of the
State of Qatar with the besieged Palestinian people.
He undertook to contribute to the rebuilding of Gaza
through a number of projects involving basic services,
including schools and hospitals. The Security Council
must convey a firm message to Israel to end the unjust
siege and stop bombing civilians.

With regard to Syria, the Council was briefed last
week by Ms. Navi Pillay and Ms. Valerie Amos with
regard to human rights, emergency assistance and the
need to provide aid to that brotherly country. I recall
that early this year and for the first time in several
months, the United Nations issued an estimated death
toll in Syria, which has reached over 60,000, while
the number of Syrian refugees could exceed 1,100,000
before the middle ofthe year. These figures do not even
take into account the internally displaced or those who
suffer food insecurity and lack fuel, energy and other
basic services. They do indicate, however, that Syria
is experiencing an urgent humanitarian disaster that
requires an international intervention on the part of the
United Nations and the international community.

The sole party responsible for the deterioration
of the situation in Syria is the Syrian regime, which
met the will of its people with heavy weapons. The
international community, including the State of Qatar,
has tried to support a peaceful solution to the crisis
through the efforts of representatives like the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, in the hope that the Syrian
regime would respond to his appeals and to the voice of
reason. But at every turn it impedes those endeavours,
choosing instead a bloody approach and a destructive
security situation. Here, I am referring specifically to
the statements of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
the Syrian regime, which described the Joint Special
Representative as biased towards a conspiracy targeting
Syria. That demonstrates that the Syrian regime is not
at all ready to engage positively with the international
community or the Syrian opposition.

The recent reports of the use of toxic substances
by the regime in the area of Homs point to the use of
chemical weapons, proving that the regime disregards
the lives of its citizens. The regime has killed or injured
hundreds of thousands of citizens, destroyed entire
neighbourhoods and villages, schools and universities.
It has attacked citizens who were buying bread. It has
committed the worst possible crimes - the slaughter
of women and children with knives, rape and the
desecration of places of worship and the looting of
property.

