The President (interpretation from Spanish): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council to be held this
year, I should like to wish a happy new year to all
members of the Security Council as well as to all Members
of the United Nations and to the Secretariat. On behalf of
the Council, I welcome the new members of the Council:
Argentina, Canada, Malaysia, Namibia and the Netherlands.
We all look forward with confidence to their participation
in the work of the Council. We are convinced that their
experience and wisdom will be of invaluable assistance in
the discharge of the Council's enormous responsibilities.

I should like also to express the Council's deep
gratitude to the outgoing members for their important and
decisive contributions to its work. The representatives of
Costa Rica, Japan, Kenya, Portugal and Sweden have all, in
an excellent manner, contributed their talents to the
business of the Council.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President (interpretation from Spanish): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of January 1999, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Jassim Mohamrned Buallay, Permanent Representative of
Bahrain to the United Nations, for his service as President
of the Security Council for the month of December 1998.
I am sure I speak for all members of the Security Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Buallay for
the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

I should like also to express our appreciation for the
cooperation extended to us in our work by Counsellor Liu
Jieyi of China, who I understand is leaving us.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Sierra Leone in which he requests to

be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dahor (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have received photocopies
of letters dated 6 January 1999 from the Charge d'affaires
ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Liberia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council and 7 January 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of Togo to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, which will be
issued as documents of the Security Council under the
symbols S/l999/17 and S/l999/ 18, respectively.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the attacks by armed rebels of the former
junta and Revolutionary United Front in the capital
of Sierra Leone, and at the resulting suffering and
loss of life. It condemns the unacceptable attempt by
the rebels to overthrow by violence the
democratically elected Government of Sierra Leone.
The Council also condemns the rebels' continued
campaign to terrorize the population of Sierra Leone
and especially the atrocities committed against
women and children. The Council demands that the
rebels lay down their arms immediately and cease all
violence. The Council reiterates once more its firm
support for the legitimate and democratically elected
Government of President Kabbah.

"The Security Council strongly condemns all
those who have afforded support, including through
the supply of arms and mercenaries, to the rebels in
Sierra Leone. In this context, it expresses its grave
concern at reports that such support to the rebels is

 

being afforded in particular from the territory of
Liberia. It reaffirms the obligation on all Member
States to comply strictly with existing arms
embargoes. In that context, the Security Council urges
the Committee created pursuant to resolution 985
(1995) and the Committee created pursuant to
resolution 1132 (1997) to pursue active measures to
investigate violations of the embargoes and to report
to the Council, with recommendations as appropriate.

"The Security Council stresses the importance of
dialogue and national reconciliation for the restoration
of lasting peace and stability to Sierra Leone. The
Council welcomes the efforts to resolve the conflict
being undertaken by the Government of President
Kabbah, and further endorses the approach set out in
the final communique of the meeting in Abidjan of the
Committee of Six on Sierra Leone of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) of 28
December 1998 (S/ 1998/ 1236). It welcomes the offers
made by leaders in the region aimed at resolving the
conflict and in that context urges them, including the
ECOWAS Committee of Six, to facilitate the peace
process. It also calls on the Secretary-General to do all
he can to assist in these efforts, including through his
Special Representative.

"The Security Council also expresses its concern
at the serious humanitarian consequences of the
escalating fighting in Sierra Leone. It calls on all
States and international organizations to provide
appropriate humanitarian assistance and on all parties
in Sierra Leone to afford humanitarian access. The
Council notes that United Nations agencies are
working with the increasing numbers of refugees in
neighbouring countries and calls on all States to
ensure that the humanitarian agencies are adequately
resourced to meet the additional demand.

"The Security Council commends the forces of
the Military Observer Group of West African States
in Sierra Leone for the courage and determination
they have demonstrated over the last year in their
efforts to maintain security in Sierra Leone. It also
commends the key contribution of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in efforts to restore stability in the
country. The Council urges all States urgently to
provide resources, including logistical and other
support, to help maintain an effective peacekeeping
presence in Sierra Leone.

"The Security Council expresses its intention to
continue to monitor the situation closely and to
consider urgently any further action which may be
necessary."
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l999/l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 7.05 pm.

