Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Kobler
and Mr. Skoog for their briefings.
At the outset, I ensure Mr. Kobler of the United
Kingdom's full support of his work and reiterate its
commitment to the Libyan Political Agreement - the
sole framework for a political solution to the situation in
Libya. Sadly, as he has made clear, its implementation
remains mixed, at best. I very much agree with all seven
points of hos seven-point agenda. As the penholder
for Libya, we see three interlinked areas of concern:
security, the economy and the political process.

In 2017, security has deteriorated significantly,
particularly now in the South, where there are renewed
escalating clashes, which are edging the country
towards civil war. The United Kingdom condemns all
such violence, as well as threats of military action and
reports of gross human rights abuses by armed groups.
Such acts have no place in the Libya of today, and we
are clear that the military and other security structures
need to be under civilian and political oversight. As the
Ambassadors to Libya of China, France, Russia, the
United Kingdom and the United States said last week,
there is a difference between acts against the terrorist
threat and acts that can lead to further deterioration
in Libya.

On tackling terrorism, it is important to recognize
the defeat of Da'esh in Sirte, and I pay tribute to all
involved and acknowledge the many lives lost in that
effort. But in spite of that success, we are now faced
with a threat that is dispersed across Libya. Those who
continue to undermine effective governance in Libya
are feeding the terrorist threat by creating ungoverned
spaces. It is a threat that extends not only across Libya
but across the region as a whole. Such ungoverned spaces
create conditions for human trafficking and criminal
networks to profit from the political and security
vacuum in parts of Libya. Irregular migration can only
be tackled properly by a strong and stable Government.

Turning to my second point, the economy also
remains vulnerable to the volatile political and security
situation. We need to see real improvements. The
Presidency Council and the Central Bank must work
cooperatively to address the liquidity crisis and ensure
that public services like water and electricity are
sustained throughout Ramadan. We need to see an end
to parallel institutions undermining the Presidency
Council. There has been some progress, including the
dispersal of the budgets in the early months of 2017
and the economic dialogue on the detail of fiscal and
monetary policy now taking place in Tripoli, but it is
clear that more steps are needed.

Throughout, it is crucial that Libya's oil resources
remain neutral and be used to benefit the whole country.
The continued unity of the National Oil Corporation
is essential to ensuring that revenues be used for the
national good. We call for much-needed investment in
the maintenance of oil infrastructure to help increase
national exports and reduce the drain on the economy.

Turning to my final point, the common thread
in both the security and the economic situations is,
of course, the political process, but I am pleased to
reiterate here in the Chamber the United Kingdom's
continued support for the Presidency Council and the
Government Of National Accord, headed by Prime
Minister Serraj, as the legitimate executive authorities
under the Libyan Political Agreement, in line with
resolution 2259 (2015).

But as the security and economic instability
illustrate, Libya needs urgent progress towards full
political reconciliation now more than ever. We support
early signs of progress to bridge political differences,
including regional efforts Within the framework of the
United Nations-led political process and reengagement
by Libya's legitimate institutions, the House Of
Representatives and the High State Council, with
preparations for dialogue.

We have a difficult and long road ahead, so we urge
all parties to commit to progress. We underline our
firm opposition to any attempt to disrupt the political
process. All those who have a role to play, including
those still outside the Libyan Political Agreement, must
engage constructively and in the spirit of compromise.
The international community, as Mr. Kobler reminded
us, must continue to support them.

We welcome the Secretary-General's commitment
to Libya as one of his personal priorities, and we
reiterate our full support for the central role of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya in advancing
the political process in Libya. As the penholder on
this issue in the Council, we will carry on playing our
part. We will continue to monitor the situation in Libya
closely. We will support all efforts to reach a more
inclusive political settlement within the framework of
Libyan Political Agreement and we will work with the
Presidency Council and the Government of National
Accord in their efforts to serve the people of Libya,
because the continued support of the Security Council
and the wider international community will remain
vital if we are to secure a better future for all Libyans.

