Mr. Shalgham (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting so that we can follow the developing situation
in Libya. I would like to welcome Mr. Ian Martin and
to thank him for his efforts in Libya. I can say that he
has been able to build a strong relationship with the
parties concerned. Every time he visits Libya, I meet
and speak with him. I believe that his approach will
produce optimal results. I would also like to thank
Ms. Pillay for her presence here and for her efforts to
assess the situation in Libya.

All Council members are aware of what happened
in Libya. We experienced an atrocious war, in which
acts were committed that run counter to the nature of
Libyan society and our Arabic and Islamic culture and
precepts. Massacres and rapes were carried out on the
orders of Muammar Al-Qadhafi. In one family, the
father, grandfather and daughter were raped on
Al-Qadhafi's orders. In Zuwara, young girls, aged 14
and 15, were raped, their bloodied and naked bodies
thrown into the streets. That was truly a tragedy.

The situation is not bright. There are
complications and problems. There is an interim
Government and a National Transitional Council
(NTC). There is power without legitimacy and
legitimacy without power. There are armed young
people who need structure and leadership. There are
detention centres that we are unaware of, and not
subject to, State control. We do not accept and
condemn the use of such detention centres. However,
the key point is that we will not accept mistakes, nor
will we attempt to hide them. Errors have been made
and there have been transgressions and complications,
but we do not condone or accept them. We will make
changes.

There is an electoral law, on which Mr. Abdel
Jalil has said that 14,000 comments had been made. I
have a number of comments myself and I have shared
them with Mr. J alil. The question of exclusion has been
completely rejected. We have simply said that those
whose hands have been stained with Libyan blood and
those who have stolen money from the Libyan people
will face justice. As an Ambassador and Minister under
Al-Qadhafi, I will be the first to subject myself to any
such judicial proceeding.

We have an interim justice law, which is not yet
in full force. There are approximately 8,000 prisoners
being held in Tripoli. We have spoken to our brothers
there and have said that all individuals who did not
commit a crime or who did not participate in any
massacres can obtain their passports without delay, but
be placed under surveillance.

The 17 February revolution was launched in
order to protect laws and human rights. In Benghazi,
the revolution was sparked by the Abu Salim prison
massacre. It was a revolution for justice and human
rights. Ms. Pillay and Mr. Martin did not distinguish
between the Tuaregs from near Misrata and those from
Algeria; the two groups are quite often confused. The
Tuaregs are Libyan citizens who were not affected, but
Al-Qadhafi did call on the Tuaregs of Mali and Niger
to serve him. We requested that the latter return to their
homes. The Libyan Tuaregs, however, are respected
people and will remain at home in Libya. The Tuaregs,
who originated from black Africa, remained near
Misrata following the abolition of slavery. They were
not targeted because they were black, but because they
supported Al-Qadhafi and took part in rape and other
crimes in Misrata. I attempted to bring about
reconciliation, but ran out of time. We have asked the
religious leaders to intervene for the purposes of
reconciliation in Benghazi and Tripoli, and hope that a
solution will be found in the near future.

In terms of administrative issues in Libya, I
personally believe that we have been slightly off the
mark. The country was not divided into governorships
or even into states, which creates complications in
terms of organizing elections. There is some confusion
in that regard. I spoke with Mr. Martin the day before
yesterday and told him that it was possible for him and
his team to look into those issues and into
administrative preparations in Libya.

Armed combatants must not be forgotten. They
are the ones who launched the revolution. They are the
ones who made the sacrifice. Either we establish a
consultative council for them, or some of them can
become members of the National Transitional Council.
Some are doctors, university professors and lawyers.
We cannot exclude or marginalize them. That would be
unthinkable. We cannot manage Libya with a single
group of people who have lived outside our country for
more than 30 years and who are unfamiliar with it. We
have said as much in all frankness to our Libyan
brothers.

In terms of reconciliation, that is an extremely
important issue. The role of reconciliation can be
assumed by religious leaders, elders and experts,
following the examples set by South Africa or the
Kingdom of Morocco. Reconciliation is extremely
important. We must reject any exclusionist policy in
that process.

Turning to the question of women, statistics show
that women account for more than 53 per cent of
Libya's population. A reference was made earlier to the
10 per cent rate of political participation by women. I
believe that those quotas have been eliminated. In the
African Union, we have a gender-based decision that
substantially increases the quota for women's
legislative and political participation to 50 per cent. We
have therefore done away with that 10 per cent quota.

If we want to build a modern society, we cannot
leave women out of it, nor can we disregard their role.
That is not part of Islamic law. Islam does not leave
women out or discriminate against them. Progress
cannot be achieved through discrimination. We need at
least 30 per cent representation of women, but if we
deny the role of women, then we will not see
development. In Egypt, in Libya and in Tunisia,
women say that they will not vote for someone who
does not hear their voice. Vote and voice are actually
the same word in Arabic: "saut". So we have to address
this issue of women, and we must do so courageously
and loudly.

Progress and freedom cannot begin by looking
backwards. There was a religious movement in Europe
after the Second World War. After such developments,
people look to religion and values. That is positive.
What we are seeing here are the basic principles and
values of Islam - tolerance, co-existence, forgiveness.
But Islam does not mean slavery, nor does it mean

mutilation or stoning as punishment. We want the
values and precepts of Islam. The Koran stipulates
tolerance, forgiveness, kindness towards the family and
orphans, and punishment for those who commit murder
or who deprive others of their lives or prosperity.
Those are the values that we need, not the rhetoric of
vengeance.

In Bani Walid, for example, there were several
incidents. There is, of course, the whole background
with pro- and anti-Qadhafi forces. Some members of
my delegation are from Bani Walid, and yes, after 42
years of a closed society and of repression and spilled
blood, there were certain internal incidents.

In general terms, there is one overall positive
aspect, which is the great freedom that is felt in Libya
today, thanks to the new openness and the process of
discussion. Democracy makes it possible to manage
and handle differences in opinion. Dictatorship
imposes agreement. This process of managing
differences is something new for us. From its very
beginnings, Libya has never had political parties or
unions, not even under the king. Only for one year,
when it was a British protectorate, did we have
political parties. Things take time. Naturally, we have
problems. However, freedom, democracy and openness
are in full bloom, and the Libyan people yearn for
progress.

We are a nation of only 7 million. We have
important resources, including human ones. More than
20,000 Libyans have studied in American universities.
More than 90 per cent of Libyan women are educated,
as are 95 per cent of the men. We also have important
natural resources at all levels.

As to the NATO victims, there were four
incidents. In Brega, NATO bombarded revolutionary
tanks. The commander of the forces told me at the time
that the revolutionaries had been conducting an
unprogrammed manoeuvre and had thus become victim
of the bombing. After another important incident,
Al-Qadhafi said that NATO had bombed civilians, but
he sent his troops into places such as schools and
hospitals where there were civilians. There was also
another incident, for which NATO apologized. As to
the remainder, one of those responsible had stored
weapons in a private home, and that home was
supposedly bombed by NATO, even though we have
information that it was Al-Qadhafi himself who
bombed the house. This is under investigation.
I have a memory I would like to share. There
were 1,800 telephone calls between Al-Qadhafi and
Mr. Al-Mahmoudi, the Prime Minister at the time, and
Mr. Al-Mahmoudi asked the head of the Al Khadra
Hospital to put the bodies of Al-Qadhafi's victims in
locations that had been bombed by NATO. The head of
the hospital responded by saying that the victims'
families were refusing to do that. There was a
conversation between a father and his son, and the
father was saying that his son had been wounded by
NATO when the mother's voice was heard from behind
saying that that was a lie, and that her son had been
injured in a car crash. I repeat, there were 1,800
conversations, which we will transcribe and send the
Council a copy. People say that they have opened
empty graves and that there were no more bodies to put
in them.

On 25 February I said that by March, if NATO
did not intervene, Benghazi would become the largest
mass grave in the world. Al-Qadhafi had sent a
60-kilometre-long military column to destroy
Benghazi. I hope that the accusations against NATO
will not be used as an excuse to protect other tyrants. I
hope that does not happen.

We all know history. We all know how Poland
and France were liberated from Nazism, and how
Kuwait rid itself of Saddam Hussein. One of the
physicians who was very close to Muammar
Al-Qadhafi told me that NATO was so precise that if
they wanted to cut off one ear they could leave the
other one intact.

As to the list of names, the Palestinian Centre for
Human Rights, the Arab Association for Human Rights
and the Public International Law Group came to see us
in Libya. We opened the doors of prisons and hospitals
to them and they undertook investigations, including of
NATO activities.

Two hours ago, I received a message from Tripoli
concerning civilian victims of NATO. We have already
established a commission to consolidate information
and data from the National Transitional Council, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Ministers of Defence,
Justice and the Interior, and the Human Rights Council,
as Ms. Pillay has stated, so that information can be
gathered from sites that were targeted by NATO.

Secondly, there will be consultations with
Ambassador Dirk Brengelmann, NATO Assistant
Secretary General, who is currently in Libya and has
begun talks with the Minister for Foreign Affairs today.
The new Libya is prepared to cooperate with any
international investigating body under the auspices of
the United Nations. We intend to establish a mechanism
to indemnify victims with financial and moral support
once we have obtained the results of the investigations.
All investigation results will be made public.

One of my assistants showed me orders to burn
me and all the members of my family in my village.
One of my nephews was found dead. One of my
cousins was slain; another saw all his family members
gunned down. Had it not been for the protection of the
revolutionaries from the north and for NATO, my
entire tribe would have been killed. More than 500,000
people would have died in Benghazi. In one hour, 95
people were killed in Benghazi by Al-Qadhafi forces.
Two MiG planes bombed Benghazi, and that was not
the act of NATO forces. In one month, Misrata, Brega,
Ajdabiya, Zawiya, Fashloom and other towns were
destroyed. Graves were opened and robbed. NATO did
not do that.

With respect to the rhetoric about Christians and
Crusaders within the NATO forces, there were people
from Qatar, Jordan and the United Arab Emirates who
fought together with us. They were not part of a
crusade; that was slander promoted by Al-Qadhafi.
Al-Qadhafi referred to an older woman who was
supposedly the mother of Shalgham - myself - and
was reported to have said that she did not wish to
recognize him any more. But my mother died more
than 10 years ago. It was a lie.

I have spoken frankly. We are not hiding the
truth. We have been telling the good and the bad. Once
again, on behalf of the Libyan people, I would like to
thank the Council for its courage in coming to the
salvation of Libya. I thank all countries that sent planes
and soldiers to assist and save Libya. King Idris and
Al-Qadhafi sold oil to Europe and to America, and we
will do so too. There is not one single foreign soldier
on Libyan territory, so it is not worthwhile exploring
that issue further.

On behalf of the Libyan people, I would like to
thank the Council for its great, historic decision to save
my homeland.

