Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thank Ms. Sandra Honore, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
comprehensive briefing and offer her our full support
for her efforts and those of her team.

Haiti is at a crossroads in its history. Over the past
few months, the Haitian people have faced immense
challenges at all levels - political, economic and
humanitarian. Despite all those challenges, in 2015
the Haitian authorities were ready to hold presidential
and legislative elections. The political landscape in the
country is not altogether different today, although the
outbreak of violence before the second round of elections
to derail the transitional process and the postponement
of the second round of presidential elections could have
led to a political regression.

But the will of the Haitian people restored the
process to its propr course and demonstrated their
resolve to overcome the current political impasse by
signing on to the transitional plan and agreeing to hold
presidential elections, which have been postponed
until 24 April. I note the importance of holding the
postponed presidential elections as scheduled in
order not to send Haiti into a new political crisis with
substantial security, economic and social implications
for the Haitian people.

I commend the efforts of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), to
which Egypt has contributed a police component.
MINUSTAH has played a pivotal role in building the
national capacities of Haiti, particularly the security
and judicial entities in view of the coming reports
on the development of the Haitian National Police
addressing the recent violence. In that regard, I appeal
to all Member States and troop-contributing countries
to continue to support the Haitian National Police
and to step up their efforts to complete the building
of national institutions by providing logistic support
through bilateral cooperation with Haiti. Egypt stands
ready to make further contributions in the next phase.

Against that backdrop, we cannot ignore the
humanitarian dimensions of the current Haitian
landscape. Egypt expresses its concern at the
deteriorating humanitarian situation and the difficulties
in ensuring funding for the humanitarian crisis. This
adds a further impediment to the efforts of the United
Nations in support of the efforts of the Government
and civil society to alleviate the hardships facing the
Haitian people and the country in implementing the
strategies to end the cholera epidemic and address the
lack of food security for 1.5 million people in Haiti.

Before concluding, I would like to stress the
importance of the joint transition plan prepared by
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team,
which includes areas that require the open and substantial
support of international partners. We also look forward
to receiving the evaluation by the assessment mission
sent by the Secretary-General. Egypt would like to
stress the importance of the joint transition plan and
the assessment of the future needs of Haiti and their
impact on the future stability of the country, and of
addressing the proposals put forward in that regard.
Haitian national stakeholders should also help in setting
priorities, as international strategies and programmes
would support national efforts. In this context, we call
for genuine partnership with the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in order
to assist Haiti in a more comprehensive manner and to
facilitate the transition from the instability that Haiti
has endured in recent decades.

In closing I would like to express our full support
for the nation of Haiti, while expressing Egypt's full
confidence in its ability to get through this critical and
sensitive stage.

