Mr. Simmons: It gives me great pleasure today
to address this gathering on behalf of the Secretary-
General of NATO and to represent that organization in
today's very important discussion.

Allow me first to express my thanks and
congratulations to Romania for having called for and
prepared this timely and important event. I should like
also to thank the Prime Minister of Romania and you,
Mr. Foreign Minister, for joining us in this important
discussion. I also very much welcome the participation
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and his
comments, which show his own confidence in, and
important stress on, the cooperation between regional
organizations and the United Nations.
Our new century offers no shortage of challenges,
and, under the United Nations, all the organizations
that are represented in today's discussion have
recognized them and are trying to deal with them.
Globalization in this century offers our societies the
opportunity to become more independent, creative and
prosperous, but it also makes them more vulnerable.
The rapid dissemination of technology and information
makes entirely new ways of production available to
many people, but it has also brought the spectre of
more States' developing weapons of mass destruction
and the spread of small arms and light weapons.

More than in any other place, in this city we are
aware also of the challenge of terrorism and the risk it
presents to us all. Regional conflicts confront us with a
cruel choice between costly indifference and
engagement. The breadth and diversity of these
challenges can be addressed only once we adopt a
broad concept of security - a concept which, as many
others have said, moves beyond military matters alone
and includes political, economic and social elements.
Only such a broader approach will enable us to move
beyond dealing with mere symptoms.

To put such a broad approach to security into
practice requires the cooperation of all major
institutions - global, regional and subregional. Over
the past decade, such cooperation has emerged,
including between the United Nations and NATO. After
four decades of respectful distance between them, both
institutions have come a long way, not only in
formulating common goals, but, most importantly, in
pursuing them together. Indeed, since the end of the
cold war, the interdependence between NATO and the
United Nations has consistently grown.

Since the cold war ended, the United Nations has
been able to play a much more visible and more
welcome role in managing global security. That role has
also put tremendous burdens on the Organization -
politically, militarily and financially. Not surprisingly,
therefore, the past decade has also seen a stronger
reliance on regional organizations, not as a challenge to
the primary role of the United Nations, but, rather, to
support it. NATO is proud to be one of those
organizations. Although the alliance does not consider
itself formally a regional organization under Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter, NATO's transition
from a purely collective-defence organization into a
security manager in a broad sense has enabled it to act in
that same spirit, first in Europe and now beyond. NATO
is currently undertaking United Nations-mandated peace
support operations in the Balkans and Afghanistan and is
now exploring options to help train Iraqi security forces,
in close consultation with the interim Government in
Baghdad, in response to the call of this Council.

It is not important today to recall the history of
interaction between the United Nations and NATO,
from the early cooperation in Bosnia all the way to
Afghanistan. But that good record has been set, and we
should look to the future and, to possibilities for
additional cooperation. Let me raise three areas where,
I believe, we can develop such cooperation.

First, NATO and the United Nations should seek
to broaden their areas of dialogue. We now have, and
should continue, regular exchanges with the
Secretariat, both the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs. The
current dialogue naturally concentrates on our peace
support operations. But as Afghanistan has
demonstrated, what we call failed States and terrorism
are sometimes connected. Hence, our peace support
operations, such as the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), are often based in the effort
to combat terrorism. We all know that to fight terrorism
effectively, the response must be multifaceted and
comprehensive, and that requires continued close
cooperation among international organizations.

The Security Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee has an important role to play in that respect,
and NATO welcomes the recent enhancement of that
body through the creation of its Executive Directorate.
We believe that the issue of terrorism, as well as the
threat of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
will warrant being added to the agenda of our regular
and intensive discussions, as the Secretary-General has
indicated.

In our long-standing cooperation in peace
operations, I also see room for further improvement.
NATO has proved its ability to act outside Europe - as
our recent summit declaration indicated - wherever
threats, crises or challenges arise. As Secretary-General
Annan argued in his address to NATO and
parliamentarians last March, he could also envisage
NATO playing a role in Africa, either directly or over
the horizon. Such a role is not likely being discussed,
but we think that NATO's recent offer to help Iraq
indicates that NATO and the United Nations in fact
need to prepare for the possibility of cooperation in
regions other than Europe and Central Asia. It is in that
context that I would also recall the decision taken by
NATO's recent summit in Istanbul to develop its
cooperation with its Mediterranean dialogue partners
and to open a discussion with other countries in the
broader Middle East.

Secondly, we need to reflect on how to build a
more structured relationship between NATO and the
United Nations. In our collaboration so far in the
Balkans and in Afghanistan, cooperation has been
particularly good, as we say, on the ground, and we
have developed means of cooperating with the United
Nations representatives in Sarajevo, in Kabul and in
other areas. Those things must continue. We also
regularly inform the Secretary-General and the Council
about our activities. To advance that goal, we have
liaison arrangements here at the United Nations that
have proved very useful. The groundwork for such
enhanced cooperation has certainly been laid. The long
record of NATO-United Nations interaction and
operations in support of training and in exercises in
education has underscored the merit of an ever-
deepening dialogue in ensuring the transparency of our
efforts.

But we should examine options to go forward.
That is why I am pleased to note that just recently a
United Nations team visited NATO to gain insights into
how NATO plans peace support operations and whether
NATO commands can offer further support to the
United Nations in that area in the future. While that
may fall short of a structured relationship, it bodes well
for a future discussion between our organizations to
cooperate pragmatically and without inhibitions.

That brings me to my third point: the need for a
flexible and pragmatic approach to regional
cooperation. Notwithstanding some similarities, each
crisis - as many have noted here - has its own
peculiarities. Hence, it does not pay to strive for
strategies or models that are universally applicable.
Indeed, judging from NATO's experience with regional
crises, it pays to be more imaginative. I shall mention
here only NATO's decisions to appoint political
representatives, the Secretary-General's special
representatives, first in southern Serbia, later in
Macedonia and finally in Afghanistan. Initially, NATO
members were perhaps sceptical of that effort, but it
has become a characteristic of our engagement in
dealing with peace support operations. And it shows
that, in fact, we must be flexible in managing these
situations.

To repeat, dealing with the challenges of the
twenty-first century requires a multi-institutional
approach, a true architecture of institutions. In Europe,
the key elements of such an architecture are already in
place with NATO, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Working together, those organizations can bring a
distinct approach, but also their different capabilities,
to providing for greater security. Together, they offer
the chance to establish a new quality of security in
Europe and beyond. Their cooperation must expand as
we expand our cooperation with the United Nations.
Our experience in Europe is unique; it cannot be
transferred wholesale elsewhere, but it can make an
impact and have a positive influence elsewhere as well.

NATO, for its part, wants to be engaged where it
can make an additional contribution. It can serve as a
model of how various institutions can cooperate and in
so doing can generate the positive political momentum
that this meeting demonstrates. Again, I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, and your Government for
convening it. As we look forward to the sixtieth
anniversary of the United Nations Charter, that is an
important and encouraging step for the future.

