Mr. Takasu (Japan): Japan welcomes the fact that
the Security Council continues to pay utmost attention
to the plight of civilians in armed conflict. We
welcome today's open debate and thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2007/643).

There has been a decline in the number of
conflicts being waged around the world, but far too
many civilians continue to fall victim to brutality and
degrading treatment. While reporting certain
encouraging developments, the report of the Secretary-
General provides us with the stark reality of civilians,
particularly the vulnerable, being deliberately targeted
for military attack and sexual violence in many conflict
situations.
07-60635

We are deeply concerned about increasing
casualties among humanitarian workers due to
deliberate attacks. We need to promote a humanitarian
space in armed conflict. Humanitarian organizations,
including United Nations agencies and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, must be
able to discharge their responsibilities to deliver
essential services. To that end, it is of vital importance
to ensure the security and safety of humanitarian
workers. We call upon all parties engaged in armed
conflict to comply with the relevant international
humanitarian laws and stop attacking humanitarian
workers.

I would like to underline three points today.

First, with regard to the recommendations of the
report of the Secretary-General, we support the
proposal to request reports from peacekeeping
operations and other relevant missions on the steps that
have been taken to ensure the protection of civilians, in
response to the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including 1674 (2006). First and foremost, we need to
clarify precisely which concrete measures have been
taken by each operation and how effective they have
been. That basic information will afford us good
opportunities to take effective action in the future. We
need to respond and take remedial action on each
specific situation, based on reliable information.

In order to make this process effective, in
formulating and monitoring the mandates and activities
of peacekeeping and other missions, the Security
Council needs to use the Aide Memoire for the
Consideration of Issues Pertaining to the Protection of
Civilians in its daily deliberations; it is a practical
checklist relating to the protection of civilians.

Secondly, I would like to address the issue of
impunity. There is no doubt that perpetrators of crimes
must be held accountable for their actions. Regrettably,
however, in many conflict situations impunity prevails
due to lack of action and often leads to a cycle of
violence. The question is how to strike the proper
balance between national reconciliation, on the one
hand, and punishing those who have done wrong, on
the other. This needs to be carefully considered,
including its sequence.

Yet when we succeed in establishing the rule of
law and proper judicial systems, we contribute greatly
to durable peace and stability. Therefore Japan has
taken initiatives in the field of international justice. We
5
acceded to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court last month after completing all the
necessary ratification measures, and we are ready to
work actively to ensure that the Court functions
effectively and fulfils its objective.

With regard to the Khmer Rouge trials, the
internal rules were adopted last June. To meet the costs
of the trials, Japan has made a voluntary contribution
of $21.6 million, representing 40 per cent of the total
cost. Japan has also provided an international judge to
the Supreme Court Chamber. It is our very strong hope
that trials will proceed promptly and fairly and that
they will result at long last in bringing to justice those
who are guilty of committing atrocious acts.

Thirdly, I would like to underline the importance
of controlling conventional arms. Japan is fully aware
of the humanitarian problems caused by cluster
munitions. In order to respond effectively and
practically, it is necessary to develop a process in
which all major producers and possessors can
participate and both humanitarian and security
objectives are met. We welcome the consensus reached
at the Sixth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention
on Certain Conventional Weapons in Geneva last week.

Also, Japan is of the view that an arms trade
treaty is an important initiative, and we greatly need to
bring about an end to irresponsible transfers through
management of the arms trade.

Japan attaches great importance to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, especially because this is
one of the highest priorities for promoting human
security globally. By promoting human security, we are
working towards a world in which all human beings
will be protected against threats to their lives,
livelihoods and their dignity. In the situation of armed
conflict, more than in any other situation, every effort
must be made to better protect the vulnerable in
society, including refugees, internally displaced
persons, women, children, the elderly and the disabled.

Japan, together with other interested delegations,
has been taking initiatives such as providing assistance
through the United Nations Trust Fund for Human
Security and mainstreaming the human security
concept in United Nations activities through the
Friends of Human Security. Next year, Japan will host
the Fourth Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD-IV) in Yokohama. Under the
theme "Towards a vibrant Africa", human security will
6

be one of the three principal topics under discussion.
Following TICAD-IV, this subject will be taken up
further at the Group of Eight (G-8) Summit in July.
The international community must do all it can to
protect civilians who have the terrible misfortune of
finding themselves caught up in the midst of armed
conflict, and Japan will do its part.

I am grateful that the report of the Secretary-
General reaches the same conclusion as the notion I
have been advocating personally on many occasions
over the years on how to measure the progress of
United Nations activities. This progress is not
measured by the number of reports, resolutions or
guidelines, but by their tangible impact on the people
on the ground who suffer from injustice and fear.

