Mr. Llorenty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to echo
the words of gratitude and congratulations directed to
Ambassador Liu Jieyi for the excellent work carried
out during China's presidency of the Security Council
in July. I also congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your team on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council and assure you of our support and my
delegation's readiness to cooperate with you. We, too,
welcome the new Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, Mr. Vasilly Nebenzia.

I wish also to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime; Mr. Jehangir Khan, Officer in Charge
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism;
Mr. Weixiong Chen, Deputy Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate;
and Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Special Representative of
INTERPOL to the United Nations.

I wish also to thank the Egyptian presidency for
having submitted to the Council resolution 2370
(2017), which we deem particularly important given
the current context and the global challenges that we
are facing. We congratulate Egypt on the work it did
to ensure the unanimous adoption of the resolution,
which is a clear reflection of the spirit of cooperation
that we must maintain in order to confront the scourge
of terrorism. We express our support for the ongoing
efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
as well as the recently created United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia, in line with its
policies aimed at peace, categorically condemns all
acts of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations as
criminal and unjustifiable, regardless oftheir motivation
and wherever and by whomsoever committed, as this
is one of the most serious threats to international
peace and security. That is why we stress the urgency
of implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

Bolivia is Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which
is charged with promoting efforts to strengthen the
exchange of information and knowledge between
United Nations entities and international organizations,
with the specific purpose of ensuring that States,
inter alia, refrain from supplying any kind of support
to non-State actors attempting to develop, acquire,
manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or use, in this
case, nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
delivery systems. The Committee therefore seeks to
promote international cooperation, and the resolution
that we have just adopted is, as has been noted, a fitting
complement to the Committee's mandate.

My country wishes also to underscore the content
of resolution 2370 (2017), which stresses the need for
inter-State cooperation aimed at preventing any kind
of active or passive support for entities or individuals
involved in terrorist acts. We reaffirm the need for States
to combat this human scourge by all peaceful means set
out in the Charter of the United Nations and stress that
measures to prevent it must be in line with the obligations
incumbent upon us by under international law and the
relevant international conventions and protocols, in
particular human rights conventions, refugee law and
international humanitarian law. However, we believe
that such cooperation and technical assistance should
be provided at the request of States and should not be
viewed as another element of interference or political
exploitation, and should be specifically aimed at
building national capacities.
Bolivia believes that the international community's
responsibility to combat this global problem must be
based on a common but differentiated approach in
which weapons-producing countries must acknowledge
their own responsibility, which differs from that of
those countries that suffer the consequences of the
broad availability of weapons that undermine peace
and threaten the lives of people living on the territories
affected as a result of weapons being obtained by those
who intend to carry out terrorist acts.

We deplore the fact that some international treaties
do not address the structural causes of this issue.
Weapons manufacturing is focused on profit and
promotes human suffering. Bolivia rejects war and
along with it the entire industry that funds it.

Today we must focus on preventing the sale of
weapons to those intending to commit terrorist acts.
To that end Bolivia, in the context of the preventive
measures that it has taken, enacted in 2013 a law
regulating firearms, munitions, explosives and other
related materials. The goal of the law is to ensure
peaceful coexistence and safeguard the lives of the
people and prevent, combat and punish crimes related
to the illicit traffic of firearms as well as crimes against
the security and defence of the State and civilian
security by regulating the manufacture, import, export,
storage and commercialization of firearms, munitions,
explosives and other materials.

In this context, we believe that in the context of
preventive measures we should focus in particular
on the financial mechanisms that make it possible to
launder the profits of the illegal arms trade, including
so-called tax havens.

Terrorism today, both locally and globally, is the
major challenge that we are facing, and it is for that
reason that we call on the Security Council to unite
its efforts to combat this scourge through greater
international cooperation, with full respect for
international law and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

