Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretation from French): Allow me first of all to sincerely congratulate
you, Mr. President, on the manner in which you are
guiding the debates of the Council this month. Allow me
also to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the Gambia, for the manner in which he
conducted the Council's debates last month.

We welcome the fact that the Council is getting
down to the job of developing concerted international
action to promote peace and security in Africa. Indeed,
the situation in the great African continent remains a
subject of deep concern requiring a global response.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report on the
causes of conflicts and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa. The report has the
merit of grappling with all aspects of the problem by
analysing the sources of conflict both in terms of their
historical context and in terms of internal and external
factors. It also has the merit of getting down to an overall
plan of action in order to act on potential conflict
situations by establishing conditions of good governance
through respect for human rights and the rule of law, as
well as through responsibility in public administration
through harmonized economic growth and the rigorous
establishment of democracy.

It is high time Africa was given the means to which
it aspires in order to allow it to ensure for its peoples a
harmonious sustainable development, both structurally and
in crisis situations. It is high time Africa was able to free
itself from its debt burden in order to give special priority
to social development, in particular through the
restructuring of international assistance and the opening
up of international markets. It is high time regional
cooperation and integration was supported by harmonizing
the international and bilateral initiatives now under way.
It is high time the bloody conflicts in Africa were put to
an end, in particular by limiting the proliferation of
weapons. It is equally urgent to seriously address ways

 

and means of preventing new conflicts by laying the
foundations of sustained economic growth.

The ills of the African continent are numerous and
interdependent. The Security Council, as well as the
General Assembly and the other United Nations organs
whose responsibilities include Africa, will have to stress
more than ever their interaction if we wish Africa to
overcome the conflicts and underdevelopment that continue
to hinder its development and growth. It is clear that the
Bretton Woods institutions will have to be closely linked to
this great challenge of the beginning of the third
millennium.

Since 1970, more than 30 wars have ravaged Africa,
especially internal conflicts, causing more than 8 million
refugees and displaced persons. The causes have been
diverse and now have given rise to critical self-examination
at the global level. This is the beginning of wisdom.
Colonialism has left a legacy of deep structural and
humanitarian problems that have hindered the building of
States and nations. Africa continues to feel those effects.
The effects are still being felt in terms of economy, social
rights and inter-African trade.

Today it is recognized that it is essential to take swift,
concrete measures at the first signs of crisis. There are
indeed various means available, but we often lack the
common will to contain a brewing crisis. Swift action is
essential, and this applies also to humanitarian assistance,
the corollary of conflicts.

But over and above the concrete urgent measures that
must be taken to prevent new conflicts, it is necessary to
emphasize that a return to normality can occur only through
rebuilding and development at the State, economic and
human levels. The process must be continuous, and it is
useless to resort to short-term or limited operations if they
are not sustained through responsible assistance by the
international community through all its various organs, in
particular through massive financing and coordinated
international action.

In order to compensate for low savings it is essential
to encourage investments, in particular through the Bretton
Woods institutions. Let us not delude ourselves: economic
recovery in Africa can take place only through the generous
and courageous action of the international community. It is
Africa's legitimate right and the duty of the entire
international community. The competitive global trade
environment must be adjusted if international cooperation
is to be really meaningful.

These conclusions have indeed already been reached
and reiterated at numerous international conferences at the
regional level, in the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, in the Group of 77, in the Economic
and Social Council and in the General Assembly. This
fundamental debate today in the Security Council on the
resurgence of Africa should not be a dead letter. Let us
ensure that the dream becomes reality. It is no longer
possible to avoid our obligations to Africa. Several
decades have been lost through endless talk, when we
know what the remedies are to solve the diverse problems
facing Africa. The time is past when, as the Secretary-
General says in paragraph 107 of his report,

"the responsibility for producing change could be
shifted on to other shoulders".

In an interdependent world it makes no sense to
hope for independent development in any region of the
globe unless there is harmonious development on the
great African continent. For our part, we vigorously
support the historic priority to be accorded to Africa in
order to allow it to achieve a future for its peoples that is
commensurate with its rights, its ambitions, its
responsibilities and its wisdom.

