Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, for his
briefing. We commend the men and women of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) on their significant achievements.
Indeed, the transformation of Kosovo should be viewed
as a success story for the United Nations and the
international community as a whole.

My delegation has noted the many positive
developments in Kosovo and in the region since Dr.
Kouchner last briefed the Council in September.
Nevertheless, we recognize that the task ahead for
UNMIK remains challenging, as the Mission continues,
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999), to prepare the province for substantial
autonomy, to promote civilian and administrative
functions, to oversee the development of provisional
institutions and to maintain civil law and order. In all
these areas, UNMIK has risen to the task in
collaboration with its partner organizations in Kosovo.

The gains made in Kosovo over the past year
must be consolidated in the context of creating a multi-
ethnic society with multi-ethnic institutions. A
peaceful, stable and democratic Kosovo cannot be
exclusionary, or the efforts to secure a sustainable
future will fail. My delegation continues to stress that
the participation of Kosovars of all ethnic groups in the
process of reconciliation must remain a priority, as all
groups must feel a sense of ownership ofthe process.

I now wish to focus on a few issues, specifically
the recent elections, the situation of detained and
missing persons, the security situation and human
trafficking, and the return of refugees.

First, my delegation wishes to congratulate the
people of Kosovo, UNMIK and the other organizations
involved in the successful conduct of the recent
municipal elections. These elections, which were
virtually free of violence, should serve to enhance the
work ofthe municipal assemblies and to ensure that the
people of Kosovo participate in governance at the local
level. We regret that the Kosovo Serbs did not
participate in the elections. In this regard, we note
UNMIK's decision to compile lists of candidates for
assemblies in those municipalities where Serbs form
the majority. We would like to hear from Dr. Kouchner
the latest developments on this matter, as well as on the
possibility of UNMIK holding by-elections next year in
the municipalities where Serbs are in the majority. In
his briefing the Special Representative referred to his
meeting with the leaders of the Kosovo Serb
community who have agreed to form a high-level
committee to discuss how to ensure that Kosovo Serbs
are incorporated in the new municipal structures.

Secondly, my delegation has consistently
maintained that unless the issue of detainees and
missing persons is dealt with, there will be no lasting
basis for peace and coexistence. A few months ago, we
welcomed the appointment of Ambassador Henrik
Amneus to address this issue. We now welcome the
recent meeting of UNMIK and a delegation from
Belgrade to discuss concrete steps towards resolving
the question of detainees and missing persons. The
proposed submission of a law on amnesty to parliament
by the Yugoslav authorities will be another significant
step forward. In addition we were pleased to learn that
visits by international organizations and by family
members have been facilitated. We certainly hope that
the recent political developments in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia will lay the groundwork for
reconciliation between the communities in Kosovo. We
also welcome the opening of the Pristina Resource
Centre for Detainees and Missing Persons by UNMIK,
in collaboration with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

My delegation notes with appreciation the
improvement in law and order and security, but we
remain concerned about the continuation of ethnically
motivated attacks. We also note that aggressive
searches by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and UNMIK
police continue to reveal the existence of stockpiles of
military weapons in Kosovo.

In an earlier briefing, we expressed concern about
reports of human trafficking. The unit set up by
UNMIK police clearly demonstrates a recognition of
the need to address this problem. We support the work
of this unit in relation to trafficking, and we would
wish to hear further from Mr. Kouchner about the
success ofthe unit in bringing perpetrators to justice.

Fourthly, the return of refuges to their homes is of
fundamental importance in reconstruction and the
promotion of peace and in moving towards a
sustainable future. The numbers of returnees have been
rising. Reportedly, more than 80,000 Kosovars had
returned by the end of September. We are, however,
concerned about the forced returns, as this intensifies
existing problems. We believe that forced returns are
counterproductive in light of the existing situation; in
the long run, it will only contribute to deteriorating
conditions as UNMIK and other organizations find
themselves unable to deal effectively with the needs of
the returnees for accommodation, social assistance,
access to employment, health care and education. We
have noted Mr. Kouchner's call on the Governments in
the countries of asylum to impose a moratorium on
forced and induced returns over the coming winter, and
we agree with him that these returns must be dealt with
on a gradual basis to give UNMIK and its partner
organizations time to prepare for the expected influx of
some 60,000 returnees in spring 2001.

In concluding, I wish to reiterate Jamaica's
unequivocal support for the work of the Special
Representative and of UNMIK and for the continuation
of the mandate of UNMIK until the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999) are fully implemented.

