Mr. Richardson (United States of America): The
United States appreciates the work of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, and his commitment to improving the situation of
all children affected by armed conflict. In his briefing for
members of the Security Council on 11 June and in his
statement today, he eloquently described the terrible impact
of present-day conflicts on children, both in terms of their
scale and the enormity of the abominations committed.

In today's world, with the increasing number of civil
wars, international standards and principles are being swept
aside. Civilian populations are often deliberately targeted
and children suffer disproportionately as their families are
killed or displaced. One of the most heinous developments
has been the increasing use of young children in armed
conflict, in violation of international law. These children
face real tragedies and human rights abuses. Methods such
as forced recruitment and abduction are used to mobilize
children as young as 12 to participate in armed conflict, and
the subsequent mistreatment they endure and the tactical
manner in which they are used are deplorable. Many are
wounded in both mind and body. Even if they survive their
ordeal, they are often deprived of proper care and
assistance, both during and after the conflict. All have
suffered a severe disruption of their education and
preparation for their lives as adults.

As Special Representative Otunnu noted in his briefing
to members of the Security Council, it is time to exert
pressure to implement the many norms that already exist to
prevent the further abuse and brutalization of children. We
should not be distracted by debates on the margin of the
problem, but focus on where the real abuses are: with
young children whose lives are totally distorted by their
recruitment into armed conflict and brutality, becoming
both perpetrators and victims who are often drugged to
make them comply.

The United States strenuously condemns this use of
children in armed conflict in a manner that violates
international law, and it actively supports international
efforts to curb this practice.

The United States also provides support for
programmes to rehabilitate affected children through
counselling, reconciliation, education and vocational
training in the hope that these methods will facilitate the
reintegration of these children into civilian society, help
them to readjust to being children, and prepare them to
lead peaceful and constructive lives. We support the work
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and the United Nations
Children's Fund in these areas. Because of the particular
vulnerability of refugee and internally displaced children,
the United States is working with UNHCR to strengthen
its infrastructure and activities in order to better address
the special protection and assistance needs of refugee
children. The people of the United States support
numerous international and non-governmental
organizations whose work contributes to alleviating the
suffering of children affected by hostilities.

The United States places the highest priority on
assisting children throughout the world and will continue
to work with the Governments, United Nations agencies,
international and non-governmental organizations and
other partners that have the specific responsibility and
expertise to address the difficult and tragic problem of the
exploitation of children as soldiers. Today's children are
tomorrow's hope. We must all work to ensure that hope
is not extinguished by their participation in armed
conflict.

