The President: I thank Mrs. her briefing. Robinson for I shall now make a statement in my capacity as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam. Seventy-five years ago, the founders of the United Nations instilled into the Charter their hope and aspiration to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. They enshrined in the Charter the principles of sovereign equality, respect for the political independence and territorial integrity of all States, restraint from the threat or use of force, non-interference in the internal affairs of other States and the settlement of disputes by peaceful means. Those fundamental principles have become the foundation of contemporary international law, guiding friendly relations and cooperation among nations, and spurred the development of a comprehensive body of international law governing all areas, from non-proliferation and disarmament and the promotion and protection of human rights to trade, environment and climate change. The history of the United Nations is living proof of the true value of the Charter. Respect for the United Nations Charter has been pivotal in preventing another world war, promoting peaceful solutions for conflicts all over the world and maintaining international peace and security. Recent worrying events in the Middle East underscore ever more the utmost importance of upholding the Charter, especially the principles of non-use of force, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and the peaceful settlement of disputes. Disrespect for the Charter and international law, on the other hand, has been posing serious threats to international and regional peace and security and challenging the very relevance and legitimacy of the United Nations. Today emerging and complex global challenges make it impossible for single nations to cope. Inequality of opportunity, unilateralism and the abandonment of multilateral efforts are among the root causes of protracted armed conflicts. Power politics, the use or threat of use of force, coercion, interference or aggressive actions against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States are escalating tensions in many regions. In such difficult times, the United Nations Charter proves to be more relevant and essential than ever. We must act to ensure that the United Nations and its actions reflect the common interests of all Member States. We must promote multilateralism and equitable relations among States in accordance with the United Nations Charter. That is the only way to maintain international peace and security, promote sustainable development, address climate change and facilitate post-conflict reconstruction, for a better, more peaceful and just world. Viet Nam believes that States bear the primary responsibility in promoting and safeguarding adherence to the United Nations Charter and international law at all levels. We also believe that, as the organ charged by the Charter with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, the Security Council must be at the forefront to ensure respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter, and that Council members must take the lead by setting good examples themselves. In that vein, I wish to put special emphasis on three points. First, we must reinforce our commitment to multilateralism, with the United Nations at its core. States should make maximum use of the tools available to them under the Charter, especially in the areas of conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of international disputes. In that regard, I share entirely the view of the Secretary-General that conflict prevention and mediation are among the most important means to relieve human suffering. Secondly, we should enhance the role of regional organizations and expand their collaboration with the United Nations and the Security Council in the maintenance of peace and security in their respective regions and beyond. In South East Asia, the United Nations Charter was the source of inspiration for the Charter of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), which has become the legal framework of a stronger, more cohesive ASEAN community. ASEAN today has affirmed its central, indispensable role in the regional security architecture and in addressing regional challenges and maintaining regional and international peace and security. Thirdly, we need to ensure adherence by all States, large and small, to the fundamental principles of international law and the United Nations Charter in the planning and implementation of all development, security and defence strategies, as well as foreign policies. We must cultivate a culture and a mindset of adherence, which, as history suggests, is the only way for peace to be sustained. Seventy-five years ago, as the United Nations came into being, Viet Nam declared its independence, bearing in mind the monumental values of the Charter. Since the very early days of independence, Viet Nam expressed its wish many times to be a Member of the United Nations and its willingness and commitment to upholding and adhering to the purposes and principles of the Charter. As a nation heavily scarred by war and now on the path of reform, development and international integration, Viet Nam has a profound understanding of the utmost importance of upholding the Charter in ensuring lasting peace, building an international order based on international law and promoting friendly and equal relations among States. As a non-permanent member of the Council and a Member of the United Nations, Viet Nam is strongly committed to upholding the United Nations Charter. In the spirit of a partnership for sustainable peace, we will spare no effort to contribute to the endeavours of the United Nations and the international community to ensure the effective adherence to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter for the ultimate aim of global peace, security and sustainable development. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I call on the Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
