Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Presidents Meron and Joensen
and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their
respective briefings on the work of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. I would like to make the following four
points.

First, with regard to the progress in the work on
the completion strategy of both Tribunals, we note
that, during the reporting period, the two Tribunals
continued to make further progress, and we express
our appreciation in that regard. Resolution 1966 (2010)
establishes the time frame for the completion strategy
ofboth Tribunals and calls on them to complete all their
work by the end of 2014. However, according to the most
recent reports of the two Tribunals (S/2014/350, annex, and S/2014/343, annex), the time frame set out by the
Security Council cannot be achieved. The work of the
ICTY will continue until 2017 and that of the ICTR
until 2015. We express our concern in that regard. We
understand that there are multiple reasons for the delay.
There are some additional issues to those foreseen by
the two Tribunals. We hope that both Tribunals will
continue to increase their efficiency while ensuring
judicial fairness, overcome the difficulties in retaining
staff, expedite their work and conclude their task as
soon as possible. At the same time, we believe that
the Security Council should conduct consultations as
soon as possible on the programme of work of the two
Tribunals beyond 2014 so as to find an appropriate
solution.

Secondly, with regard to the transition, the
branches of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals in Arusha and in The Hague started
operations on July 2012 and July 2013, respectively.
We are pleased to see that, owing to the relatively
smooth transition of the two Tribunals to the Residual
Mechanism, some judicial and administrative functions
have been transferred. We express our appreciation in
that regard. China hopes that the two Tribunals will
carry out their work efficiently in accordance with
the Security Council's resolutions. Particular attention
should be given to strengthening communication and
coordination with the Residual Mechanism in order to
ensure a smooth transition to the Mechanism.

Thirdly, with respect to the cooperation of the
relevant countries with the two Tribunals and the
Mechanism, the cooperation of States, in particular
those of the region, is crucial to the smooth functioning
of the Tribunals and the Mechanism. We commend
Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Rwanda and
the relevant regional countries for their cooperation with
the Tribunals and the Mechanism on the investigations
and the trials.

We also note that one of the most difficult issues
that the ICTR faces is the relocation of those who
have been acquitted and those who have served their
sentences. We urge those countries that have the
capacity to show the political will and actively consider
assisting the ICTR in finding a solution to that issue.
The ICTR should heed the views of Rwanda in that
process. Moreover, there are still nine fugitives among
those indicted by the ICTR. We hope that progress will
soon be made towards finding the fugitives.

Fourthly, with respect to the assessment of the
work of the two Tribunals, it has been 20 years or
more since their establishement. They are now in the

final phase of completing their work. Before their
closure, we should earnestly review and evaluate our
experiences and lessons learned in fighting impunity
and in addressing the link between maintaining peace
and achieving national reconciliation and the pursuit of
justice. The international community can draw lessons
in that regard and use them as a reference.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Ambassador of Chile in his role as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
and the Office of Legal Affairs of the United Nations
for their work.

