Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank the United States
of America for convening this meeting and we take
note of the briefing by the Secretary-General.

Pakistan is fully committed to nuclear security.
We are active participants in global nuclear security
efforts and in the activities of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on nuclear security. We have
worked closely with other Governments within the
Nuclear Security Summit process and have attended
such Summits at the highest level. We have
participated constructively in the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism and in its implementation
and assessment group.

Pakistan's perspective on nuclear security was
clearly articulated last month by Prime Minister Syed
Yusuf Raza Gilani at the Seoul Nuclear Security
Summit. He made the following major points.

The international community together has taken
steps to create a secure world that will not live under
the fear of nuclear terrorist attack. We firmly believe
that nuclear materials must never fall into the hands of
terrorists. National measures are the most important
part of our efforts to enhance nuclear security. If
nations do not move, nothing will move. If nations
move feebly, nuclear risks increase many times.
Nations need to move together and to learn from each
other.

As a party to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material, the Convention on
Nuclear Safety, the Convention on Early Notification
of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or
Radiological Emergency, Pakistan has been
contributing substantively to the nuclear security
framework. Our commitment is evidenced by our
consistent observance of the IAEA Code of Conduct
and our participation in the Agency's illicit trafficking
database.

Nuclear security within States is a national
responsibility. Within this framework we have worked
with international partners, and will continue to
explore cooperation on nuclear security through
voluntary national actions plans and in pursuance of
international obligations. The existing international
framework, which is quite extensive, covers the
measures taken by the IAEA, by the United Nations
and by various conventions and initiatives. The
Nuclear Security Summit participants therefore agreed
that there was no need for a new, parallel institution or
mechanism for nuclear security. In that context, we
reaffirm the essential responsibility and central role of
the IAEA.

Pakistan's nuclear security regime has four
pillars.

First, we have a well-defined, robust command
and control system, comprising the National Command
Authority, the Strategic Plans Division and the
Strategic Forces Command. That mechanism exercises
control over all aspects of policy, procurement,
operations and, most important, nuclear security. The
Strategic Plans Division develops technical solutions,
personnel reliability programmes and intelligence
capabilities to deal with nuclear security,
non-proliferation, accidents and weapons of mass
destruction terrorism.

Secondly, we have a rigorous regulatory regime
covering all matters related to nuclear safety and
security, including physical protection of materials and
facilities, material control and accounting, transport
security, the prevention of illicit trafficking, border
controls, and plans to deal with possible radiological
emergencies. The Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory
Authority, an autonomous oversight body, regulates the
safety and security of civilian nuclear materials and
facilities. It works closely with the IAEA and benefits
from its recommendations and guidance.

Thirdly, we have a comprehensive export control
regime. Our export control laws are at par with
international standards.

Fourthly, we engage in international cooperation
consistent with our national policies and interests, as
well as international obligations.

Pakistan is focused especially on capacity-
building and interaction with the international
community, in particular with the IAEA. We have
established a centre of excellence for training that
conducts specialized courses in nuclear security,
physical protection and personnel liability. We have
offered the centre as a regional and international hub
for training. We are deploying special nuclear material
portals at key entry-exit points to detect, deter and
prevent illicit trafficking in radioactive materials. We
are implementing our nuclear security action plan in
cooperation with the IAEA. We have also developed a
strong nuclear emergency response mechanism.

Pakistan fully supports the globally agreed
objectives of promoting nuclear non-proliferation and

disarmament. We will continue to cooperate with all
international efforts that seek to promote fair and
equitable solutions to disarmament and
non-proliferation challenges. Pakistan shares the
majority view among the Members of the United
Nations that the Security Council should refrain from
assuming stewardship over global non-proliferation
and disarmament issues. The Council, composed of
15 States, is not a representative body. Global
disarmament and non-proliferation can be achieved in
a more universal forum where all States have the right
to participate, negotiate and evolve agreed outcomes.

Pakistan is a nuclear-weapon State and cannot
accept unrealistic references, including in resolution
1887 (2009), calling for joining the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) as a
non-nuclear-weapon State.

We underline the importance of recognizing
regional realities in South Asia and the need for
mainstreaming non-NPT States into the NPT regime.
Pakistan's position on the fissile material cut-off treaty
has been unequivocal. The Conference on
Disarmament is not a single-agenda-item body. The
Conference has more pressing agenda items, such as
nuclear disarmament and negative security assurances,
which have been pending matters for decades. Progress
on those two most consequential issues would advance
the goal of a world without nuclear weapons.

We wish to recall that the Non-Aligned
Movement, comprising 120 Member States, has
transmitted its views on nuclear security as well as on
the larger disarmament and non-proliferation issues.
Those letters are contained in document S/2012/223.
We fully support its contents and its annex.

Safe and sustainable nuclear energy is essential to
advancing our economic agenda. In view of Pakistan's
growing energy needs and existing energy shortfall,
and to respond to the future requirements of a growing
population and economy, the National Command
Authority has approved the Nuclear Power
Programme-2050. We urge the international
community to give Pakistan access to nuclear
technology for peaceful uses on a non-discriminatory
basis.
Pakistan qualifies to become a member of the
Nuclear Suppliers Group and other export-control
regimes. Last year, the IAEA Board of Governors
unanimously approved the safeguards agreement in
connection with our two civil nuclear power plants.
That shows the international community's continued
confidence in the safety standards and security
measures maintained by Pakistan.

