The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's briefing on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace - key aspects of
the work of the Security Council and the entire United
Nations system.

(spoke in English)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace are first and
foremost about enhancing our strategic coherence to
support the efforts of national Governments and their
people to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict. The Council can contribute
in several ways. I thank the Council for taking this
opportunity to take a long-term View of peace and
security challenges.

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace require strong
partnerships beyond the United Nations in support
of nationally owned solutions. We need a broad and
inclusive approach to such partnerships, while working
closely with host country authorities, regional and
subregional organizations, international financial
institutions, including the World Bank and other
multilateral donors, the business community, civil
society and local actors. I am pleased to see Mr. Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, which is our most relevant partner in the area
of peace and security in the world, with which we have
exemplary cooperation.

The Peacebuilding Commission can bring far
greater strategic coherence to international efforts,
by providing a platform for complementarity and
partnership across the pillars of the United Nations.
It also brings national and local voices to the table.
The Security Council has already benefited from the
Commission's support, including in the Sahel. I urge it
to build on that example to achieve greater operational
and policy coherence in other contexts and situations.

Sustaining peace requires support for inclusivity,
in particular of those who are frequently marginalized
and excluded. That means women and girls, the elderly,
the young, people with disabilities and minorities of
all kinds. Women's empowerment through meaningful
participation is a proven way to deepen the effectiveness
and sustainability of peacebuilding. The Council has
the means to ensure greater inclusion and success by
more consistently applying its own robust agenda on
women and peace and security.

Earlier this week in the Chamber, members heard
at first-hand about the important role young people can
play in sustaining peace (see S/PV.8241). Young women
and men are key peacebuilders. We must work with
them and for them far more effectively. Most critically,
building and sustaining peace requires addressing the
roots of conflicts and crises, which often lie in poverty,
exclusion, inequality, discrimination and serious
Violations of human rights. The human and financial
cost of focusing our efforts on responding to crises is
unsustainable. I have been outspoken in my support for
prevention - the foundation of building and sustaining
peace. Investment in prevention pays off in human
lives, financial savings and development gains.

Sustainable, inclusive development, deeply rooted
in respect for all human rights - economic, social,
cultural, civil and political - is not only an end in
itself, but it is also the world's best preventive tool
against violent conflict and instability. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development is our common
global blueprint to tackle those root causes and create
more peaceful, stable and resilient societies, founded
on fair globalization.

The reinforcement of the Peacebuilding Support
Office will enable it to play a stronger role in
connecting our efforts on peace and security with our
work to support sustainable development. My peace and
security reform proposal includes a 50 per cent increase
in regular posts in the Peacebuilding Support Office at
no extra cost, based on gains in efficiency in other areas.
At the same time, my envoys and the United Nations
special political missions are dedicated to facilitating
political processes, mediating and preventing the
eruption of open conflict. The High-Level Advisory
Board on Mediation will build on the expertise of
skilled diplomats and strengthen our relationships with
regional organizations, non-governmental groups and
others engaged in that critical activity for peace.

United Nations peacekeepers have a particularly
critical role to play on the front lines of our efforts.
We owe them an enormous debt for their service
and sacrifice. The twin resolutions of 2016 (General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016)) recognize and welcome
the contributions of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Their overriding objective is to create the
space for a political process. They have a vital role
in containing violence and protecting civilians while
giving political solutions time to take hold.

In order to create peacekeeping operations that are
fit for the challenges we face, I launched the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative in the Chamber last month.
Action for Peacekeeping will refocus United Nations
peacekeeping in three key areas. It aims to set realistic
expectations for our operations, make them stronger
and safer and mobilize more support, both for political
solutions and for well-structured, well-equipped and
well-trained forces and their mission.

We need peace operations that are better able to
respond to the specific needs and contexts of the
countries where they operate, adapt to evolving
conditions on the ground and leave when their job is
done. Key conditions for success will be clear and
defined with more focused mandates, a long-term
View and adequate exit strategies. Smarter investment
in peacebuilding and sustaining peace should reduce
the costs of peacekeeping. That in turn will enable
us to provide more support so that our peacekeeping
and political missions can fulfil their mandates
more effectively.

(spoke in French)

My report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/2018/43) outlines several options to increase,
restructure and better prioritize funding dedicated
to United Nations peacebuilding activities, for the
consideration of Member States. These options
include assessed and voluntary contributions and
innovative financing.

The Peacebuilding Fund is a key instrument to
drive coherence across all our peacebuilding activities
and partnerships, and a catalyst for others to take
action. I reiterate my call for a quantum leap in Member
State support for the essential work of the Fund and
look forward to further discussion on those options. I
look forward to the adoption of a General Assembly
resolution following up on my report and outlining our
joint path ahead.

The past two days have seen rich and engaging
discussions on how we build and sustain peace, ranging
from mediation to conflict resolution, to peacekeeping
and support for effective and accountable institutions.
We can build on our success. I believe that C6te
d'Ivoire was our most recent success story. I take this
opportunity to extend my sincere condolences to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire on the
death of our great friend and colleague, Ambassador
Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, who always played an
extremely positive and important role in the Council.

Now it is time for action.

