Mr. Ghebreyesus: I am grateful for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the health situation in
Yemen, where a cholera outbreak of unprecedented scale
continues. The outbreak is being driven by conflict, the
collapse of basic public services and malnutrition. Two
years of conflict have devastated the lives of ordinary
people and left nearly 15 million without access to basic
health care. Almost the same number of people do not
have regular access to clean water and sanitation. They
have no choice but to drink dirty water, thus continuing
the cycle of disease.

Cholera flourishes in a weakened health system.
We are witnessing the second wave of an outbreak that
first started in October 2016 and has led to more than
1,700 deaths, as pointed out earlier by Mr. O'Brien, and
more than 300,000 suspected cases in recent months.
It has affected 21 of the 23 governorates and 286 of
the 333 districts. Almost the entire country is affected.
The largest number of cases are in Amanat Al Asimah,
Al Hudaydah, Hajjah, Amran and Ibb - those five
governorates make up 55 per cent of the total of
300,000 cases. The World Health Organization (WHO),
UNICEF and other partners are working with Yemeni
authorities to detect and track the spread of the disease
and reach people with medical treatment, safe water
and adequate sanitation and hygiene practices. WHO
and UNICEF are supporting more than 600 cholera
treatment centres and oral-rehydration therapy sites
in the most affected districts across the nation, and
we plan to open another 500 centres. In addition, our
quick-response teams have been trained and deployed.
Emergency operation centres have been activated in
Sana'a and priority governorates. More than 400 tons
of critical lifesaving supplies have been delivered,
including intravenous fluids and treatment kits, and
more than 5 million people have been supported to
access safe water.

At the same time, there is a shortage of doctors and
nurses to help treat and care for those who are ill. Some
have fled the country, yet many continue to come to
work, even though they have not been paid for more than
10 months. WHO and UNICEF are paying incentives,
travel costs, overtime and other allowances whenever
they can in order to help to get them through this period,
but that is not a sustainable solution. Other challenges
include the fact that more than 55 per cent of all health
facilities are closed or only partially functional. There
are no doctors in 49 of the 333 districts. The supply
chain is hampered by restrictions on imports and
logistics, as well as limited numbers of implementing
partners and funding. The ongoing conflict makes the
challenge worse, because it is difficult to reach those in
need. Consequently, we have four major requests of the
Council today.

First of all, we call for an expedited political
process to bring an immediate end to the conflict - so
that people cannot only survive, but thrive. Secondly,
in areas of continuing conflict, we must ensure that
civilian infrastructure, such as water, sanitation and
health facilities, are always protected, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. Thirdly, donors
need to not only quickly honour the pledges they made
at the high-level event regarding Yemen in April, but
also to provide funds for the crisis in a more flexible
manner. Ensuring that workers are paid and given
incentives to remain at their posts is a critical issue.
Those brave professionals need our help so that they can
continue to serve their communities. Lastly, we must
provide political and financial support for long-term
recovery and development. The partnership between
the World Bank, UNICEF and WHO on revitalizing
the health sector provides a useful model. We need to
rebuild the country's health and sanitation systems so
that we can prevent and better contain future health
risks. We have agreed, with the World Bank, UNICEF
and the World Food Programme, to visit Yemen as soon
as possible. WHO, UNICEF and partners are doing all
they can to save lives and support the health system,
but without peace there will be no end to the suffering
of the people.

