Sheikh Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
apologize for asking to speak once again. I wish to note
that our mission here is not to request military
intervention from the Security Council or to take a
decision in favour of military intervention. Moreover,
we are not interfering in Syria's internal affairs. It is a
matter for the Syrian people to decide who shall govern
them.

I do, however, have a comment to make
concerning the statement made by the representative of
Syria. He referred to a poem by the late poet Nizar
Qabbani. We all know that Nizar Qabbani was a bard
of liberty, but we do not know what he would have to
say about this situation if he were still alive. The
representative of Syria talked about the colonialism
under which the countries of the Gulf, especially Qatar,
had suffered. Qatar was in fact never colonized but had
signed a treaty with the United Kingdom that expired
in the early 1970s, and had never had to resist
colonialism because it and the other Gulf States lived
in dire poverty until God blessed us with oil. Today, we
are proud to stand by our Arab brothers who need our
assistance, and we will help them without reminding
them of our generosity.

I should also like to raise the question of
democracy. We in no way wish to interfere; we wish to
work alongside the Syrian people in implementing
reforms and relaunching democracy. Democracy in
Syria began in 1919, and we hope most earnestly that it
will prevail once again and bless the entire Syrian
people with its benefits.
With respect to Israel, we have no open front with
that country, but our position is unequivocally
manifested in the support we extend to our Palestinian
brothers, be they in Gaza or elsewhere. History will be
the judge of that.

As for Iraq and the million who have died there, I
recall that we all - including Syria, whom we
thank - contributed to the liberation of Kuwait from
the Iraqi occupation, and participated in all decisions
taken by the Arab League and the Security Council.

As for Libya, almost 50,000 people have died
there, and had Al-Qadhafi remained in power there
would have been far more deaths. The League of Arab
States adopted a resolution on that issue which Syria
endorsed as well.

As to the statement made by the representative of
the Russian Federation concerning Saudi Arabia, I note
that the King of that country is a true Arab who has
always demonstrated his concern for his fellow Arabs
by giving priority to their interests and not his own. It
was his sincerity that led him to withdraw his observers
from Syria because he did not want to be a false
witness to what was happening there.

