The President (spoke in Russian): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Nigeria and Sierra Leone, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
Without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Mbanefo
(Nigeria) took a seat at the side of the Council
chamber.

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance with
the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall take
it that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Otunnu to take a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council Will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the eighth
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL), document
S/ 1999/ 1003.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1999/ 1069, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should also like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to document S/ 1999/1073, containing the
text of a letter dated 19 October 1999 from Togo,
transmitting the decision of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) redefining the mandate
of the ECOWAS Monitoring Group in Sierra Leone.

In accordance with the decision taken earlier in the
meeting, I now call on Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict.


