Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Please allow me
to join other delegations in congratulating you,
Mr. President, for having convened this timely and
informative debate. Let me also congratulate the
co-facilitators of the intergovernmental peacebuilding
architecture review, the Permanent Representatives
of Angola and Australia, on the excellent manner in
which they are moving the process forward. I assure
them of South Africa's support. I also wish to thank
Ambassadors Kamau, Skoog and Rosenthal for their
briefings.

My delegation recognizes that the core message
of the reviews of the peace operations is that conflict
prevention must be a central component when
considering the necessity for peace operations. In that
respect, United Nations cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations is integral to sustaining
international peace and security.

The report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(see S/2015/490) also acknowledges that the task of
sustaining peace globally goes beyond the capacity
of what the United Nations can deliver on its own.
Partnerships with local communities, regional and
subregional actors, donors and civil society are essential
to make peace sustainable.

South Africa is encouraged by this aspect of the
report and the progress made by the United Nations
in strengthening its partnerships with regional
organizations, particularly the efforts to institutionalize
its relationship with the African Union. Cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations is critical,
as the need for sustainable development in post-conflict
scenarios is contingent on the regional environment
in which these countries exist. In that regard, my
delegation calls for greater synergy between the
efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission and those of
regional and subregional organizations, in particular
the African Union and its post-conflict reconstruction
and development policies and organs.

Some of the key conclusions and recommendations
emanating from the report of the Advisory Group
of Experts on the 2015 review of the peacebuilding
architecture also remind us that the United Nations has
the core mandate of sustaining peace. As a result, that
thread must flow throughout all of the Organization's
engagements, from preventative action to peacemaking,
peace enforcement, peacekeeping and post-conflict
recovery and reconstruction engagement. That mandate
must inform and be incorporated across all the sectors
and phases of action. It is for those reasons that South
Africa supports the recommendation that the challenge
of sustaining peace should be assumed by the entire
United Nations system, including the three relevant
intergovernmental organs. South Africa believes that
such efforts should include other role-players, such
as the international financial institutions, the private
sector, local communities, regional and subregional
organizations and donors.

My delegation is supportive of having the Security
Council exercise some flexibility in its working methods
in order to allow the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
to effectively play its role in advising the Council on

institution-building in post-conflict situations. We
encourage the Security Council, working in consultation
with the PBC, to make sure that peacebuilding tasks
related to institution-building are working in an
appropriate synergy with all peacekeeping mandates.

The report of the Advisory Group of Experts also
calls for a people-centred and inclusive approach at
the national level that will provide a common vision to
all domestic stakeholders. South Africa fully supports
that approach and believes that national ownership of
peacebuilding efforts is at the core ofcreating sustainable
institutions in the immediate aftermath of conflict. The
international community has the obligation to build
on national efforts and advise countries, based on the
priorities that they have identified for themselves. The
United Nations and the international community in
general should support and complement national efforts
towards the development of institutions immediately
after the signing of a peace agreement and the end
of open conflict, in order to support the newly found
peace. Where peacekeeping operations exist, capacity-
and institution-building should be simultaneously
pursued if conditions so permit.

We support the need for the Peacebuilding Fund to
leverage funding so as to catalyse additional voluntary
contributions, and for the Fund to consider developing
a new funding area around efforts to strengthen the
capacity of regional organizations.

Finally, my delegation maintains the view that
institution- and capacity-building in post-conflict
countries requires a substantial injection of resources
and more predictable funding. Consideration should
be given to having the United Nations finance the
Peacebuilding Fund from its assessed contributions,
as recommended by the Advisory Group of Experts, in
order for the United Nations to achieve its objective of
sustaining peace.

