Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States, too, warmly welcomes the continued support of
the Security Council to Colombia. The Government of
Colombia has made critical progress in implementing
the Final Peace Agreement with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC). As a result of
the parties' commitment and the support of the United
Nations, the FARC has peacefully laid down its arms.
The last containers with all of those weapons are now
in the hands of the United Nations, and the Government
has already begun the process of reintegrating the
former combatants into society.

Colombia has shown the world that commitment to a
political process and a shared future, along with strong,
unified support from the Council and the international
community, can bring success in peacebuilding.
Colombia is an example for the region and for the world.
But now Colombia faces the challenge of consolidating
that peace. The threat to that peace is serious, and it
comes in the form of a lack of infrastructure, basic
services and the rule of law in conflict-affected areas
formerly occupied by the FARC, creating a haven for
criminal activities, drugs and violence. Yet we remain
focused on building on the gains made and creating the
conditions for peace to prosper. In particular, resolution
2377 (2017), adopted today, advances the readiness of
the second political mission in helping to address these
challenges. We stand ready to partner with Colombia
and support the Security Council in the hard work ahead.

Additionally, we welcome the announcement
by the Government of Colombia and the National
Liberation Army of a temporary bilateral ceasefire.
The United States joins other members of the Council
in expressing our interest in considering how the
temporary bilateral ceasefire could be supported by
the work of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia. We look forward to hearing the Secretary-
General's recommendations on the way forward in the
coming days.

With our vote today, the United States underscores
that we stand with Colombia as a steadfast partner and
as a friend. The United States has stood with Colombia
through times of great challenge, and we continue to
stand with it in this moment of hope and opportunity.

