Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First, I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council, and I thank you for your
cooperation with us and for opening the door for
dialogue in these very difficult circumstances.

The Security Council finally concluded its
consultations on the appropriate means to enable my
Government to continue to honour the commitments
undertaken following the hasty adoption of resolution
1556 (2004) on 30 July 2004. That had barely occurred
when we saw a fatal blow delivered to the tireless
efforts undertaken by my country and to the progress of
the negotiations overseen by the African Union under
the chairmanship of the President of Nigeria,
Mr. Obasanjo, in Abuja. Thus, the people of my
country in general and the citizens in Darfur have seen
their hopes for prosperity and peace dashed following
the submission of the draft resolution just adopted.

The Government of Sudan has shown that it has
honoured its commitments as dictated by its
responsibilities towards our citizens throughout Sudan.
The clearest testimony to that commitment is precisely
the report of the Secretary-General and the briefing by
his Special Representative, which unequivocally
describe the achievements made in other areas and the
spheres in which action remains to be taken in order to
implement resolution 1556 (2004).

We wish to reaffirm here the ongoing nature of
our commitment, despite our deep conviction that
many paragraphs in the resolution adopted today
represent the worst form of injustice and indignity. The
members of the Council know better than anyone that
the roots of the problem lie in the country's economic
and social backwardness. Hence, we wonder whether
the sanctions measures will help to resolve the problem
or whether, on the contrary, they will in fact complicate
it by hindering measures aimed at solving it. Moreover,
the reference in resolution 1556 (2004) to measures
under Article 41 of the Charter is linked to actions to
be taken only in the event of non-compliance by the
Government.

All in this Chamber are familiar with the
Secretary-General's report and heard the briefing of
Jan Pronk, his Special Representative. Did either
reflect any judgement concerning the Government's
failure to respect the resolution? They did not. Despite
the poor quality of today's resolution and some of its
injustices, it does include a reference to the cooperation
provided by my Government. Why do some insist on
punishing the Government of the Sudan despite its
cooperation, which is beyond doubt?

We again draw the attention of Council members
to the fact that the attention of the entire world is
focused on the search for justice and credibility in the
way nations are treated. Is selectivity being avoided?
Are internal crises in developing countries exploited
for the sake of political objectives or to conceal
practices or crimes committed against other peoples?
Such questions could lead to praise for countries within
this body that have consistently supported law and
justice and seek dialogue with integrity, while
respecting the principles of the Charter, which will
always triumph over evil. The history of this
Organization is replete with moral stories in that
respect.

The quality of the resolution might have been
improved by delaying its adoption and avoiding the
hasty action urged by certain countries. That has led to
an unfair text that aims solely at achieving the political
objectives of its sponsors. The resolution's focus runs
totally counter to the Secretary-General's report, the
briefing of his Special Representative and the true
situation on the ground. It adopts an approach that sets
the Government against the people of Darfur. It
discourages the latter from seeking a solution to the
current crisis, rather than encouraging them to maintain
cooperation and ongoing participation towards peace
and prosperity.

In that respect, the Council has frequently noted
that peaceful negotiation is the best way to address the
situation in Darfur. We have spoken out repeatedly
against the Council's sending any signal that might
have a negative impact on the negotiating process
under way. Such an ill-advised approach was apparent
in the severity of the text of resolution 1556 (2004),
which led to the failure of negotiations in Addis Ababa
in July due to the intransigence of the rebel groups
following its adoption, despite the fact that progress
had been made. Moreover, the strenuous efforts
recently made by the United States, motivated by the
ferocious political campaign under way there, along
with the resolution adopted today, have led to the
failure of the negotiations in Abuja, even though both
parties were on the verge of reaching agreement on the
second agenda item on security matters. Thus, the
rebels refused even to sign the humanitarian protocol.

The haste and pressure associated with today's
resolution are due to the fact that the text aims only at
pleasing the United States Congress, which believes
itself to be the sole conscience of the world and that it
enjoys the divine right to decide the destinies of
peoples, whereas it would appear rather to be a case of
the emperor's new clothes. Millions of other people,
however, are not blind to its shortcomings. They see its
daily crimes, its murder of women and children, and its
destruction of homes throughout the world - in
Afghanistan, Iraq and Palestine - as broadcast on our
television screens. Moreover, it tortures prisoners and
innocent people in prisons in Afghanistan, Iraq and
Guantanamo.

While we can understand the position of certain
States - even of those that voted in favour of the
resolution, sponsored it or spoke honestly in the
informal consultations - we shall overlook those that
support injustice simply in order to join the ranks of
the quartet of tyranny. We are surprised, however, by
the position of one State that we thought to be more
honest than the country that has always perpetrated
injustices in an extreme, partisan and entirely
subjective manner. That State must have believed the
Sudan to be an easy target, allowing it to atone for its
sin of joining the international coalition in the illegal
war against Iraq.

The adoption of the resolution has torpedoed all
negotiations and undermined the African Union's
efforts, spearheaded by President Obasanjo with all his
African wisdom. Proof of this is that at the last minute
the rebels set impossible conditions, which were drawn
from the text of the draft resolution as originally

submitted to the Council.

We hope that the Council will be honest with
itself in claiming to support the efforts of the African
Union. It should devote careful study to the resolution
it has just adopted to see whether it truly addresses the
issue justly, objectively and without superficiality.
History will be the best judge of that.

