Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix; Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten; and Ambassador Joanna Wronecka,
in her capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan, for their detailed briefings on the current
situation in South Sudan.

The people of South Sudan have endured a long
and painful process until now. Today, we are witnessing
encouraging progress towards a political solution. That
is thanks mainly to the great commitment of the leaders
of neighbouring countries, regional organizations and
the parties involved. It is clear that the latter face
the main challenge in moving towards the proper
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan.

The signing of the Revitalized Agreement
represents a fundamental step towards peace in the
country. Despite major challenges, the Agreement
has allowed the ceasefire to be respected in most
of the South Sudanese territory; progress is being
made in the establishment of various committees and
mechanisms for the implementation of the agreement;
and macroeconomic indicators are becoming relatively
stable, as indicated by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2018/1103). However, Ms. Patten's report
leaves us deeply indignant, throwing a bucket of cold
water over the kindling of the cautious optimism that
we might have had for progress at the political level.
As long as the bodies of women and girls are seen as
spoils and weapons of war, there can be neither peace
nor justice nor a future.

Just as we recognize that the situation in South
Sudan remains complicated, we cannot but highlight
the positive achievements made. At the same time,
we must be clear that the road ahead - towards
the implementation of peace - will surely present
challenges that must be overcome with the political will
of the leaders of South Sudan. In the same vein, the
continued support of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), the African Union and the
Security Council is fundamental to efforts to follow up
on implementation. Much effort has been invested in
the promotion of the political process, and it is therefore
Vital to work together in harmony so as to continue
advancing towards the building of sustainable peace,
alongside justice, accountability and respect for human
rights, particularly those of women and girls.
As almost everyone in the Chamber has expressed
on several occasions, there is no other solution than
a political one. Dialogue aimed at addressing the
fundamental problems, reconciliation, capacity-
building in several areas, support for development,
and the definition of security measures, inter alia, are
important steps to follow. The Agreement presents a
unique opportunity to address several of those problems
prior to, during and after the transition period. To that
end, the active participation of civil society, young people
and, of course, women is essential. We must continue
to work to encourage the presence and participation
of women in the implementation of the agreement and
reach at least 35 per cent of representation by women,
as established in the agreement.

Despite progress in the political field, it is undeniable
that the population is still affected by the terrible effects
of the conflict, especially on the humanitarian front.
There is a lack ofbasic services for the almost 2 million
displaced persons and refugees. The civilian population
also continues to fall Victim of Violent attacks. My
delegation condemns in the strongest possible terms
the sexual Violence that more than 100 women and girls
recently fell Victim to in northern South Sudan. Those
attacks are unacceptable and must be investigated, and
the perpetrators must be brought to justice. We urge the
parties to take concrete action in that regard. Impunity
when it comes to that kind of brutal action against the
civil population prevents the achievement of genuine
peace.

We thank the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict for her efforts to shed light on
that issue and combat it. We reiterate our support for
the work that her Office is carrying out. As mentioned
in resolution 2428 (2018), the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan will be very important in that
regard.

The time has come for South Sudan to create an
environment of protection for women, to combat
sexual violence and to develop transitional justice in
the interests of accountability. In that connection, the
establishment of a hybrid tribunal, under the leadership
of the African Union, will be critical.

It is clear that, at this stage, all our efforts must be
directed towards the implementation of the Agreement.
The cooperation of the international community is
needed to mobilize political and financial resources

to assist in the implementation of the Agreement.
Similarly, it is very important that the Security Council
remain united and work in harmony with the African
Union and IGAD, especially in restoring confidence
among the parties. We must therefore maintain a neutral
and constructive position. In order to do that, we must
coordinate our actions with those of the region. It is
also very important that the parties ensure an optimal
operational environment for the United Nations Mission
in Southern Sudan (UNMISS) and the humanitarian
workers, in compliance with international law and
international humanitarian law.

We reiterate our gratitude to the countries of
the region for the leadership that they have shown,
especially Ethiopia, the Sudan and Uganda, which
have made important progress in the political process
possible. Similarly, we emphasize and appreciate the
committed work of UNMISS.

Lastly, we thank IGAD and the African Union, in
particular, for the vital role they are playing in bringing
peace to South Sudan.

