Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, allow me to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this briefing on
an issue that is currently of vital importance to
international peace and security. I also warmly thank
Mr. Mohamed Khalethiari forhis informative briefing.
The Council is once again frequently called on to
consider the issue of ballistic missile launches by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which are also
a challenge to the international community. Belgium
expresses its deep concern at these repeated launches
and at the ongoing diplomatic impasse. We reiterate
our strong condemnation of the launches, which are
in flagrant violation of the Council's resolutions.
We also regret the bluster and threatening rhetoric
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. They
are unacceptable provocations while a resumption of
negotiations is still on the table.

Given that gloomy picture, Belgium calls for the
unity of the Council in pursuing its objective, namely,
establishing lasting peace on the peninsula, which
requires the complete, verifiable and irreversible
dismantling of the nuclear and ballistic programmes
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. To that
end, the sanctions must be fully implemented by all.

In particular, Belgium calls on the Democratic

People's Republic ofKoreato proactivelyand specifically
move towards denuclearization, as it has undertaken to
do, and to resume bilateral negotiations in good faith.
We therefore call on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to show restraint and de-escalate tensions.
Provocative missile launches must stop, as must bellicose
rhetoric. Dialogue must be resumed as soon as possible.
Belgium places particular emphasis on the following
points. We ultimately believe that the denuclearization
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea should be
part of the broader multilateral nuclear non-proliferation
regime as soon as possible, with the country's return to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and accession to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty.

Of course, the Council must also assume its
responsibilities. In particular, it must mitigate, as
far as possible, the negative humanitarian impact of
the sanctions regime in place against the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. Access to the country for
United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations
must be facilitated. That is why we are working, with
our partners in the Council, to improve the system of
exemptions from sanctions on humanitarian grounds.
Finally, Belgium is concerned about the recent report
of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
(see A/74/275/Rev.1), which describes a situation on
the ground that is still a catastrophe in terms of the
oppression of fundamental freedoms and human rights
violations.

This yearend will have seen a resurgence of
tensions regarding the North Korean issue and, despite
our differences, the Council must remain united
in the way forward towards our common goal: the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Belgium therefore calls on the Council, and more
broadly the diplomatic stakeholders, to continue to
work for a rapid and favourable way out of the crisis
for all.

