Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): In my
capacity as Coordinator of the Rio Group, I am making
this statement on behalf of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras,
Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay
and Venezuela, countries members of the main political
coordination mechanism in Latin America.

We thank Ambassador Greenstock for his
briefing. The Rio Group wishes to convey to him our
appreciation for the relevant work done at the head of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). The
Committee's achievements, reflected in the high level
of cooperation among States, the submission of
information concerning national implementation of
measures to combat terrorism and the strengthening of
technical cooperation in that regard, attest to the very
sound leadership of Ambassador Greenstock.

Scarcely two weeks ago, on 7 February, a terrorist
attack perpetrated in a social club in the centre of
Bogota again reminded us of terrorism's criminal and
aberrant nature and of the serious threat that it poses to
the peace and security of our countries. The Rio Group
communique of 8 February, as well as resolution
837 (1354/03) of the Permanent Council of the
Organization of American States (OAS) of
12 February, expressed their most vehement rejection
and condemnation of that act and reaffirmed the
intention to continue to cooperate to eradicate
terrorism. We also endorse Security Council resolution
1465 (2003), which expresses condolences to the
people and the Government of Colombia with regard to
that that terrorist act.

We must put an end to this scourge through all the
means provided for in the Charter of the United
Nations and in international treaties and norms,
including those specified in the legal structure of the
Organization of American States itself. The
international community must act firmly, respecting the
rule of law, international law and, in particular, human
rights and humanitarian law. There is no other solution.
The integrity, stability, democracy and freedom of our
countries are at stake.

Mindful of that reality, the countries members of
the Rio Group have shown a prompt concern to work
together to develop policies and actions to defeat
terrorism. Evidence of that was seen in the Specialized
Inter-American Conferences on Terrorism, held in
Lima in 1996 and in Mar del Plata in 1998, which led
to the creation of the Inter-American Committee
Against Terrorism within the framework of the
Organization of American States. The Committee is
carrying out intensive cooperation activities aimed at
preventing, combating and eliminating terrorist acts
and activities in accordance with work plans that are
agreed upon periodically.

Recently, the third regular session of the OAS
Inter-American Committee Against Terrorism, held in
January 2003, adopted the Declaration of San Salvador
on Strengthening Cooperation in the Fight against
Terrorism. Moreover, in June 2002, we adopted the
Inter-American Convention against Terrorism. The
Convention obligates all States of the Americas to
prevent, combat and eradicate the financing of
terrorism and to engage in effective cooperation to
combat it.

The Rio Group supports the declaration annexed
to resolution 1456 (2003), adopted by the Security
Council meeting at the level of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs on 20 January, as well as the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001). All the members of
the Rio Group have complied by submitting initial
reports and supplementary reports to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. The gravity of the terrorist threat
requires constant dialogue as well as intensified
international cooperation and assistance in order to
enable us to adopt effective measures to prevent,
combat and eliminate this evil.

As pointed out in resolution 1377 (2001), in
resolution 1456 (2003) and in other relevant
resolutions, the fight against terrorism demands
resolute cooperation, not only of States but also of
regional and subregional organizations and of the
relevant agencies of the United Nations system. In that
regard, the Rio Group, which has welcomed the
significant regional progress made with regard to
combating terrorism, looks forward with interest to the
convening of the 7 March meeting of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, aimed at improving the flow of
information about experiences, standards and practices
and at coordinating the activities under way. We trust
that that exercise will contribute to a joint plan of
action in which each body will exploit its special
characteristics to the utmost in the quest for a
comprehensive measure to combat terrorism.

It is obvious that terrorism is not limited to the
criminal activities of one particular organization or
region. In that context, the Security Council - which
has affirmed that acts of terrorism are unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation and of who commits
them - must bear that consideration in mind in its
efforts to identify, deter and punish those responsible
for terrorist acts.

In addition, the Rio Group believes that the draft
comprehensive convention against terrorism cannot be
further delayed. The difficulty we have encountered in
finding a comprehensive and precise definition of
terrorism does not justify its postponement. Rather, it is
a challenge facing the international community, which
must respond to that challenge in a responsible and
timely way. Therefore, we remain hopeful that dialogue
and understanding will enable us to conclude the work
on the draft convention in the near future.

The new demands of international cooperation
require all Member States to maintain a constant
attitude of vigilance and prevention, identifying and
punishing activities that promote and defend violence
within their jurisdictions as early signs of the knitting
together of terrorist networks and of possible
preparations for terrorist attacks. We cannot remain
indifferent to the activities of persons or groups who
obviously support terrorist organizations or who use
the openness of free societies to support terrorist
activities financially, politically or publicly. For that
reason, we in the Rio Group welcome the legislation
adopted by various countries that applies strict
monitoring, tracking and punishment measures against
those responsible for terrorist acts, as well as against
those committing any act, of collaboration or fund-
raising on their behalf.

We must adopt a zero tolerance policy against
terrorism and redouble international cooperation in all
fields in order to counter terrorism.

