Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I, too, would like to
thank President Meron, President Joensen, Prosecutor
Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for the reports and
for their briefings today.

The United Kingdom continues to be a strong
supporter of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We
believe that the ICTY has played a key role in tackling
impunity and deliveringjustice to the countless Victims
of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. We thank
and commend the Tribunal for all of its work over the
past 20 years. We are pleased to see that Serbia, Croatia
and Bosnia are continuing to cooperate with the ICTY.
State cooperation is, in our View, absolutely essential
for the ICTY to be able to complete its mandate.

We note from the Prosecutor's report (S/2013/678, annex II) that the capacity of domestic institutions to
conduct effective war crimes prosecutions remains
a concern, especially in Bosnia. We share the
Prosecutor's concerns about the limited progress on the
category II cases that were transferred to the Bosnian
authorities between 2005 and 2009. We consider that

the report's suggestion, namely, that local authorities
consider adopting a comprehensive war crimes training
curriculum, is a good one. We encourage all parties
to consider that suggestion positively and to explore
ways to improve the capacity of domestic institutions.
The timely completion of all ICTY trials and appeals
is important. We urge the ICTY to take all necessary
steps to minimize any further delays in its proceedings.

On the ICTR, we remain pleased that it has
completed all of its trial work, and we note the progress
made on the appeals. It is welcome news that the
transition to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals is going well. Apprehending
the remaining nine fugitives continues to be a cause
for concern. It is important that all of the individuals
indicted by the ICTR be captured and brought to justice.
We encourage all Member States to provide the ICTR
with their full and unequivocal support, so as to ensure
that all of those fugitives are apprehended as soon as
possible.

Once again, we note with regret that the problem of
relocating individuals who remain in Arusha following
their acquittal or the completion of their sentences has
still not been resolved. The United Kingdom shares
the ICTR's View that enabling persons who have been
acquitted by an international tribunal to resume their
lives is a fundamental expression of the rule of law.
We commend the ICTR for its continued efforts and
we encourage all parties to work together to try to find
an acceptable solution to the problem as quickly as
possible.

We also regret to see that staff retention continues
to be an issue for both Tribunals. We acknowledge
the difficulties that staff shortages and the loss of
experienced members of staff can have on each
Tribunal's ability to carry out its work. We thank the
Tribunals for their efforts to minimize the impact of
staff attrition on their work and we encourage them to
continue those efforts and continue to prioritize their
resources as rigorously as possible.

Last but not least, we would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the delegation of Guatemala for its
outstanding contribution on international justice issues
through its role as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals over the last two years.

