Mr. Williams: I have just completed my last visit
to the region as Special Coordinator, and I return
guardedly optimistic but conscious of many challenges
ahead. The substantive dialogue developing between
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) chairman
Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Olmert and the
reform efforts of Palestinian Prime Minister Fayyad
have created growing expectations. The anticipated
engagement of Tony Blair, the Quartet's representative,
more active regional diplomacy and the preparations
for a series of high-profile international gatherings -
above all the November meeting called for by
President Bush - reinforce those efforts. In the period
ahead, the diplomatic process will need to be carefully
monitored and supported and must be buttressed by
urgent and meaningful efforts and steps on the ground,
07-49245

if the many factors that could derail efforts are to be
overcome.

I wish to turn first to the bilateral process
between President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert,
who met again yesterday for three hours. That meeting
followed closely on their meeting on 6 August at
Jericho, which marked the first visit by an Israeli
leader to a Palestinian town in seven years. These
meetings will continue, with the next one anticipated to
be held on 10 September, before a mission to the
region by United States Secretary of State Rice. Both
sides have reported to me substantive discussions and
exchanges of ideas on permanent status issues, as well
as on confidence-building steps. There also appears to
be a welcome common desire to reach an agreement or
understanding that could be presented to the
international meeting in November.

Inevitably, differences of emphasis are noticeable
regarding the precise content and scope of what needs
to be achieved. For expectations to be met, I believe
that the talks will need to shift gear to achieve concrete
agreements on permanent status issues and
implementation steps. Given the sensitivity of those
issues, the shortness of time and the amount of work to
be done, that will not be easy. But, with political will
and supporting action on the ground, it is my
assessment that that can be achieved.

Turning to the situation in the West Bank, the
Palestinian Authority, under Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad, has begun to implement reforms and a serious
security programme. The Palestinian Authority
Government has initiated measures to remove
redundant employees and end superfluous hiring at
ministries. It is preparing an emergency plan for
immediate public expenditures, while initiating wide-
ranging consultations for the production of a medium-
term expenditure framework for the period 2008-2010.

On security, Israel's agreement not to pursue a
number of wanted militants provided - they turn in
their weapons and report to Palestinian Authority
offices - has provided an important first example of
security cooperation. I would also like to commend the
work of the Palestinian Authority security forces in
Jenin, who recently rescued a soldier of the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) from a mob after he had
mistakenly entered the city.

It is incumbent upon both parties to respect the
agreements that have been reached and to move to
07-49245
further cooperation that results in an early end to
Israeli incursions and the deployment of credible
Palestinian Authority security personnel on the streets
of cities such as Nablus. Further releases of prisoners
would also build upon the important and positive first
step already taken by Prime Minister Olmert in that
regard.

The casing of closures is another urgent
requirement. While Israel has its legitimate concerns,
the 532 obstacles in the West Bank continue to restrict
the movement of Palestinians and to prevent normal
economic activity. Freedom of movement is essential
in any economy. In the context of genuine security
cooperation and political empowerment, it is vital for
Israel to ease closures in the West Bank. I am also
concerned about reports by United Nations agencies
about increasing difficulties for staff access.

Let me turn now to Gaza. I remain deeply
concerned about the political, institutional and socio-
economic consequences of the continued split between
Gaza and the West Bank. President Abbas and Prime
Minister Fayyad confirmed to me that they remained
committed to reintegrating Gaza under the legitimate
authority of the Palestinian Authority. I welcome that
clear position. For its part, Hamas continues to call for
dialogue. However, in the absence of steps that indicate
acceptance by Hamas of President Abbas's dismissal of
Mr. Haniya as Prime Minister on 15 June, or its
readiness to reverse its actions, progress will remain
elusive.

While some order has been brought to the streets
of Gaza, the actions of Hamas are taking place outside
the framework of the rule of law and the institutions of
the Palestinian Authority, generating concern regarding
respect for human rights and the future development of
Gaza. Hamas is recruiting volunteers and using
charities in efforts to provide certain services, since the
majority of Palestinian Authority employees are not
reporting to work owing to the dispute over whom they
should report to.

Hamas continues to assert its military control
over the Gaza Strip, including through the
establishment of new security body, a coastal force, a
female police force and an interior security force.
There are reports of increasing arrests and clashes with
other political factions. Palestinian civil society groups
have documented allegations of the harassment of
3
journalists, arbitrary arrests and torture and other
human rights abuses by Hamas militants.

The Palestinian Authority is continuing to pay
public sector salaries in Gaza. Due to efforts by the
Palestinian Authority, Israel and the United Nations,
food and medical supplies are entering through two
border crossings, namely, Sufa and Karem Shalom, as
well as through a conveyor belt at the Karni crossing.
Yesterday, for the first time in two months, potatoes
were exported through Karem Shalom. Despite a
temporary interruption of support earlier this month,
owing to concerns about a diversion of resources, the
European Commission has resumed payments to enable
fuel shipments to Gaza for local electricity generation.

However, those measures are not enough to
prevent a worrying social and economic deterioration
in Gaza. The shortage of some essential commodities,
unstable prices, the accumulation of garbage owing to
municipal strikes and, above all, the mass closure of
industry are sources of acute concern. The main
commercial crossing of Karni has now been closed for
more that two months, ever since the Hamas takeover
led to the removal of trained Palestinian Authority
security personnel on the Palestinian side. Neither the
import of raw materials nor the export of commercial
goods through Karni has been possible. As a result,
85 per cent of manufacturing businesses have been
closed and 95 per cent of private construction projects
have been halted - at a loss of $160 million, as well
as $213 million in United Nations projects.
Approximately 70,000 workers have lost their jobs.

The United Nations and others continue efforts
to find a formula that could lead to the early
reopening of Karni. United Nations policy in that
regard is guided by three concerns: first, that the
people of Gaza should not be subject to collective
punishment; secondly, that further damage to the socio-
economic fabric of Gaza will only increase dependency
on aid and fuel extremism; and, thirdly, that all steps
taken should be consistent with the goal of reunifying
the occupied Palestinian territory under the Palestinian
Authority. I call for the cooperation of all parties to
work to reopen the Karni crossing.

Israeli-Palestinian violence has continued this
month, claiming the lives of 51 Palestinians, injuring
145 others and injuring 13 Israelis. A further
18 Palestinians were killed and 88 injured in internal
violence. I would like to draw the Council's attention
to three aspects of that violence.

First, 83 rockets and 89 mortars were fired by
Palestinian militants, including Hamas, from Gaza into
Israel. A school and a day care centre in Sederot were
hit, and an infant was among those injured. There have
also been several attacks with those weapons on the
crossings between Israel and the Gaza Strip. I condemn
those attacks on civilians and on crossing points used
by civilians as well as aid workers seeking to help the
people of Gaza. Reports of the continued smuggling of
weapons and materiel into the Gaza strip from Egypt
are another cause for concern. On 25 August, two
Palestinian militants scaled the wall between Israel and
Gaza and opened fire on IDF positions before being
killed by IDF fire.

Secondly, Palestinian casualties of IDF
operations in the West Bank and Gaza include, in the
latest period, five children killed and 23 injured. A
Palestinian woman also died of a heart attack while
waiting at a West Bank checkpoint to be taken to a
hospital. I remind Israel of its obligations to protect
civilians under international humanitarian law and of
the need for more credible accountability measures, as
called for by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights.

Thirdly, I wish to underscore my concern at the
lawless action of some Israeli settlers, who injured
eight Palestinians, including a United Nations staff
member, in violent incidents in the past month. In
Hebron, there have been confrontations between
Jewish settlers and Israeli security personnel. Eighteen
Israeli security personnel and 12 settlers were injured
during the evacuation of a building in the market of the
Old City after settlers had refused to obey the orders of
the Israeli Government. Three settlers were also
injured by Palestinians throwing rocks. I note also the
continued lack of progress in securing the release of
the captured Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, and I call on
all parties to work with Egypt as it seeks to resolve that
issue and the fate of a number of Palestinian prisoners.

I am also deeply concerned that Israeli settlement
activity continues throughout the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. I regret to say that there are no credible
efforts or actions to remove any of the more than 100
outposts or halt settlement expansion. Israeli steps to
meet its Road Map obligations in this regard are crucial
to the credibility of the renewed diplomatic process.
Settlement activity undermines hope for a contiguous
Palestinian State. Settlements and their supporting
infrastructure are also a key cause of significant
hardship for the Palestinian people, as the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs details in a
forthcoming report.

I have described the bilateral process and the
considerable challenges on the ground. I wish to turn
now to regional and international diplomatic efforts.

In the aftermath of the visit to Israel in late July
of the Foreign Ministers of Egypt and Jordan, as
envoys of the committee of the League of Arab States
on the Arab Peace Initiative, Arab Foreign Ministers
met in Cairo on 30 July and called for the November
international meeting to be comprehensive in nature.
The Secretary-General recently exchanged views with
the Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia, His Royal
Highness Prince Saud Al-Faisal, on these matters. The
Secretary-General believes that the widest possible
attendance from the Arab world at the international
meeting should be encouraged, and he will be working
towards that end.

I note too, in this context, the continued Syrian
commitment to the Arab Peace Initiative. I also
welcome assurances from both the Israeli and the
Syrian leaderships that they have no desire to initiate
conflict, despite reports of military exercises and build-
ups on both sides, and media speculation about
heightened tensions.

The Secretary-General will host his Quartet
partners for a meeting here at United Nations
Headquarters on 23 September, after which he and
other Quartet members will host an iftar dinner for
members of the Arab League's follow-up committee on
the Arab Peace Initiative. This will be an important
moment to take stock of the bilateral efforts under way
and to make preparations for the November
international meeting.

On the following day, 24 September, the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee will meet at the ministerial level
here at the United Nations. We hope that that meeting
will reconfirm the international community's strong
support for the Palestinian Authority Government's
programme. The meeting will also be a key stepping
stone towards a donor pledging conference planned for
December.
07-49245

The Quartet representative, Tony Blair, will
participate in both the Quartet and Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee meetings, which will be an opportunity to
share with international partners his agenda for the
period ahead to support Palestinian reform and
economic rejuvenation. Mr. Blair's core team and
office are being established in Jerusalem, and he is
expected to arrive there on 4 September for his second
visit. Several United Nations offices and departments
are collaborating to finalize arrangements for the
provision of financial management and security
support for Mr. Blair's mission.

In Lebanon, the political deadlock that has
gripped the country since November of last year
continues. International initiatives to facilitate a
Lebanese dialogue and to address the causes behind the
stalemate also continue, but there has been little
tangible shift in the positions of the parties. In this
respect, I pay tribute to the recent efforts of France in
particular.

Attention is now turning towards presidential
elections. The Speaker of Parliament has begun
constitutional consultations, signalling the advent of
the official process through which the Lebanese will
select their next president. The Secretary-General
hopes that the Lebanese will find their way to
consensus on this critical issue. He supports the clear
desire of the Lebanese to hold presidential elections as
stipulated in their Constitution - an outcome that
would help to achieve a breakthrough in the country's
political impasse.

We also note that on 5 August, parliamentary by-
elections were held in a tense but orderly atmosphere
for the seats rendered vacant by the tragic
assassinations of Pierre Gemayel and Walid Eido.

In northern Lebanon, the Lebanese Armed Forces
have entered their fifteenth week of confrontation with
fighters from Fatah al-Islam in the Palestinian refugee
camp of Nahr el-Bared. According to official figures,
141 soldiers have been killed and hundreds wounded
since fighting erupted in May. The exact extent of
civilian casualties has not been established. Fatah al-
Islam fighters have continued to reject calls by the
army to surrender. Last week, the army ensured the
evacuation of the remaining family members of Fatah
al-Islam fighters.
The United Nations has worked closely with the
Lebanese authorities in fashioning a strategy to support
the Government's post-conflict reconstruction of the
Nahr el-Bared camp and its assistance to the
approximately 30,000 Palestinian refugees who have
been displaced by the fighting. Responsive and
concerted action on the part of the Lebanese authorities
and donors will continue to be required in order to
deliver effective assistance.

In the south, the situation has remained generally
calm. There has been a modest decrease in the number
of Israeli air violations of the Blue Line, with
170 overflights recorded since my last briefing to the
Council. However, the fact that the overflights
continue represents a continuing violation.

Despite a welcome reduction in the number of
mine and unexploded-ordnance incidents in recent
months, tragedies continue. On 23 August, a non-
governmental organization worker was killed while
clearing a cluster-bomb site. Four civilian deminers
were injured in that incident, and one supervisor was
injured in another. To date, 22 Lebanese civilians have
been killed as a result of the unexploded ordnance
contaminating large tracts of southern Lebanon.

While the United Nations continues its demining
efforts on the ground, the provision of the necessary
cluster-munitions strike data would greatly facilitate
the rate of clearance operations and reduce the present
threat to civilians. Further to the adoption of resolution
1773 (2007) last week, the Secretary-General reiterates
his call for Israel to provide that strike data.

Let me conclude by saying that we cannot afford
a new failure in the efforts to revive the Arab-Israeli
peace process. There is a hope now which has been
absent for almost seven years. A setback at this stage
could have serious consequences. Nor can we allow
progress in Lebanon in the past year to be stalled by
internal political deadlock or by opponents of Lebanese
sovereignty and unity. In both arenas, the international
community's engagement must be robust and
purposeful in order to advance the implementation of
the resolutions of this Council.

I will miss the opportunity to contribute to those
goals as United Nations Special Coordinator and as
Special Adviser on the Middle East, a role I have
undertaken since last summer's war in Lebanon. I wish
to thank the Secretary-General and his predecessor for
giving me this opportunity, and to pay tribute to the
professionalism and dedication of my colleagues in the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process and here in New York. I
wish them well and look forward to working closely
with the United Nations in the region in my new role.

