Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): 1 want to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this very important
and urgent meeting and to express appreciation to
those Council members who took the initiative for the
meeting. We thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for
his briefing.

We appreciate the statement that the Secretary-
General issued two days ago, which we believe was
timely and most appropriate and reaffirmed the long-
standing position of the United Nations regarding the
approach and the principles on the basis of which peace,
security and justice could be sought by the Israeli and
the Palestinian sides.

The Chairperson ofthe African Union Commission
has also spoken on our behalf when he reiterated the
African Union position and called for renewed efforts to
find ajust and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, stressing the solidarity of the African Union
with the Palestinian people and its support for their
legitimate quest for an independent and sovereign
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We are indeed very concerned by this latest
development surrounding Jerusalem, because unilateral
measures concerning a place with so much historical,
religious and therefore emotional significance is bound
to cause incalculable damage and undermine hopes
for peace.

Jerusalem, as the Secretary-General said, is a
final-status issue that must be resolved through direct
negotiations between the two parties on the basis of
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, taking into account the legitimate concerns
of both the Palestinian and Israeli sides.

It seems to us that there is only one viable,
realistic, fair and sustainable option for resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict: the two-State formula,
which entails two States living side by side in peace
and security.

We are not aware of any other viable option that
would accommodate the interests of both parties and
also accord with the interests of the region for durable
peace and security while being consistent with the
aspiration that people have for justice and fair play.

We are not convinced that this latest development,
which, not surprisingly, has begun to roil the Middle
East, will advance the cause of peace and lay the
foundation for peace, security and the two-State
solution, with all its implications. Obviously, the
Middle East does not need all this, for it already has
its fair share of insecurity and very complex challenges
that could affect not only the security of the region but
also that of the entire globe.

That is why this latest development is so worrisome
and why it is so critical that ways and means be found
to limit the damage that might be caused and to try, no
matter how difficult it might be, to save the two-State
formula in a credible manner and in a way that goes
beyond paying lip service.

Many who still had some hope despite the many
hurdles have already begun to show signs of despair
and hopelessness. We all know, and life experience
has shown so many times, that when those Who
seek moderate solutions are deprived of space and
their credibility is destroyed, the results are never
salutary. That is one way of inadvertently opening
the floodgates for extremism and terrorism. That is to
say, the implications of this latest development are so
huge that it warrants serious handling and readiness
to look into what the Security Council can do to avert
what otherwise could be the further destabilization of a
region that is already facing major challenges.

