Mr. Doutriaux (France)(spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Michael Steiner for his
excellent briefing and also welcome Mr. Covie, the
Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia and the President of
the Coordinating Centre of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo.

Since the representative of Denmark will soon
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU), I will
limit my statement to several points.

The positive balance sheet that we noted in April
when Mr. Steiner last came to New York is holding.
The current phase is decisive in implementing
resolution 1244 (1999), and the progress achieved
gives us great hope that the peace efforts of the
international community will become a reality. The
benchmarks identified by the Special Representative
give us a proper standard for measuring what has
occurred so far, particularly with regard to the
establishment of provisional, effective and democratic
institutions; the establishment of multi-ethnic
integration, according to resolution 1244 (1999); the
rule of law; freedom of movement and the right of the
return of refugees; a reduction in the size of the
Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC); the establishment of
positive relations with Belgrade; the development of
regional cooperation; and economic development.
These are all benchmarks from which one can measure
the progress made.

Considerable progress has been made in recent
months since the establishment in March of the
coalition Government and in the establishment of
democratic institutions. It is encouraging to see that
there is a transfer of certain UNMIK powers to
executive authorities and, at the same time, the
legislative process that is gradually developing. This
can be seen, for example, by the adoption on 4 July of
a resolution on the return of refugees and displaced
persons. This text constitutes an important, positive
step, the spirit of which should set the tone for future
work of the Kosovo Assembly.

The coming municipal elections will provide an
opportunity to further reinforce the democratic basis of
the provisional institutions by providing a new
opportunity for the communities that did not participate
in the 28 October 2000 elections to do or in 2002. This
should be one of UNMIK's essential goals in the
coming months.

In Kosovo, the primacy of the rule of law,
economic development and the creation of a society
that is equal for all and for all communities are
inextricably linked needs. There must be simultaneous
progress in all three areas in order to ensure that there
will be a lasting multi-ethnic future.

We welcome the progress that has been made on
the inter-ethnic dialogue. This carries great hope that
there will be a reconciliation process among the
communities, despite the modest number of sustainable
returns of refugees and displaced persons to their
homes. Likewise, a clarification of the fate of missing
persons remains indispensable. Such an effort is crucial
for the population to enable it more easily to turn the
page on the past. The return of displaced persons will
also be facilitated by greater freedom of movement on
the territory of Kosovo. Recent progress in UNMIK's
relations with Belgrade, as set forth in the common
document of 5 November 2001, attests to this. The
effective struggle against crime is another condition,
and recent arrests carried out by UNMIK are a good
sign in this connection.

We must recall the need for UNMIK to extend
and maintain its authority over Kosovo as a whole and
to fully exercise its authority, other than those powers
that have been transferred to local institutions in
accordance with the constitutional framework of
interim self-government of Kosovo. This must apply to
Mitrovica, where we welcome the efforts of UNMIK
and KFOR to use a global and gradual approach in
concert with the Belgrade authorities, with a View to
dismantling parallel structures. This applies also to the
external relations of Kosovo, which remain the sole
purview of UNMIK and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner.

The deepening of UNMIK's relationships,
notably with Belgrade and Skopje, as described in the
Secretary-General's report, deserves to be encouraged.
The development of regional cooperation in the spirit
of the Zagreb summit should also be supported. In
general terms, all of the communities have great
interest in respecting UNMIK's authority, with a view
to ensuring the proper evolution of the process of
interim self-government, in the spirit of resolution
1244 (1999).

Finally, I would like to welcome the fine
cooperation that exists in the field between UNMIK
and KFOR.

