Mr. Mladenov: On behalfofthe Secretary-General,
I will devote my regular briefing on the situation in
the Middle East today to presenting the ninth report
(8/2019/251) on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), which covers the period between 15 December
2018 and 15 March 2019. Beforelprovide an update on the
developments related to the provisions of the resolution
that have taken place following the submission of the
written report of the Secretary-General to the Council,
I would like to address the situation on the ground in
the past 48 hours.

On 25 March, a rocket was launched from the Gaza
Strip, directly hitting a house in central Israel. Seven
family members were injured, including three children.
Over the following 24 hours, at least 103 rockets and
mortars were fired from Gaza towards Israel, some of
which were intercepted by the Iron Dome system, while
others caused material damage to a house in Sderot or
hit uninhabited areas. The Israeli Air Force conducted
42 strikes on various locations in Gaza, while some
16 shells were fired by the Israel Defense Forces and
the Israeli navy towards the Gaza Strip. According
to local sources, seven Palestinians were injured as a
result of the strikes. Several buildings were destroyed,
including Hamas offices and security buildings. At 6
am. this morning, local time, a fragile calm seems to
have taken hold.

In the past 10 days there have been two rockets
attacks from Gaza targeting the Tel Aviv area, which
represents a very serious escalation. Since the early
hours of yesterday, my team and I have been working
intensely with Egypt and all concerned parties to
ensure that the situation does not spiral out of control.
As I have said many times in the Security Council, but
I will repeat it again here today, nobody has an interest
in a full military confrontation in Gaza.

A new conflict will be devastating for the
Palestinian people, it will have consequences for Israelis
who live in the vicinity of the Gaza perimeter, and it
is likely to have regional repercussions. This is why
I ask all participants today to join the United Nations
in condemning the continued indiscriminate firing
of rockets towards Israel. Such acts of provocation
only dramatically increase the risk of escalation and
ultimately damage our collective efforts to support the
people of Gaza and intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
We must also call on all sides to exercise maximum
restraint as the situation remains extremely tense.

Returning to the report under resolution 2334
(2016), I have to begin by saying that once again no
steps have been taken by Israel to "immediately and
completely cease all settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem", as
called for in paragraph 2 of the resolution. Since the end
of the reporting period, the Government announced the
construction of 840 new units in Ariel. This decision
was presented as a response to an attack on 17 March.

Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures also continued across the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Since 15 March, an
additional seven Palestinian-owned structures have
been demolished or seized by the Israeli authorities.
This has resulted in the displacement of nine people.
A water cistern in Susiya, three structures belonging
to communities in southern Hebron and an elementary
school building under construction in the Shuafat
refugee camp in East Jerusalem are among the
buildings demolished.

Resolution 2334 (2016) also calls, in paragraph 6,
"for immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians". However, even the brief period since
the submission of the written report, as witnessed by
recent events, has been characterized by escalating
violence. Beginning on 14 and 15 March, thousands
of Palestinians in Gaza demonstrated under the
slogan "we want to live". They protested the dire
socioeconomic circumstances in Gaza and "the
injustice due to the Palestinian division and the Hamas
takeover of Gaza by force and violence". Although the
protests were generally non-violent, Hamas security
personnel violently dispersed participants and many,
including women, children, journalists and human
rights activists, were beaten and hospitalized. Tens
of homes were raided in search of demonstrators.
Local human rights monitors reported that over 1,000
people, including children, were arrested and many
reportedly beaten. The crackdown was condemned by
all Palestinian factions.

Meanwhile, protests at the Gaza fence, which had
subsided for a couple of days, also resumed. At least 11
incendiary devices were launched from Gaza towards
Israel just since 15 March. In response, the IDF shelled
or conducted air strikes against targets in Gaza on four
occasions, causing no injuries. That, of course, does not
include the rockets fired in the escalation of the past
48 hours.

Tensions in the occupied West Bank also continued.
Four Palestinians were killed by Israeli security forces
in various security operations and other incidents, while
two Israelis, including one soldier and one civilian,
were killed by Palestinians. On 17 March, a Palestinian
stabbed an Israeli soldier near the Ariel settlement, took
his rifle and shot him and an Israeli civilian, killing both
and severely injuring another soldier. In the subsequent
search operations, 15 homes were raided, a temporary
security cordon was imposed on several villages and
three of the suspect's family members were arrested.
Two days later, the suspect was killed by the Israeli
security forces in the village of Abwein.

Another incident took place on 19 March, when
Jewish worshippers, accompanied by Israeli security
forces, entered Nablus on their way to visit Joseph's
Tomb - a monthly practice that is consistent with
previous agreements between the parties. While the
details of the ensuing clashes remain disputed, two
Palestinians were killed by the Israeli security forces
and at least 27 others were injured.

In Bethlehem, on 20 March, a 26-year-old Palestinian
was shot and killed by the Israeli security forces and
another was injured while driving near a partial military
checkpoint under disputed circumstances. In Beit Sira
village, near Ramallah, a Palestinian man was similarly
shot and injured near a checkpoint. Israeli authorities
have launched investigations into both incidents.

On 24 March, two Israeli prison guards were
stabbed by Hamas inmates in Ktziot Prison, in southern
Israel. Following that, 12 prisoners were reportedly
injured in ensuing clashes between guards and inmates.

Resolution 2334 (2016), in paragraph 7, calls
upon the parties "to refrain from provocative actions,
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric". Unfortunately,
such actions and rhetoric have continued. On 17 March,
both Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad praised
the attack near the settlement of Ariel and called it
a "heroic operation", while Fatah social media sites
praised the perpetrator as a "heroic martyr". Israeli
political leaders have also continued to call for targeted
assassinations of Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad
officials and for the annexation of the West Bank.

Resolution 2334 (2016), in paragraph 4, reiterates
the calls of the Middle East Quartet for

"affirmative steps to be taken immediately to
reverse negative trends on the ground that are
imperilling the two-State solution".

No such steps were taken during the reporting period.

Meanwhile, the situation at Jerusalem's holy sites
continues to be tense. On 17 March, the Jerusalem
Magistrate Court reinstated for 60 days an order to close
the building located in Bab Al-Rahmah - also known
as Mercy Gate - in the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount compound, which has been closed by the Israeli
authorities since 2003 on security grounds. The Islamic
Endowment - the Waqf - echoed by the Palestinian
and Jordanian Ministries of Foreign Affairs, maintains
that Israeli courts lack jurisdiction over the holy site,
which lies in the territory occupied in 1967, and warned
against any changes to the historical and legal status
quo. Israel, however, considers the establishment of a
mosque in the Mercy Gate area to be a violation of the
status quo. As of 20 March, the Jerusalem Magistrate
Court order had not been executed. Daily prayers
continue in the Mercy Gate area, while discussions
between Israel and Jordan are ongoing.

The past few days have not seen a resolution of the
funding crisis created by Israel's decision to withhold
6 per cent of the revenues it collects on behalf the
Palestinian Authority, and the Palestinian leadership's
refusal to accept any clearance transfers unless the
full amount is reinstated. The Palestinian Government
has begun implementing severe austerity measures
The measures include a 50 per cent salary cut for over
50 per cent of Palestinian Government employees,
overall ceiling on salary payments, the cessation
of promotions, appointments and bonuses and of
the purchase of property and cars, and a 20 per cent
reduction in operational expenses across the board,
including reduced expenses on travel, hospitality and
fuel. In addition, the Palestinian Authority plans to
borrow from domestic banks between now and July.
This will all have a substantial impact on the Palestinian
economy, resulting in reduced purchasing power and
further reduction in gross domestic product growth rate
both in West Bank and Gaza.

In closing, I would like to reiterate some
observations concerning the implementation of the
provisions of resolution 2334 (2006).

The expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, is continuing
unabated. The advancement, approval or tender of
more than 3,000 units in the occupied West Bank,
as indicated in the written report before the Council
(S/2019/251), is the largest batch since May 2018. This
includes the latest announcement of over 800 units in
the settlement of Ariel. Ireiterate that the establishment
of settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, has no legal effect and
constitutes a flagrant violation of international law,
as stated in resolution 2334 (2016), and must cease
immediately and completely.

The demolition and seizure of Palestinian structures
also continues. The demolition of structures linked
to vital water connections in Area C communities in
the West Bank, which were already suffering water
shortages, is particularly troubling. I am concerned by
the continued pressure being placed on Palestinians
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Such policies must be reversed and Israel should abide
by its obligations under international law.

I am saddened by the persistent violence that
continues to result in the tragic loss of Palestinian
and Israeli lives. Recent incidents in the West Bank
and Gaza highlight the mounting tensions across the
occupied Palestinian territory and the risk of a broader
escalation of the conflict. I call on the parties to reject
violence and to work to reduce tensions. There is no
justification for terror, and I call on all to join the
United Nations in condemning it unequivocally.

I am concerned that we may once again be facing
another very dangerous escalation of violence in Gaza,
with potentially catastrophic consequences. The past
two days have shown us how precariously close we
came once again to the brink of war. The indiscriminate
launching of rockets and mortars against Israeli towns
and villages violates international law and places
civilian lives at great risk. The launching of incendiary
and explosive devices towards Israel must also stop.

I also remain gravely concerned by the number
of deaths and injuries of Palestinians along the Gaza
perimeter fence. Israeli security forces have the
responsibility to exercise restraint, and lethal force
must be used only when strictly unavoidable in order
to protect life.

I strongly condemn the campaign of arrests and
violence inside Gaza against protesters, including
women and children. The brutal beating of journalists
and human rights workers and the raiding of homes
is particularly alarming. The long-suffering people of
Gaza have a right to protest without fear of reprisal, and
I call on all Member States tojoin the United Nations in
condemning such actions.

As I have repeatedly emphasized, the situation
in Gaza is untenable and the latest protests further
highlight the need for the return ofa unified Palestinian
Government to Gaza. I call on all Palestinian
factions to engage in earnest with Egypt in order to
implement the 2017 Cairo agreement and end the
intra-Palestinian divisions. While the United Nations
is continuing its efforts to de-escalate the situation,
progress on the reconciliation track and the lifting of
closures on Gaza remain essential. I encourage Member
States to support those vital efforts.

The lack of resolution ofthe Palestinian Authority's
funding crisis threatens to further destabilize an
already volatile situation. Both parties should continue
to implement their bilateral agreements and avoid
taking unilateral actions that undermine the two-
State solution.

The situation in the Old City of Jerusalem also
remains a serious concern. I urge all parties to work
towards de-escalating of tensions. I encourage Israel
and Jordan to work together to uphold the status quo at
the Holy Sites, noting the special and historic role of the
Hashemite Kingdom as custodian of the Muslim and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem.

Lastly, I remain deeply concerned by the lack of
progress towards the realization ofa two-State solution,
in line with relevant United Nations resolutions, long-
standing international parameters and prior agreements.
There is no viable alternative to the two-State solution.
Given the interconnected nature of conflicts throughout
the region and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict's potential
to fuel extremist narratives, creating the conditions
for the parties to return to meaningful negotiations
remains critical.

What is needed first and foremost, however, is the
necessary leadership and political will to take concrete
steps in support of ending the occupation and realizing
a lasting peace. Until that can be found, another
generation of Israelis and Palestinians is destined to
spend their lives searching in vain for an elusive peace.

