Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I join previous
speakers in thanking you, Sir, for having convened this
debate, which serves as an engine for generating
complex and open dialogue to analyse and examine the
conceptual issue of the rule of law. We would also like
to join previous speakers in thanking Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his active involvement in
addressing this important subject and for his follow-up
report (S/2011/634*).

In recent years, the international community has
stepped up its efforts to address the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations. Following the
commitment to the rule of law made in the Outcome
Document of the 2005 World Summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1), the rule of law was placed
high on the United Nations and other international
agendas. A consensus emerged that the rule of law
should be promoted at both the national and the
international levels and based on the United Nations
Charter, the norms of international law and the
principles of good governance.

In its presidential statement of June 2010, the
Council recognized that

"respect for international humanitarian law is an
essential component of the rule of law in conflict
situations and reaffirm[ed] its conviction that the
protection of the civilian population in armed
conflict should be an important aspect of any
comprehensive strategy to resolve conflict"
(S/PRST/20] 0/11).

We share the views expressed by Council members and
other speakers who have called for a more systematic
approach to protection.

We also trust that increased efforts to fight
impunity at the national and international levels are
essential. It is commendable that the Council continues
to focus on the responsibility of States to end impunity
and to thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity or
other grave violations of international humanitarian
law in order to avoid their recurrence and to seek
justice and peace.

Armenia attaches the utmost importance to the
promotion of justice and the rule of law, as these
values are indispensable to the maintenance of
international and regional security and the protection
of human rights. Moreover, systematic breaches of the
rule of law contribute to violations of basic human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including peoples'
right to self-determination, which are among the major
and most immediate causes of regional conflicts.

The notion of the rule of law represents a concept
that is diametrically opposed to rule by force or the use
of force. This principle stipulates a framework for
peaceful conflict resolution and democratic
governance. Strengthening the rule of law based on
justice and security therefore requires a deeper
commitment and a broader vision of the future.
Adherence to the principles of the non-use or threat of
use of force, clearly and unequivocally declared by the
parties concerned in conflict and post-conflict settings,
is another crucial factor for creating an environment
conducive to building mutual trust and achieving
peace, justice and security.

The rule of law is a concept at the very heart of
the stated mission of the United Nations and other
international organizations. It is a well-known fact that,
in an increasing number of operations on the ground,
the United Nations is calling on the services of relevant
regional and subregional organizations, since in certain
areas and in some cases these international actors are
able to provide expertise and a better understanding of
local particularities to complement that of the United
Nations.

While the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace, relevant
international organizations, including the Bretton
Woods institutions, other multilateral actors and civil
society, can play a significant role and contribute in a
coordinated manner to the development and
strengthening of the rule of law and the maintenance of
international peace and security.

