Ms. Loj (Denmark): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having taken the
initiative to organize this debate. Likewise, I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno and Executive Director Dr. Peter Piot for
their respective briefings.

There might not be scientific proof that
HIV/AIDS poses a direct threat to peace and stability.
However, we know that AIDS is a killer and that more
than 3 million children, women and men died from
AIDS last year. More will die this year, and the
economic, social, cultural and political implications
will continue to worsen. We are seeing State
institutions being seriously weakened in the worst-hit
regions of Africa. That gradual collapse of governance
functions illustrates a new form of State collapse: the
fading State.

Fortunately, the world is responding, and the
comprehensive threat posed by HIV/AIDS is getting
more and more attention. In his report entitled "In
larger freedom" (A/59/2005), the Secretary-General
called for a new security consensus, one that includes
deadly infectious diseases and, in particular,
HIV/AIDS. In doing so the Secretary-General shared
the views of the High-level Panel on Threat,
Challenges and Change, which identified AIDS as one
of the most significant global threats today - a point
of view we share fully. It is now time for the
international community to demonstrate its firm
commitment. A strong statement on HIV/AIDS in the
declaration to be adopted by the summit to be held in
September 2005 will be an important step in the right
direction.

The risk of HIV infection increases in the post-
conflict phase, when the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants takes place.
Evidence indicates that women are most at risk. In all
its deliberations, the Security Council must address
that aspect where relevant.

The expected establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission will mark a new beginning for a
comprehensive approach to countries emerging from
conflict. In the post-conflict phase, the Peacebuilding
Commission must in its strategies address this issue
and enhance the coordination of the fight against
HIV/AIDS.
Denmark recognizes that significant progress has
been made in the implementation of resolution 1308
(2000) in the five years of its existence. We commend
the efforts of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to mainstream
HIV/AIDS into their mandated activities.
Strengthening cooperation between DPKO and

UNAIDS and its partners - including non-
governmental organizations, bilateral and multilateral
donors and national Governments - would stimulate

further progress.

Allow me to refer to 5191st meeting, held in this
Chamber on the last day of May, on the theme of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In the
presidential statement adopted at that meeting, the
Council condemned all acts of sexual exploitation and
abuse and expressed its support for the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy in that regard. It is our
sincere hope that the increased focus on the code of
conduct for United Nations peacekeepers and the
efforts made by troop-contributing countries to
implement the recommendations of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations will also have
the added benefit of positively influencing the issue we
have before us today. The transmission of HIV in a
conflict zone should never be an act of a United
Nations peacekeeper.

In April this year, the Danish Minister for
Development Cooperation presented a new strategy for
Denmark's support for the international fight against
HIV/AIDS. The strategy builds on the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS that emerged from the
special session of the General Assembly (resolution S-26/2, annex) held in 2001 and highlights the
priorities for Denmark's response to the epidemic.

Women, young people and children orphaned by
the epidemic are among the most vulnerable members
of a population. The strategy has a particular focus on
action directed towards supporting those groups.
Furthermore, the strategy highlights the need for
increased action to combat stigma and discrimination
in an HIV/AIDS context. It also points to the crucial
role played by civil society, including people living
with HIV/AIDS, in the fight against HIV/AIDS.

Let me conclude by commending UNAIDS and
DPKO for their collective and persistent efforts
regarding the important issues we are discussing here
today.

