Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I would like to express
my sincere gratitude to the members of the Security
Council for their overwhelming support of the draft
resolution contained in document S/2104/l89, as well
as for their support in trying to resolve the crisis by
diplomatic and political means.

I would like to thank all the sponsors of the draft
resolution for their support. In this difficult time for
my country, we really need their support, and I want to
assure them that it is highly appreciated by the people
of Ukraine.

I would like to particularly thank the Member States
who are the guarantors of the Budapest Memorandum
who supported Ukraine - the United States, the
United Kingdom, France and China - and who several
times spoke in favour of territorial integrity. It is awful

that the other one, the fifth guarantor, the Russian
Federation, violated its own obligations.

All the appeals by the united membership to the
wisdom of the Russian leadership were not successful.
I received a call 40 minutes ago as we were discussing
the crisis in Crimea, Ukraine. Members noticed that
somebody called me. Russian troops entered the
mainland from the south, from Crimea. Now we are
facing a new development and we are to face an even
more dangerous stance of the Russian Federation.

I appeal to all Council members to find the means
and measures in the Security Council and the United
Nations, as well as at the bilateral level, to do the utmost
possible to stop the aggressor, the Russian delegation,
present in the Chamber.

For us it is no surprise that Russia has vetoed
today's draft resolution. For that permanent member
of the Council, it has become the custom to veto any
measure aimed at maintaining international peace and
security.

We remember the vetoes of draft resolutions on
peacekeeping missions in Syria, which brought about
thousands and thousands of deaths. I am confident
that when Council members gather together next week
with Ambassador Tanin to speak about the reform of
the Security Council, the issue of the right of the veto
will be discussed. Two cases, Syria and Crimea, will
certainly be considered as examples of the behaviour
of a permanent member of the Council when peace is
needed.

(spoke in Russian)

The representative of the Russian Federation
has stated many times in this Chamber that Russia's
right of the veto was gained through the blood of the
Second World War. I would like to recall that it was the
collective bloodshed of Ukrainians, Belarusians and
Georgians. To manipulate the issue of the bloodshed is
absolutely unacceptable. Moreover, it is a manipulation
of the right of the veto before the new blood on one's
hands. Previously it was Georgian blood - now it is
Ukrainian. I believe that such chaos should end now.

Today I take an optimistic View of the situation.
Why so? Because I am convinced that the statement
made by the Russian representative expressed not the
voice of the Russian Federation, but rather the voice of
the Soviet Union. The genuine voice of Russia today
can be heard on the streets and squares of Moscow,
St. Petersburg, Samara and Yekaterinburg, where
thousands and thousands of people have gone to
express their support and desire to protect Ukraine and
its territorial integrity. That represents the democratic
future of Russia and the basis on which we will build
our fraternal ties.

Today the question of how to stop the aggressor
concerns all of us. It involves the loss of the entire
system of values established over the years through the
untiring efforts of Member States towards a collective
security system and non-proliferation.

(spoke in English)

I am confident that today the entire United Nations
family demonstrated its unity. Tragic and dramatic
events in Ukraine have united all of us. We must
demonstrate that we are capable of protecting the
United Nations system and the global security system
through a new approach. I am absolutely confident that
we will be able to do that.

