Mr. Keating: My tour of duty comes to an end
next week. On the day that I arrived in Mogadishu in
January 2016, I was taken straight to the President's
office to discuss a threat by federal member states to
suspend cooperation with the central Government.
When I left Mogadishu two days ago, the country faced
a similar situation.

The structural problems that shape Somali politics
and security have not changed, but that should not
obscure some remarkable achievements in the past three
years. There was a peaceful transition of presidential
power with a result that was accepted as legitimate.
A new Upper House, representing the federal states,
came into being. The percentage of women Members of
Parliament went up from 14 to 24 per cent, higher than
both the African and the global average. A famine was
averted in 2017 thanks to national mobilization, better
preparedness and the generosity and speed of donors in
providing funding. That is a largely untold story that is
a credit both to Somalis and to the United Nations.

The federal map is being filled in. One year ago,
HirShabelle state was created. There have been successes
in conflict prevention and resolution. I just crossed
lines and went shopping in Galkayo, a town that was
until recently very insecure and bitterly divided. Other
conflicts, such as between Puntland and Somaliland,
have been prevented through intense diplomatic activity
by the United Nations, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and others.

A framework for addressing chronic insecurity
is in place: the national security architecture and the
comprehensive approach to security.

The plan for the transition of lead security
responsibility from the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) to Somali forces is being
implemented. Somali forces just took over Mogadishu's
iconic stadium and adjacent areas.

There is a Government in place with a compelling
reform agenda, anchored in the strong partnership
between President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
Farmajo and Prime Minister Hassan Ali Khayre.
Its primary objective is to make the country more
creditworthy and accountable as a step towards
regaining full sovereignty, reducing dependency and
attracting both public and private investment.

Benchmarks set by the International Monetary
Fund are being met, domestic revenues are increasing,
public financial management is improving, business
confidence is growing and the prospect of arrears
clearance and debt reliefis closer.

Legislative and institutional frameworks are being
developed for the 2020 elections. Real progress is
being made to review the Constitution. Federal states
have been more engaged on a range of issues, and the
work Federalization Negotiation Technical Committee
has energized the Government's agenda. A national
reconciliation framework is being developed with a
view to all players in Somali society playing a part in
addressing grievances and resolving conflicts.

Somalis can draw strength from those positive
changes. However, no one should delude themselves
about the challenges ahead, many of them structural.

Somalis continue to experience profound insecurity,
high and costly levels of violence, ruthless attacks by
Al-Shabaab, limited access tojustice and basic services,
an absence of local governance, chronic poverty and a
lack of income andjobs.

The country is vulnerable to climate shocks. There
are 2.6 million internally displaced persons. It is one
of the most disadvantageous places in the world for
women, and the educational, work and life opportunities
for young people remain heartbreakingly limited.

Abuse and the deprivation of human rights is
common, including sexual violence, harmful traditional
practices, limited freedom of expression and arbitrary
arrests and detentions, including of children. A national
human rights commission has yet to be established.

Disputes over borders, resources and revenues,
power-sharing and grievances between clans and
interest groups have the potential to turn Violent and
result in further human misery and displacement.

The 4.5 power-sharing convention that accommodates
the interests of powerful clans at the expense of weaker
ones and of minorities has allowed progress, but is a
source of exploitable grievances.

The rule of law is weak. A justice and corrections
model is close to being agreed, but capacity remains
very limited. The Government lacks the means to
ensure that judgements are implemented; too often,
people turn to Al-Shabaab instead.

Corruption is systemic, used to gain and retain
power. It penalizes the poor, the majority. Untraceable
money changing hands continues to be a defining
feature of Somali politics.

Tackling corruption also requires structural
change - building and funding independent justice
institutions, appointing well-trained and competent
staff in the civil service.

Somalis are proud of their clan lineage, but the
country cannot afford to let clan identity be the only
basis for determining appointments. Young people in
particular deserve institutions that deliver services.

The Government is fully aware of those challenges.
The issue is whether it will be able to tackle them, and
whether the international community will be able to
provide coherent, adequate and timely support to help
it do so. There are many risks. Four stand out.

First is the risk that Al-Shabaab and other extremists
will derail progress. Despite the success of AMISOM
and Somali security forces in containing Al-Shabaab,
it remains resilient. It uses targeted assassinations,
improvised explosive devices and the extortion both of
communities and businesses, including in Mogadishu
and other towns. Managing and mitigating that risk
requires systematic degradation of Al-Shabaab, as
well as increasing the legitimacy and capacity of the
Government. One without the other will not work.

Accelerated implementation of the national security
architecture and investment in the comprehensive
approach to security are essential. Those can facilitate
more coherent approaches by international partners,
but success depends primarily upon the implementation
of agreements among Somali leaders on security roles
and responsibilities throughout the country.

Second is the risk that political differences will
bring progress, the passage of key legislation and the
implementation of the Government's reform-and-
security agenda to a grinding halt. The deficit of trust
between the central Government and federal member
states and the recent decision by the latter to suspend
cooperation are very worrisome. The failure to restore
trust and cooperation sends a negative signal to both
Somalis and those international partners trying to
make a case to sceptical capitals that Somali is ready
for additional financial and security support. Federal
states should use the upcoming meeting of the National
Security Council, to be convened by the President, as
an opportunity for constructive engagement. Building
upon progress to date, there is scope for more investment
in the capacity of federal states and more outreach and
communication from the centre. Securing the buy-
in of key constituencies to the national agenda - not
just the federal states, but also parliamentarians, clan
power brokers, the business community, including the
diaspora, and traditional elders - is becoming tougher
and more expensive as state and national elections
approach, but it is essential.

Mitigating that risk requires a twin-track approach.
Fundamental issues, including how power should
be shared, allocated and separated, the nature of the
federal state and the respective powers of Federal
and state Governments, should be addressed through
the constitutional review. Young people, women and
minorities need to be consulted. Strong and differing
views about federalism are legitimate, but if the political
culture is to change, those need to be resolved through
dialogue, not unilateral actions. More immediately,
the greatest challenge is to reach political agreements
that enable forward momentum without prejudicing the
outcome of the constitutional review. Those include
the electoral law, the integration of security forces
and resource- and revenue-sharing agreements. In
that context, trust is the key ingredient, although it
is difficult given the fact that politicians suspect, or
assume, that their opponents' principal preoccupation
is to remove or replace them. The concept of patriotic
opposition is weak, and the rules of the political game
are blurred and blunt. Motions of no-confidence and
impeachment and elections are abused and used for
financial and political gain. They need to be revamped.
Politicians' role should be to get things done, rather
than promote clan or personal interests. That will take
time and will happen only if agreements and processes
are seen as legitimate and the result of constructive
engagement. Trust requires respect for due process,
the commitment to non-violence and the willingness to
engage and make compromises for the broader good.
That was my parting message to Somali leaders.

The third risk, notwithstanding Council unity, is
fragmentation in the international community. There
are a number of dimensions to that. The Government's
security, political and economic reform agenda will be
far more successful if partners work with one another,
based on agreed national plans and capable management
systems. In some areas that is working, and the results
have been impressive, including humanitarian and
electoral support and economic and financial reforms.
Strong partnerships are being brokered by the United
Nations and international financial institutions.
Much high-level budget support is in the pipeline,
including from the European Union and Norway, but
in other areas, namely, the security area, more bilateral
approaches prevail, thereby complicating the chances
of success.

Another area in which fragmentation must be
resisted is the basis upon which AMISOM. will
remain in the country. AMISOM. deserves predictable
funding and a clear horizon for its drawdown, based
on reconfiguration around progress in degrading
Al-Shabaab and on evident Somali capacity to assume
security responsibilities. A premature departure of
AMISOM. could be disastrous, but in order to be
sustained, support for AMISOM, as well as support
for Somali security institutions, requires success in
improving the population's security. Somalis have
taken ownership of a conditions-based transition, and
AMISOM. can help drive its success. The role played by
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS)
will need to evolve as transition advances. The current
UNSOS review will shed light on that.

A further test of international unity relates to
Somalia's vulnerability to partners' rivalries, including
in the Gulf. The atmosphere created by the resurgence
of diplomatic activity in the Horn of Africa and the
rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea may, I
hope, prove contagious. Beneficial knock-on effects
could include containment or a swifter resolution of
conflicts among Somalis, including talks between
Hargeisa and Mogadishu, which need to resume,
and finding a respectful basis upon which Somalia
can benefit from historic links and support with all
its partners.

A fourth risk is that the population will once
again face the prospect of a humanitarian catastrophe.
Unfortunately, the risk of that happening is high, and
millions are already living on the edge of a dignified
existence. Future crises will result from the combination
of climate-related shocks, armed conflict provoked by
Al-Shabaab and unresolved grievances, competition
over natural resources and the systemic marginalization
of certain groups. The objective should be to reduce
human vulnerability by creating jobs, investing in
urbanization, water management and access to clean
power, and adding value to the country's enormous
economic potential, whether in livestock, fisheries,
agriculture or information technology.

The future of Somalia is in the hands ofthe Somalis.
The Government recognizes that, and I pay tribute to
its determination to reassert Somalia's sovereignty.
Political will alone, however, is not enough. Practical
capacities are essential, as is success in fostering truly
inclusive politics, which is far from easy in a political
economy scarred by 30 years of violent conflict,
with spoilers who benefit from insecurity. Success
depends upon political, business, traditional and other
leaders working together for the common good, while
leveraging the country's potential wealth to transform
prospects for people - especially youth. Cynicism
concerning the likelihood of that ever happening and of
Somalis being able to find a basis upon which to resolve
their problems has been punctured in the past few years.
There is now a sense of the possible, not of just the
impossible. The more that political leaders show unity,
the greater the opportunity, and the responsibility,
of international partners to invest in all parts of the
country and its leadership.

In conclusion, I should like to thank the Council for
its continued support for Somalia, the United Nations
and me and my team. It has been a privilege to work
with international partners and, above all, with the
leaders and people of Somalia.

