Mr. Moussa: I would like at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month.
It is an honour for me to address the Council and
introduce the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/693) on the Lord's Resistance Army-affected
areas. The report assesses the threat posed by the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) and the regional and
international efforts to address it, particularly those
made by the United Nations.

This is the second report on the LRA since 2006.
Members will recall that on 21 July 2011, Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun briefed the Council on the
transnational threat posed by the group in the Central
African region, particularly in remote areas of the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and South Sudan.

Over the years, the LRA's brutal and
indiscriminate attacks on civilians have resulted in
deaths, abductions, looting and the displacement of
some 440,000 persons, who are today displaced or
living as refugees in the countries affected. Although it
does not pursue a political agenda, the group continues
to perpetrate serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law with impunity, and
to instil fear and terror among local populations. The
affected countries' limited capacity to control their
porous borders, which stretch over vast areas, means
that the group can move easily, crossing the borders of
the affected countries.

The toll has been particularly heavy in
communities in the Haut and Bas Uele districts of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where 335,000
persons have been displaced due to the LRA. The
majority are being generously hosted by local
communities, which already have only limited access
to basic infrastructure, such as schools and health care.
The humanitarian situation has deteriorated further this
year, with 49,000 persons newly displaced in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo alone during the
first half of the year. Constrained humanitarian access
due to insecurity continues to be a significant
challenge, and the remoteness of and logistical hurdles
involved in reaching many locations make operations
costly and time-consuming.

Recently, the Governments of the LRA-affected
countries have taken important steps to address the
threat, including through coordinated military
operations. However, the national security forces of
those countries lack the full range of resources and
capabilities in areas such as logistics, intelligence-
11-59157
gathering and air mobility to effectively deal with the
problem on their own as well as extend their authority
throughout their respective territories, protect the
civilian populations and enforce the rule of law.

Over the years, the affected countries, the African
Union, the European Union, the United Nations and the
wider international community, for that matter, have
made a significant investment in efforts to address the
LRA threat, including through the provision of troops
and logistical support. It is crucial that we collectively
remain engaged on this important issue.

In this context, over the years the quest to engage
in further analysis regarding the LRA has produced
much in the way of results. Therefore, additional
concerted actions that yield concrete results on the
ground for the communities living with the
consequences of this crisis must continue.

In our View, the military operations being
conducted by the Member States affected should be
intelligence-driven and targeted, and ensure the
containment rather than the dispersal of LRA elements
in order to maximize their impact. In that regard, the
recent deployment by the United States of 100 combat-
equipped military personnel to provide training and
advisory support to national armies in the Central
African region that are carrying out operations against
the LRA should enhance the efforts already being
undertaken by the Governments of the affected
countries.

In addition, while LRA combatants attempting to
leave the group face serious risks and challenges, the
Governments of the affected countries should continue
their efforts, in collaboration with their partners, to
facilitate the defection of LRA combatants and ensure
that they are able to participate in effective
reintegration programmes.

The Secretary-General welcomes the African
Union's initiative to develop a regional strategy to
address the LRA, as it provides an important new
opportunity for coordinated action by the affected
countries. The United Nations Office to the African
Union (UNOAU) is continuing to provide planning
support for the modalities of the strategy, including
military planning for the regional intervention force
and, together with the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and humanitarian partners, is
helping to develop a plan for the protection of
civilians.
11-59157

Meanwhile, as indicated in the Secretary-
General's report that is before the Council, the United
Nations system is taking a number of actions aimed at
addressing the LRA problem in a more effective and
coherent manner through its political, peacekeeping,
human rights, humanitarian and development efforts in
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, South Sudan and Uganda. In that
connection, steps have been taken to further strengthen
coordination and synergy among the United Nations
entities, including with the UNOAU and the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
In addition, the United peacekeeping operations in the
region are taking further steps to strengthen civilian
protection, within their mandates and capabilities, in
strategic locations in the LRA-affected areas, so as to
help deter attacks against civilians and facilitate
humanitarian operations.

UNOCA, in its capacity as the United Nations
political focal point for the LRA in the region, and in
close cooperation with all relevant United Nations
presences on the ground, will continue to enhance the
linkages in the work of the United Nations and other
partners and facilitate coordination and information-
sharing among them. Meanwhile, I will continue to
engage the United Nations presence in the region with
a View to articulating the modalities for coordinated
support to the African Union regional initiative and for
the affected countries.

Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to
express my gratitude to our partners for their continued
efforts in addressing the LRA threat. These efforts
should be strengthened and sufficiently supported by
all concerned so that they can be sustained in order to
help eradicate the threat posed by the LRA.

