Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First allow me, Madam, to say how delighted
we are to see you presiding over the Council as it
discusses such an important issue: the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We would also like to
express our gratitude to Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
to Under-Secretary-General Oshima and to the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Gnaedinger, for their important reports.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
continues to remain at the centre of the international
community's attention, and there is good reason for
this. Despite the fact that over the last half century a
multitude of international instruments on human rights
and humanitarian law have been adopted, in times of
conflict completely innocent civilians continue to
suffer, including children, women, the elderly and
refugees, as well as humanitarian personnel who are
providing assistance to them.

The unsatisfactory situation regarding the
protection of civilians requires ongoing coordinated
measures at the global, regional and national levels. We
welcome the Secretary-General's report on this item
(S/2002/l 300), which seeks to provide a
comprehensive analysis of the reasons for the
violations of norms of international humanitarian law
during armed conflict and to provide recommendations
to increase the protection of civilians.

Russia is pleased at the progress that has been
made over the past 18 months in enhancing the
effectiveness of measures in this area, in particular the
analysis of changing trends and, thus, of new
conditions for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

Many of the Secretary-General's proposals are in
keeping with Russia's position. I refer to providing
additional protection for vulnerable populations,
ensuring access to humanitarian assistance and
prosecuting those responsible for crimes against
international law, including through the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We agree with the Secretary-
General's View that the upsurge in terrorism is
confronting us with new challenges with respect to
activities that seek to protect civilians. It is the duty of
each State to wage a relentless campaign against
terrorism, whose very essence erodes the status of
civilian populations.

Russia is also very concerned about cases of
sexual exploitation and violence and trafficking in
women and girls perpetrated by humanitarian personnel
and peacekeepers. In that connection, we support the
measures formulated by the United Nations to increase
protection and care for vulnerable persons in situations
of humanitarian crisis and conflict, in particular the
adoption of core principles for the conduct of United
Nations humanitarian workers.

However, we believe that the eradication of war
from societies and the prevention and halting of
conflicts are of crucial importance for the protection of
civilians. Effective, commensurate international
reaction is required for any crisis, including
humanitarian crisis. This reaction should be based on
the norms of international law and the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. That implies that the Security
Council bears primary responsibility in questions
relating to the maintenance of international peace, that
States must scrupulously comply with the rules of
international conduct and that all parties to an armed
conflict must comply with the norms and principles of
international law, including international humanitarian
law.

It is primarily States and the parties to an armed
conflict that are required to protect civilians. However,
international efforts, including efforts by the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and other United Nations structures
may have an additional positive impact on
accomplishing this task. It is important, however, that
such efforts be properly coordinated so that in
protecting civilians - and, indeed, on other issues -
there is a strict division of labour, in accordance with
the United Nations Charter and other international
legal instruments.

In order to enhance the effectiveness of the
Security Council's work in this area, and in the light of
the Secretary-General's recommendations, we need to
take fuller account of the nature of each specific armed
conflict and, on that basis, to take action to protect
civilians.

The mechanism for interaction between the
Council and the representatives of the relevant regional
and subregional organizations requires further
improvement so that they can pool their capacities in
resolving conflicts and protecting civilians. That
cooperation should be based on the provisions of the
Charter, in particular Chapter VIII, while respecting the
prerogatives and the authority of the Security Council.

There are many other ways to protect civilians.
These include improving the national legislation of
States: the dissemination by States of knowledge about
international humanitarian law; and strict compliance
with the provisions of the Charter, the relevant
decisions of the Security Council, human rights
standards and the norms and principles of international
law. States Members of the Organization, and the
Secretary-General, should act more promptly in
conveying appropriate information to the Council about
situations that may pose a threat to the maintenance of
international peace and security, including instances of
the deliberate denial of safe, unimpeded access by
humanitarian personnel to civilians or by the
humanitarian assistance provided for them, as well as
about other gross violations of the rights of civilians, if
these pose a threat to international peace and security.

We hope that today's discussion will help to
improve the work of the Security Council and that of
other United Nations structures in protecting civilians
and that it will give additional impetus to this
endeavour.

