President Kufuor: I am greatly honoured to
participate in today's meeting, not only because
Ghana's tenure in the Security Council coincides with
its chairmanship of the African Union, but also because
we are anxious to see a speedy reversal of those
negative trends that have made our continent host to
more than two thirds of all United Nations
peacekeeping operations, not to mention the numerous
relief agencies that are contributing to the protection of
millions of people displaced by conflict.

The impressive number of participants in today's
debate on peace and security in Africa and previous
ones relating to the subject reflects growing deep and
abiding interest in the well-being of Africa. That is
most reassuring and encouraging. In particular, we
welcome Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's
unwavering commitment and determined efforts to live
up to his pledge at the beginning of his term that Africa
generally and the crisis in Darfur in particular are at
the top of his agenda.

While we acknowledge with appreciation the
invaluable support that Africa continues to receive
from the international community, it is Ghana's vision
that a new order of peace, unity, democracy and
prosperity will soon prevail throughout the continent,
in place of its current image as a disaster zone always
in need of support. As highlighted in the concept paper
prepared by the French delegation (S/2007/552, annex), for which France must be commended, many
positive developments are taking place in Africa. In
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau, Burundi, the
07-51572
Democratic Republic of the Congo and even in the
Sudan, that is evident.

No one can deny, however, that formidable
challenges still remain in areas such as the illicit trade
and proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
drugs and human trafficking. The restoration of peace
and normalcy on the continent, especially in places of
conflict like Somalia and the Eritrea-Ethiopia border, is
urgent. Reconstruction and the consolidation of peace
in nations emerging from conflict must also continue to
attract significant support from the international
community to prevent a relapse.

Emergent threats, such as terrorism, climate
change and the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
equally demand vigilance and decisive action. The
good news is that the African Union and its member
nations are resolved to take the initiative in tackling
these problems and are in fact making progress. That is
all the more reason for the international community to
continue to complement Africa's endeavours.

I am proud of the contribution of the African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS). It has had a great
impact in Darfur, of course with the support of the
international community, in spite of the exceptionally
difficult circumstances in which it has been operating,
including inadequate logistical and financial assistance.

The sustained presence of AMIS in Darfur is
proof enough of the African Union's determination to
assume its primary responsibility for peace and
stability on the continent. It is also largely the joint
effort of the African Union and the Security Council,
especially through the appointment of special envoys,
Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, that
there has been the re-launch of political dialogue
between most of the Darfur rebels and the Government
of National Unity of the Sudan.

In this regard, we should acknowledge other
ongoing initiatives to bring normalcy to the Sudan.
These include the following: first, the joint efforts of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the Libyan leader,
Brother Muammar Al-Qadhafi, to bring the remaining
factional leaders to participate in the dialogue, to
achieve full-scale negotiations; secondly, the resolution
on deploying forces to control the common borders of
the Sudan, the Central African Republic and Chad, to
protect refugees, internally displaced persons and
humanitarian relief workers, which we welcome; and
thirdly, various contributions made by regional
3
organizations, such as the European Union and the
League of Arab States, several countries, notably
China, the United Kingdom and the United States, and
a host of non-governmental organizations, which are to
be appreciated.

I am confident that the forthcoming peace talks in
Tripoli have good prospects for success, and I therefore
urge all factions to agree to participate.

In the light of those initiatives, let me urge all
concerned to endeavour to resolve whatever
outstanding issues there are in the path of the
deployment of the hybrid forces to secure a ceasefire
and unimpeded humanitarian access in the region.

I cannot conclude my statement without
appealing fervently to the Council to show
commitment to the protracted conflict in Somalia equal
to that it is showing with respect to Darfur. In spite of
the initiative of the African Union in mobilizing troops
from among member nations to keep the peace in that
highly volatile area and the ready offer of some States
such as Ghana to contribute troops, promised support
thus far from partners in the international community
to equip and airlift the troops has been inadequate and
slow in coming.

The Security Council must therefore step in with
timeous assistance. It must also consider a contingency
plan for the possible deployment of a United Nations
force to replace the African Union Mission in Somalia
by next February.

