Mr. Mayoral (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to introduce my four-month briefing pursuant
to paragraph 16 of resolution 1617 (2005). Since the
last briefing to the Council, I wish to inform members
that 17 individuals and four entities have been added to
the list. Two individuals were removed from the list
during the same time period, and the Committee has
upgraded the information concerning 46 individuals
and three entities. Efforts to enhance the quality of the
list also continue.
In that regard, the Committee will soon
implement its decision to render all names on the list in
their original language and is actively considering
other further improvements to the identifying
information of individuals already on the list.

On 21 December 2005, the Committee approved
a partial revision of its guidelines. As the Council is
aware, the Committee had been considering such a
revision for more than a year and a half, and it was
therefore a source of great satisfaction that agreement
was reached on most of the issues under discussion.

The Committee is continuing to discuss the
listing and delisting of names from the Consolidated
List, as requested by the Council in resolution 1617
(2005).

I shall not go into detail as to all the changes, but
I would encourage Member States to familiarize
themselves with the new guidelines, which enhance the
Committee's decision-making procedures and clarify
the rules concerning updating the Consolidated List
and the application of exemptions pursuant to
resolution 1452 (2002).

As I indicated in my most recent briefing to the
Council, the Committee has substantially increased its
cooperation with Interpol. That cooperation has led to
the adoption of concrete measures, reflected on
6 December when Interpol issued its first four Interpol-
Security Council special notices concerning individuals
placed on the Consolidated List. The dissemination of
those notices will significantly enhance the application
of sanctions, as it will make it possible to utilize the
already existing communications network between
Interpol and the police authorities of almost all United
Nations Member States. In the near future, the
Committee will submit further names to Interpol so as
to ensure that as many special notices as possible can
be issued. For that reason, we wish here to express our
gratitude to Interpol for its efforts in that regard.

Likewise, at several of its meetings, the
Committee considered the issue of Afghan nationals
placed on the Consolidated List who have responded to
the appeal of the national commission for the
consolidation of the peace process and declared their
support for peace and stability in that country. In its
communications with Afghanistan, the Committee has
stated that it deems the process under way very
important for the development of Afghanistan. The
Committee has also noted that the removal of the
names of those individuals from the list should be a
requirement for their full reintegration into Afghan
society.

In that regard, the Committee is seeking further
information from Afghanistan concerning the process
in general and the decision to reintegrate those
individuals in particular.

In that regard, the Committee has also requested
the Monitoring Team to assist Afghanistan in that
respect. On 31 January, the Committee received a
response to the request made by the Secretary-General
in summer 2005 for information on what measures
were in place within the United Nations system to
ensure that it did not enter into any contractual
relationship with individuals or entities on the
Consolidated List. We were informed by the Legal
Counsel that to date no such contract had been entered
into.

At the same time, it was noted that, at this stage,
there was no uniform procedure in place to ensure that
such contractual or financial arrangements did not
occur. The Secretary-General has decided to carry out a
review of all internal procedures with a view to
developing a uniform approach in that regard. The
Committee welcomes that initiative and hopes to be
informed of its progress on a regular basis. While
acknowledging that this issue falls outside of the
Committee's mandate, members have noted that a
uniform procedure should apply to other sanctions
regimes as well.

The Committee continues to place great emphasis
on resolving the pending issues on its agenda.
Currently the Committee has before it some 20 issues
upon which no agreement has yet been reached. Those
issues relate to requests for listing and delisting,
notifications under resolution 1452 (2002), and
suggested technical updates to the Consolidated List.

The Committee acknowledges that a large
number of outstanding issues could negatively affect
its reputation, especially since some of those requests
date back as far as April 2003 - which means that
they have been pending for almost three years. For that
reason, the revised guidelines include language to the
effect that the Committee will review the status of
pending issues at least once a month. It should be
emphasized that holds are not the same as rejections. It
is our hope that many of these pending issues will be
resolved shortly.

The second issue I should like to address
concerns the activities of the Monitoring Team. The
Monitoring Team continues to work closely with the
Committee. It is invited to attend almost all its
meetings and makes comments and suggestions on a
range of issues, as requested. The Monitoring Team has
completed its fourth report, as required under
paragraph (c) of Annex I to resolution 1617 (2005),
and the Committee looks forward to considering it in
the coming weeks. The Committee has also asked the
Monitoring Team to assist in analysing the checklists
to be submitted by States by 1 March 2006 at the latest
so as to report on action that they have taken with
respect names added to the Consolidated List between
29 July 2005 and 31 January 2006.

Let me underscore that an expert member of the
Team, Ms. Christine Lee, accompanied me on my
recent visit to Japan and Indonesia, and that, since I
presented my last report to the Council, certain Team
members have also travelled to Central Asia, East
Africa and Australia to consider issues related to the
effective implementation of the sanctions regime.

The Team has also held a further meeting of
heads and deputy heads of the intelligence and security
services of a group of Islamic countries. The
Committee very much values their support for, and
contribution to, its work.

Moreover, the Team has continued to strengthen
its ties with international and regional bodies,
including a particularly productive relationship with
Interpol, and with other United Nations bodies. The
Team is coordinating its travel plans with the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), and a
member of the Team joined the CTED in a visit to a
Member State earlier this month.

The Monitoring Team has continued to encourage
the 45 States that have still not submitted a report, as
required by resolution 1455 (2003), to do so. Since
October, three more States - Cameroon, Sierra Leone
and Mali - have reported to the Committee. In
addition, the Team has worked with the CTED and the
experts supporting the 1540 Committee to identify a
common approach to the 31 States that are late in
reporting or have not reported at all to any of the three
Committees, without, however, undermining the
individual obligation of States to provide a report.

Finally, the Monitoring Team, together with the
Secretariat, has finalized plans for a comprehensive
database that is expected to be launched before the end
of this month. It is hoped that this database will lead to
a more efficient system of information-sharing with the
CTED and with the experts who support the 1540
Committee.

Between 27 January and 4 February, I undertook
a visit to selected countries, pursuant to paragraph 15
of resolution 1617 (2005). I visited Japan and
Indonesia. Both countries have made remarkable
progress in the struggle against Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities. I
appreciated having had the opportunity to be able to
review with them the experiences both countries
acquired.

As Council members, perhaps, may know, an
individual included in the Consolidated List, Mr.
Lionel Dumont, resided in Japan under a false identity
for a couple of years before he was apprehended in
Germany in 2003 and later sentenced in France. It was
very interesting to hear the Japanese authorities' frank
assessment of this case and to learn about the
considerable changes made in the Japanese legal
system to prevent such a case from recurring. I was
personally impressed by the dedication shown by the
Japanese authorities at all levels to ensure that their
country would not become a target of terrorism. It was
clearly understood that domestic security was
intrinsically linked with international security, and, as a
consequence, Japan is providing valuable technical
assistance to the entire region and beyond. As a
member of the Committee, Japan contributes to its
work in an outstanding way, and I was glad to have the
chance to express my gratitude for this to the Vice-
Minister for Foreign Affairs of that country.

For its part, Indonesia's important role in the
fight against terrorism in the region convinced me that
it would be useful to visit Jakarta. In recent years,
Indonesian authorities have neutralized a number of
high-ranking terrorists, especially many of whom were
followers of the Jemaah Islamiyah, an entity that, as
you know, is included in the Consolidated List. This is
a very good example of the will shown by all the
officials of Indonesia with whom we met to
aggressively address the problem caused by terrorism.
I am pleased - and all members of the Group were
impressed at the fact - that Indonesia has provided
assurances that it will provide the Committee more
identifying information about the persons included in
the List. Such information will surely ease the
implementation of sanctions by all Member States and
dispel concerns expressed in Indonesia about the
possibility of incidental targeting of individuals with
the same names as those placed on the List.

Both in Japan and Indonesia, I was very
favourably impressed with the high level of domestic
and international coordination and cooperation. We
believe that such cooperation is essential in the
international fight against terrorism. I believe that the
visits of the Committee underscore this fact and also
help to bring awareness of the crucial role that the
United Nations plays in this regard.

As far as the future work of the Committee and
the Monitoring Team are concerned, considerable work
lies ahead. In the coming months, the Committee will
be considering the Monitoring Team's fourth report; it
will continue its revision of the guidelines with respect
to listing and delisting names; it will seek to reduce to
a minimum the number of pending requests before the
Committee, including consideration of the requests
from Afghanistan to delist names of nationals of that
country; it will ensure that our cooperation with
Interpol is effectively executed; and it will develop
new ties to other international and regional
organizations.

The Committee also hopes to improve its website,
which already contains much useful information for
Member States and other users but which could be
modified so as to be more user-friendly. Shortly, I
intend to undertake another visit to selected States, and
I plan to take the opportunity this time to focus on non-
reporting countries, of which, unfortunately, there are
still far too many.

Pursuant to paragraph 10 of resolution 1617
(2005), all Member States are called upon to report to
the Committee by 1 March 2006 on specific actions
taken with regard to individuals and entities added to
the Consolidated List. I have sent a note verbale to all
Member States reminding them of this requirement. In
this note, I also included a checklist that Member
States should use in this connection. The checklist is a
new tool for the Committee in assessing the
effectiveness of the sanctions measures, and I,
therefore, strongly encourage all Member States to
submit this checklist in due time.

Indeed, busy times lay ahead, and I wish to
express my appreciation in advance to the members of
the Committee, and to the Monitoring Team, in
particular Mr. Barrett, who will have to dedicate much
time and effort to successfully accomplishing these
many tasks. As I have always stressed, the Committee
will need to rely on the vital contributions of each and
every Member State to carry out its tasks. The
Committee remains open, speaking personally, to
handle all pertinent questions that could be brought to
the attention of Member States.

