Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today to discuss a thorny and
highly sensitive subject.

Its roots precede the events and the clashes of 1975.
Its thorny implications extended to the historic popular
consultation held in East Timor on 30 August 1999,
which concluded successfully, as can be seen in its
results. It should be Clear that this process could not have
been successful had it not been for the persistent efforts
made by the Indonesian Government, as well as the
courageous initiative by President Habibie to augment and
ensure security and political circumstances conducive to
holding the popular consultation in all its phases.

Egypt has welcomed the holding of popular
consultation, which took place with the free will of
Indonesia. One of the means through which we expressed
our welcome was through our effective participation in
the United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET).
Thus, Egypt reaffirms the necessity to respect the results

 

of the ballot and to put into effect the will of the people of
East Timor.

In view of the escalation of acts of Violence and the
deterioration of the security situation in East Timor, Egypt
cannot but express its concern and regret Vis-a-Vis these
serious developments, which have not only harmed and
detracted from the safety and security of East Timorese of
all sectors and orientations, but also of UNAMET personnel
and its compound, whether these acts of violence stem from
the ranks of pro-integrationists or others. I concur with the
Secretary-General, who spoke on the results of the popular
consultation. He mentioned that the results of the popular
consultation are neither a victory nor a defeat for any party,
but indeed they reflect the will of the people of East Timor
for self-determination. Because we believe in this, Egypt
calls on all of the parties which propagate violence to
promptly halt and put an end to these acts so that United
Nations personnel may return to UNAMET headquarters in
Dili and so that they may resume faithfully their tasks away
from acts of provocation and intimidation in order for East
Timor to achieve its desired results.

While calling for an end to the acts of violence, Egypt
cannot but refer to the constant and persistent attempts by
the Indonesian Government to control the security situation.
These attempts, by means of a group of tangible measures,
have produced some signs that suggest the possibility of an
improvement in the territory, be it through the declaration
of martial law in East Timor to enforce order and the rule
of law, or through the introduction of substantial changes
in the structure of the Indonesian military command and
bolstering the military presence in the territory with a View
to restoring peace and security. We hope that this trend will
intensify.

We in Egypt requested an end to the acts of violence
and domination and the realization of stability and peace in
East Timor. However, as I made clear at the beginning of
my statement, we understand that the situation is sensitive
and delicate and that it is important to deal with it with a
great deal of prudence and calm and to refrain from taking
measures that may further aggravate the situation or may
lead to further complications.

Egypt is confident that Indonesia understands the
situation and knows the measures required to be taken in
such a situation. We are also confident that Indonesia will
play its responsible role in resolving the situation and will
do what is necessary in restoring stability, tranquillity and
peace and to put the political process back on the agreed-
upon track.

