Ms. DiCarlo: This is an important year for
Afghanistan as the population marks the 100th year of
its independence. As the Deputy Secretary-General just
highlighted, the country is at a pivotal juncture with an
unprecedented opportunity for peace. While a number
of initiatives are ongoing, presidential elections are
only nine weeks away.

Allow me to update the Security Council briefly on
political developments since the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, briefed the Council on 19 June (S/PV.8555).
I will first turn to elections. Our message to the Afghan
people is the need for the upcoming presidential
election, scheduled for 28 September, to be credible
and held on time. We are pleased to once again provide
technical assistance for the conduct of the elections.

I am pleased to report that the Independent Election
Commission has made steady progress in preparing for
the voting. during our recent visit I met with members
of the Independent Election Commission and of the
Electoral Complaints Commission in order to receive
an update on their plans and learn of the challenges that
they still face. In addition to a large technical support
team embedded with both electoral bodies, the United
Nations has also deployed two non-voting members to
each Commission. They are experienced former electoral
commissioners from Bulgaria, Ghana, Kenya and
Nepal, appointed to provide advice to the Commissions.
The Afghan commissioners were appointed through
a consultative process that included political parties,
civil society and presidential candidates.

Regarding the progress made, an election
budget of $149 million has been finalized. The
Government has committed to covering a significant
portion - $90 million. The international community
has pledged to finance the remaining $59 million.

The voter registration update exercise was just
concluded. More than half a million more Afghans have
registered, of whom some 36 per cent are women. This
is the first time that citizens were given an opportunity
to review and make corrections to the 2018 voter list.
The IEC announced a preliminary figure of 9.6 million
registered voters for the upcoming elections. The
Independent Election Commission is also working to
implement biometric voter verification and electronic
results transmission technology. If successfully
implemented, they will introduce an additional layer
of fraud mitigation and address specific post-election
challenges observed in 2018.

The security assessment of more than 5,000 polling
centres has been completed. Security arrangements
for the campaign period are also being put in place.
However, security has been a consistent concern in
Afghan elections, often infringing on the right to
vote, particularly of women and of those living in very
insecure areas. We encourage the Afghan Government
and the Independent Election Commission to pay
attention to the security of all voters, including women,
during the process.

Ahead of the campaign, starting this weekend,
the Independent Election Commission also issued
accreditation letters for the agents of presidential
candidates. There are now 18 presidential candidates,
three of Whom have women as Vice presidential
candidates on their slates.

Despite the progress, challenges remain. The
recruitment of thousands of polling staff needs to
be finalized. The training of those staff, as well as
observers and candidate agents, is extremely important.
The necessary equipment and materials will need to be
in place to complete all preparations in a timely fashion
and deliver the upcoming elections in a credible and
transparent manner. With only nine weeks remaining
to the polling and the Commissions working against
the clock, there is no room for delays of a technical or
political nature. Close collaboration among all actors
is critical to ensuring that the remaining steps are
completed according to the set electoral calendar.

However, successful elections are not determined
by only technical matters. Maintaining a level playing
field among all candidates is key to credible elections.
The United Nations urges all actors to exercise
restraint and show respect for the independence of the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission. We also encourage both
Commissions to regularly engage with a broad range
of stakeholders and ensure that the public is kept fully
informed during the process.

Similarly, we expect the candidates and other
stakeholders to assume their important responsibility for
the credibility of the electoral process. The overriding
responsibility for a successful election lies with the
political leaders themselves. Credible presidential
elections are vital in order to give the newly elected
President the authority needed to bring the country
together in the peace process.

Let me now turn to the peace process. As the
Deputy Secretary-General stated, all Afghans we met
made clear their desire for peace now and view recent
events as an unprecedented opportunity to achieve
peace after so many decades of conflict. Direct talks
between the United States and the Taliban continue.
The first intra-Afghan peace conference, co-hosted
by Germany and Qatar, took place from 7 to 8 July
in Doha. While delegates, including Government
officials participated in their individual capacities, this
was an important step forward towards one common
objective - to start formal negotiations between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban to reach a
sustainable peace agreement. Additional intra-Afghan
conferences are being planned.

Regional engagement to support the Afghan
peace process has also intensified. From 10 to 11 July,
representatives of China, Russia and the United States
held their third consultation on the Afghan peace
process in Beijing. Pakistan joined the consultation.
On 19 July, the fifth round of the China-Afghanistan-
Pakistan Practical Cooperation Dialogue took place
in Islamabad.

Our interlocutors stressed that peace cannot come
at any cost, particularly the democratic gains of the last
18 years. I was heartened to see women-representatives
participating in the Dialogue in Doha. As the Deputy
Secretary-General stressed earlier, women need to
fully, effectively and directly participate in peace talks
and negotiations for a peace process to be sustainable.

A political solution to the conflict in Afghanistan
remains more relevant than ever, as civilians continue
to bear the brunt of the conflict. All too often, civilians
are either injured or killed, including when caught in the
crossfire, struck by explosive weapons or deliberately
targeted. We call on all parties to the conflict to

respect international humanitarian law, ensure access
for humanitarian agencies to provide life-saving
assistance, and distinguish between combatants and
civilian targets to protect civilians from hostilities.

Afghans deserve peace and the right to choose
their representatives. The United Nations remains
committed to assist Afghanistan in its efforts aimed
at attaining peace, stability and prosperity. As the
Deputy-secretary General said, we urge the Security
Council to do the same.

