I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for putting the promotion of the rule of law on the agenda of the Security Council during your presidency. I would like to commend Judge Yusuf for his speech; I will come back to the concrete proposals he made. First, I would like to repeat what many if not most of the participants have said - the Security Council and the International Court of Justice are essential for guiding Member States on how to act in accordance with international law. With the Charter of the United Nations at its core, respect for international law is the basis for our multilateral cooperation. Effective multilateralism works only if the international order is based on rules applicable to all. Germany, as amember of the Security Council, has always shown determination to uphold respect for, and adherence to, international law, including human rights and humanitarian law. It is imperative that all of us accept and implement legally binding decisions delivered by international courts and tribunals, including, and in particular, when those institutions rule within their own competency to decide on a specific case, even if, and when, those decisions go against immediate national interests. We are convinced that in the long term a rules-based order itself lies in the national interest of all. With regard to the statement by Judge Yusuf, he said it very simply, but it is very true - the policy of force has no place in the United Nations order that we all live in. I found it remarkable that he also clearly said that the violation of international humanitarian law and international human rights law constitutes a threat to international peace and security. I think that is a very important position that we have always held. I thank him for that confirmation. I think it would be good if disputes were referred to the Court more often - we only have that one case. We believe also that it could be valuable for the Security Council to invite the President of the International Court of Justice to provide briefings when instances of non-compliance with decisions of the Court might threaten international peace and security. What Judge Yusuf also highlighted was the use of advisory functions with regard to conflict prevention. He pleaded for the Council to use that possibility more often. Germany totally subscribes to that. Judge Yusuf referred to one very important advisory opinion, which I would like to recall because we are commemorating the tenth anniversary of the advisory opinion on Accordance with international law of the unilateral declaration of independence in respect of Kosovo. The Security Council may remember that, at the time, Serbia launched an initiative by the General Assembly to ask the Court to determine if the declaration of independence of Kosovo was legal or not. The judgment came 10 years ago and clearly stated that the declaration of independence of Kosovo was in compliance with international law. I think it would help if everybody read that again and followed the outcome - a recognition of Kosovo - because that would resolve a lot of problems that we still have in that region. In addition to the briefings by Judge Yusuf, we are very much in favour of the possibility of the Security Council visiting the Court. Unfortunately, if the Security Council decides to do that, my delegation will not be part of it. However, if Council members travel to The Hague, they will meet a German judge there. I would like to use this occasion to express our gratitude for the strong support that the Security Council gave to Professor Georg Nolte a few weeks ago. We consider the election of that outstanding German international law expert as Judge of the International Court of Justice as of February 2021 to be a validation of Germany's commitment to the rules-based international order. At the same time, it is an obligation to continue our efforts to promote international law. Germany has subscribed to the acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. There are 74 countries that have subscribed to it. We fully back that and are working on a draft presidential statement. We should respond to the request of Judge Yusuf and, in our presidential statement, should include the request that more countries accept the compulsory jurisdiction, as we did in 2012. We believe that the application of the Charter of the United Nations needs to evolve over time to ensure continued authority and legitimacy. The purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter, such as the call to maintain international peace and security and the prohibition of the use of force in international relations, are the timeless and enduring core of international law, but their application is subject to contemporary challenges. The coronavirus disease pandemic is only one striking reminder of those challenges. The international community is jointly confronted with a multitude of global and existential questions for the future of humankind, such as climate change, the protection of our environment, pandemics and respect for human rights. The evolution of international law is reflected in both the practice of the Security Council and the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice. Therefore, cooperation between the Security Council and the Court of Justice is needed more than ever. The Security Council determines any threat to, or breach of, peace or act of aggression and decides on measures to maintain or restore international peace and security. But in doing so the Council has demonstrated the adaptability, pragmatism and creativity. It must do better when it comes to dealing with new challenges. We commend the recent decision by the General Assembly to establish a trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the Court. That will increase opportunities for law students from a wide range of geographic and linguistic backgrounds to familiarize themselves with the work of the Court, develop their skills in the field of the peaceful settlement of international disputes through law and become supporters of the rules-based international order themselves. Again, I thank you, Sir, very much for having put this important item on the agenda.
