Mr. Carrien-Mena (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate,
which will enable us to improve the implementation of
the practices and new and existing measures contained
in the note by the President in document S/2006/507 on
the Council's working methods, taking into
consideration the results of the last debate held in
August 2008 (see S/PV.5968), as well as the most
recent practices of the Council.

In the same way, thank you, Sir, for the concept
paper circulated as an annex to your letter of 1 April
(S/2010/165), in which you propose to focus this
meeting on three basic issues: the transparency of the
Security Council, interaction with non-members of the
Council and the efficiency of the Council. You also
provide several examples of the possible issues you
believe might be discussed at this meeting.

In that respect, my country, Ecuador, associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
reiterating the Movement's position at the fifty-first
session of the General Assembly, as well as the
relevant paragraphs of the Final Document of the
Fifteenth Summit Conference of Heads of State and
Government of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries Sharm el-Sheikh, of 2009, without prejudice
to which I would like to make the following comments
in my capacity as representative of Ecuador.

In the debate that took place on 27 August 2008
(see S/PV.5968), my country stressed that, despite
some progress made in Security Council practices, the
application of the measures in note S/2006/507 had
been insufficient and uncertain. Unfortunately, almost
two years later, we have seen that much still remains to
be done to improve the implementation of these
measures, especially those relating to transparency and
to interaction with the rest of the Members of the
United Nations, on whose behalf the Council should
act, in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

On the question of transparency, we note that
Council Presidents have continued to hold informal
briefings on the programme of work, after its adoption,
and we note the informational meetings held by the
chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council on
their respective activities.

However, with regard to the reports submitted by
outgoing Presidents of the Council, there is no real
systematic method in place or follow-up on the
problems identified during their terms of office, which
impedes the discussion and implementation of practical
solutions.

Similarly, while we recognize the benefit for our
region of the presentation of monthly reports by the
Permanent Missions of the countries of Latin America
and the Caribbean that are members of the Security
Council, it must be stated, in all honesty, that in many
cases those reports have simply confirmed the lack of
transparency between the permanent members of the
Security Council and other Council members, thus
contradicting the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the duty of the Council to
respect them in carrying out its functions.

With regard to interaction and dialogue with
countries that are not members of the Council, Ecuador
appreciates the increased number of meetings open to
participation by all Members of the United Nations
over recent years, but regrets that such meetings
continue to be the exception, while private
consultations continue to be the rule. This is something
that my country finds regrettable.

In this context, while we recognize the important
role that closed consultations can play in seeking
solutions to specific problems that come under the
authority of the Security Council, my country reaffirms
that priority should be given to incorporating the
opinions of the other Members of the United Nations,
in respect for the provisions of Articles 31 and 32 of
the Charter. The same criterion should be implemented
and strengthened for regional organizations and for
countries that contribute troops to peacekeeping
operations.

Likewise, I must point out that many of the open
meetings held by the Security Council correspond
precisely to topics that fall outside its jurisdiction, but
which, regrettably, it continues to seek to cast, in a
forced way, as threats to international peace and
security in order to interfere with the mandates of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.

Appropriate Security Council interaction with
other Member States and the other principal organs of
the Organization, within the scope of their respective
areas of authority, would contribute to improving the
effectiveness of the Council and would facilitate the
elimination of those matters previously placed on its
agenda but not covered by its mandate.

A permanent and transparent dialogue between
the Council and the General Assembly, with each
keeping to its proper purview, would also translate into
higher quality for the annual and special reports which
should be submitted in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

We hope that the ideas and proposals shared on
the implementation of the measures contained in note
S/2006/507 and on additional measures will be
followed up on appropriately and that a timely report
will be issued on their implementation, which should
not be limited to the Security Council Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that, beyond
the formalities of this debate, all members of the
Security Council need to translate the concerns and
proposals regarding the working methods of the
Council into specific action that will make it possible
to achieve the ultimate goal of guaranteeing the
transparency, open interaction and effectiveness of the
Council, without prejudice to other necessary and
urgent reforms relating to its membership and
representativeness.

