The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Colombia.

I wish to start by thanking Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for his comprehensive presentation
on recent events in Kosovo and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. With regard to what he said, in
the first place we support the constructive dialogue
held between Mr. Haekkerup and the Deputy Prime
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covic.

As we have pointed out on different occasions,
the success ofthe political process of implementing the
Constitutional Framework, and of Kosovo's future in
general, depends on cooperative relations with
Belgrade. This is why we are gratified to hear that the
degree of understanding between the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Yugoslav Government is constantly improving,
and we hope this will contribute to the search for
solutions to matters such as security, missing and
detained persons, and the return of refugees.

As for electoral participation, the low figures
only 10 days before the closing of the rolls are
alarming. We would all like the recent appeal made by
the Belgrade authorities to stimulate the Serb Kosovo
population to be heeded. These comments should be
made repeatedly and even more emphatically in the
days to come.

In this connection, we would like Mr. Guehenno
to give us additional information about the voter
registration process, in particular as regards what is
being done to register displaced persons and refugees
as well as what has been done thus far to stimulate
participation in these categories.

Another interesting topic is the situation in
prisons. Last month, Mr. Guehenno mentioned the
material conditions in prisons as a result of the number
of persons being arrested on a daily basis as compared
to the capacity of penal institutions. We would like to
know what UNMIK is doing to cope with this situation
and whether, in his opinion, there is anything the
Council could do to prevent the problem from spinning
out of control.

The last element we would like to highlight
concerns the situation in the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia in relation to Kosovo. The Government
of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has sent
several letters to the Secretary-General making serious
accusations about the work being carried out by
UNMIK and KFOR to put an end to assistance being
provided to the National Liberation Army.

We would like to know what specific actions are
being carried out jointly by UNMIK and KFOR to
investigate thoroughly the accusations and allegations
against members of the Kosovo Protection Corps. The
international community must not allow all the
achievements made in Kosovo through the work of
UNMIK and KFOR to be jeopardized by these facts.
That is why concrete acts must be employed to respond
to these allegations.

Finally, in connection with what has been said
about sanctions, it is clear that the Council must be
prepared to consider without delay lifting the sanctions.
In my opinion, this is the best way to recognize the fact
that the sanctions must end as soon as the
circumstances that justified their imposition have
ceased to exist.

I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Belgium. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

