Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's debate. We thank
the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Nigel Fisher, for his insightful briefing.

Pakistan fully supports efforts to move Haiti
towards peace and progress, which is the collective
objective of the Haitian people, the Council and the
international community. The brave and resilient people
of Haiti have made important strides towards stability
and development. The devastating earthquake of 2010
reversed the gains achieved over many years. It is
heartening that a new and promising Haiti is emerging
from the ashes of that tragedy. Challenges persist, but
the resolve of the Haitian people to take collective
action to rebuild their country is stronger.

Last year, Haiti achieved important political
milestones by forming a new Government, issuing
constitutional amendments and establishing a Superior
Council of the Judiciary. This year, elections of
Presidents of the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies
are significant developments. Improvement in relations
between the executive and the Parliament will lead to
further political progress in the country.

We welcome the pledge made by the President
of Haiti to hold elections in 2013. The elections will
help revitalize the country's democratic institutions.
Haiti needs international assistance in managing the
electoral process. We support assistance by the United
Nations for the Haitian authorities to progressively
assume full responsibility for the management of the
electoral process by 2016.

Pakistan has been a participant in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Haiti since 1993. At present,
one formed police unit from Pakistan comprising
139 personnel is serving in Haiti. All components
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) are implementing a challenging
mandate under difficult circumstances. We hope that
the drawdown of the MINUSTAH military component
will not impact the security situation in that country.
Disturbances in some areas of the country underscore
the necessity for the Mission to remain agile and capable
against an emergent situation.

The Secretary-General's report under consideration
today (S/2013/139) has presented a condition-based
consolidation plan for MINUSTAH. It entails a
narrowing of MINUSTAH activities to core mandated
tasks in the areas of security, governance, the rule of
law and the respect for human rights. We agree with
the approach of working around a set of stabilization
benchmarks to gauge the overall progress. One of
the most significant aspects of the benchmarks is the
development of the Haitian National Police (HNP).
The success of the five-year training programme and
the strengthening of the HNP is a prerequisite for
MINUSTAH's eventual withdrawal from Haiti.

Today's debate should underscore the challenge
of addressing the humanitarian situation in Haiti.
The ongoing cholera epidemic, food insecurity and
extreme vulnerability to natural disasters augment the
humanitarian challenge. We urge greater coordination
and cohesion among different actors engaged in
humanitarian work. We also caution against donor
fatigue, which can result from a protracted crisis such
as that faced by Haiti.

Pakistan supports the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Haiti. We
remain a sincere partner of the people of Haiti in their
quest for peace, security, stability and progress.

