Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): In recent years, the Syrian Arab Republic
has made considerable efforts, in cooperation with the
relevant UnitedNations agencies, to ensure the continued
provision of basic services and humanitarian assistance
to all of its citizens without distinction. Those efforts
have encountered major challenges related to terrorism
and the expansion of the economic embargo imposed
on the Syrian people by the Governments of States
that continue their destructive interference in Syrian
affairs, thereby preventing any prospect of reaching
a solution, impeding the eradication of terrorism and
depriving the people of Syria of the ability to rebuild
and recover, as well as preventing the voluntary return
of Syrian displaced persons and refugees to their homes
to lead normal lives safely.

It is deplorable that, in their monthly reports, the
representatives of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) continue to disseminate
a great deal of error-laden information and assessments
for political reasons that are well known to everyone
within the Security Council. Such behaviour is
not professional and runs contrary to the spirit of
cooperation and partnership that the Syrian Arab
Republic demonstrated vis-a-vis the relevant United
Nations agencies and humanitarian partners, according
to admissions by humanitarian workers on the ground.

The representatives of certain States members of
the Council have now become completely incapable
of thinking and reacting in a positive and constructive
manner with regard to the situation in Syria. They only
react based on the principle of enmity with Syria and its
allies in the fight against terrorism. They have become
obsessed with presenting fabricated accusations
against Syria, and dismissing efforts made by my
country. That was demonstrated by the penholders'
presentation of a draft resolution on the renewal of
modalities set out in resolution 2165 (2014), based on
a campaign of manipulated statistics and information,
which is a standard practice for OCHA every time the
resolution comes up for renewal, while at the same time
disregarding the fact that most humanitarian assistance
winds up in the hands of armed terrorists, not of those
who need it.

Over the past weeks, the penholders on the
humanitarian issue in Syria have worked on a draft
resolution concerning my country that is far from
achieving its supposed humanitarian objectives. That
is why we reject it in its entirety for various reasons,
including the following.

First of all, the penholders continue to overlook
the fact that the focal point for taking humanitarian
action in Syria is the capital, Damascus. It is a matter
of the sacrosanct principle of respect for national
sovereignty, as reaffirmed in every relevant resolution
on my country.

Secondly, the penholders insist on disregarding
developments that have taken place on the ground since
the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) in July 2014. The
Syrian State has restored its control over all of the areas
identified previously by the United Nations as being
under siege or inaccessible and achieved stability in
those areas together with its allies.

Thirdly, neither the leadership of OCHA nor that of
the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism were able
to provide sufficient clarifications regarding their so-
called independent third-party partners or companies
contracted to verify the delivery of aid to those in need,
despite our repeated official requests in that regard.

Fourthly, the contents of the draft resolution
unequivocally reveal the true motives behind it and
the insistence of some parties on the delivery of cross-
border aid. The most notable motive is to escalate
hostility within the Council to target the Syrian
Government and its role and status which are essential.

Fifthly, my country remains steadfast in its
determination to comply with the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 46/182, which emphasizes, first
and foremost, respect for national sovereignty. Syria
therefore rejects the principle of alerts and warnings,
as we believe that it does not meet the minimum
requirements of norms relating to transparency,
credibility and respect for national sovereignty.
We in the Syrian Arab Republic continue to be
as realistic and patient as possible in dealing with
the negative political polarization practiced by the
permanent delegations of the United States, France and
the United Kingdom in addressing the Syrian question.
Nevertheless, we continue to call on the Secretariat and,
in particular, OCHA officials to distance themselves
from such attempts at political polarization and to
instead build a professional relationship with the Syrian
Government and local humanitarian partners that is
based on good will, partnership and respect for the
principles of humanitarian action in order to achieve
the desired goals of such action. In that connection,
those concerned must refrain from using the Syrian
dossier as a tool to pressure, coerce and blackmail the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and its people.

Finally, after nine years ofthe terrorist war imposed
on Syria, the Governments that contributed to igniting
terrorism in the country and exacerbated the situation
continue to refuse to admit in a serious and responsible
manner that ending the suffering of the Syrian people
requires respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. They must also
support the efforts of the Syrian Government and its
allies to combat the remnants of terrorist organizations
and foreign terrorist fighters in the country and lift the
unilateral coercive economic measures imposed on the
Syrian people.

Moreover, the illegal presence of foreign forces
in Syria must come to an end, which must include the
withdrawal of the occupying American forces from oil
and gas sites in Syria. There must be a definitive end to
the first-degree piracy operations being conducted by
the United States today against the oil and gas revenues
that belong exclusively to the Syrian State and no
other party.

