Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I welcome you, Sir, to
the Security Council and thank you for convening
today's debate.

I should like to thank Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
for a very difficult assessment, which he gave in a very
honest fashion. I also align my delegation with the
statements to be delivered by the representatives of
Egypt and Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, respectively.

As members are well aware, Pakistan has stood
by its Palestinian brethren in their six-decade quest for
the realization of their inalienable right to self-
determination. Today, the protagonists of the Arab
Spring, citing democracy, have said much the same
thing with respect to many parts of the world. We
therefore call upon the Security Council to transform
its words into resolute action, notwithstanding the very
welcome recent Quartet activities in the Middle East.
The Council should ensure a mechanism to implement
its decisions on Israel and Palestine; if it fails to do so,
it will further undermine its own credibility.

While we deliberate endlessly in the Security
Council, the Palestinian observer showcased today how
his people continue to suffer at the hands of what they
call an occupation force. I am not terribly sure whether
his cry for help is condemned to be unheard here or
whether his people's dreams of peace and tranquility
are not shared by others while they continue to draw
world attention to their encirclement and the
uncrossable barriers surrounding them.

The settlement activity of Israel continues sadly
unabated. The Middle East Quartet and the
international community seem to be in a haze of
suspended promises. The Palestinians want a halt to
this settlement activity - a demand that is endorsed by
the Council and universally supported - yet there is
seemingly no recourse on the matter. As some speakers
have mentioned today, last week Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos informed the Council
that settlement activity had rendered 43 per cent of the
West Bank unusable for Palestinians, and had impeded
access to services, leading to increased violence and
severe starvation in the territory.

The Gaza strangulation and starvation are neither
legally justifiable nor morally tenable. They are
systematically eradicating the space for the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State. In my
mind, they also constitute a major roadblock to peace.
Settlement activity and peace are mutually exclusive.
This strangulation was further extended and enforced
by a decree with effect from 2 January. So life in Gaza
will not, cannot, return to normal. We therefore call for
the full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). We
would like to join the civilized world and suggest that,
to stop strangulation and starvation, the United Nations
should arrange a flotilla of its own to carry relief
supplies to the hapless Gazans. Surely the Israelis
cannot deny United Nations humanitarian supplies
under United Nations auspices.

I would like to mention that, to my mind, the
progress that the Palestinians have made in establishing
State institutions over the past couple of years, despite
overwhelming obstacles, has been extraordinary - a
fact that was not only accepted by a number of
independent observers but that was also manifested in
the acceptance of its membership last year by
UNESCO. There is no gainsaying the fact that the
Palestinians are working towards full United Nations
membership as a just reward.

I would like now to come to a point that has been
whispered about in certain corridors of late. Someone
asked "Have you noticed how often we mention Iran,
Syria, Nigeria, Libya and the Sudan?" They wonder,
and I wonder with them, whether we should be afraid,
being a Muslim, since all those countries seem to come
from that category. A lot of people say that the way
things are going, we are going to be the next 70 per
cent of Council work; should we not get a permanent
seat as well? I wonder if we are doing right in
frightening the world into religious ethnicities. I do not
think it is beneficial to the Council or this institution.
While I say that with just a passing reference, I do wish
to say it because people are talking about it. I think that
when talk starts, it is a matter of time before people get
worried about things. That is a sort of worriment that I
would respect many of my colleagues here in
addressing in a fashion that says it is not so. I hope it is
not so.

Having said that, let me also say that I am
confident that that sort of scare will not be encouraged
by the Council and that, as was mentioned by various
people in various aspects, we will be referring to other
important aspects of the world under discussion here
today, in a fashion that promotes democracy,
representative Government, et cetera. But, as they say,
why does this get mentioned as regime change? Should
not regime change be an outward feeling of everyone
within their own countries to motivate change? What
happens if that change takes on some other aspect that
is not acceptable to those surveying the scene from far-
off shores? I believe that this may not sound too
reasonable, but I do wish we would be reasonable and
not allow something like this to emanate from the
sacred halls of the Chamber.

Therefore, Pakistan supports lasting peace for all
the inhabitants of the Middle East, irrespective of
religion, ethnicity or nationality. That is important. The
framework for peace in the Middle East is laid down
elaborately in resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002), 1515 (2003) and 1860 (2009), as well as in the
Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. Mustering and sustaining the
political will to implement the framework is
imperative.

We hope that the international community will
lend its rightfully so moral and political weight to
nudge the process towards our common objective of an
independent, sovereign and viable State of Palestine, as
has been decided by the international comity many
times for years, living side by side and in peace with
all its neighbours, including Israel.

