Mr. Kebe (spoke in French): Allow me,
Mr. President, on behalf of the Secretary General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and on my own
behalf, to thank your delegation for having organized
this debate and, above all, you, Mr. Minister, for
having agreed to grace this meeting with your
presence, despite a heavy workload.

It is not a coincidence that your delegation made
the important decision to include this debate in the
Council's programme of work. The main reason for
this decision relates to the interest and the commitment
that your country has always shown in defending
African positions within the Council. There is another
reason, referred to directly in the statement of
Ambassador Mahbubani, your Permanent
Representative, made in this very Chamber on 29
January 2002, in the debate on the situation in Africa,
which was initiated by the delegation of Mauritius.
Ambassador Mahbubani asked about the results
achieved on the African questions debated within the
Council. He concluded that "There is no linkage
between one debate and another debate on the same
subject."

Undeniably, our meeting today marks the first
step towards linking one debate to another and to
establishing an ongoing solution for all African items
discussed in the Council.

On 16 May 2002, I had the great privilege of
paying tribute to Ambassador Koonjul, whose tenacity
and generosity were led to establishment of the
Working Group. The fact that Ambassador Koonjul
moved from a generous idea to a reality, and now holds
the chairmanship of the Committee is even more
commendable. He has been a beacon for us in showing
the way forward.

During that same meeting, I exchanged views
with members of the Working Group, and I tried with
them to define and lay the foundation for cooperation
between the OAU and the Group. As I have recalled,
the OAU is now at a critical stage in its development.
Next July it will cease to exist and will give way to the
African Union. Important decisions have now been
taken on the establishment of the institutions and
organs ofthe African Union.

One of those decisions relates to a review of the
structure, procedures and working methods of the
central organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution. A new
protocol was drafted by the OAU secretariat, and it will
be submitted for consideration by the Council of
Ministers and for approval by the Conference of Heads
of State and Government, planned for 8 to 10 July 2002
in Durban, South Africa. The draft protocol contains a
proposal to change the name of the Mechanism's
Central Organ to the Peace and Security Council. The
organs ofthe OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution in Africa will comprise
the following: the Peace and Security Council, which
will replace the Central Organ; the Commission of the
Union, which will replace the current OAU secretariat;
and a panel of wise persons, which is a new body.

Mr. President, since I am mindful of the objective
of this meeting, and am anxious to respond to your
request to encourage an exchange of ideas, I would like
to make a few comments on the general approach of
the Working Group, and some specific proposals
relating to some items on its programme of work. On
the subject of the Working Group's overall approach,
we in the OAU believe that it should seek to promote
and strengthen cooperative mechanisms, first, between
the OAU and African subregional organizations in
order to harmonize views, rationalize efforts and
properly distribute actions in all areas relating to peace
and security in Africa. Secondly, it should follow up
the implementation of Security Council decisions, in
particular those that stem from implementation of
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report on the causes of conflict (S/1998/318) and in the
Brahimi report (5/2000/809). Thirdly, there should be
better coordination of actions undertaken by the OAU
and African subregional organizations in the area of
conflict prevention. Fourthly, all conflict prevention
actions should be speeded up, and peacekeeping or
peace-building operations in post-conflict situations
should be rapidly established.

On the subject of strengthening cooperation with
the Economic and Social Council, in our view the
Working Group, in cooperation with the Economic and
Social Council ad hoc Advisory Group on African
Countries Emerging from Conflict, and in collaboration
with the OAU and African subregional organizations,
should organize donor conferences, encourage joint
missions to assess humanitarian situations, ensure that
programmes for reconstruction and rehabilitation,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration be
effectively included in all peace agreements, and
encourage the Secretaries-General of the OAU and of
the United Nations to appoint special envoys for pre-
conflict and post-conflict situations.

Regarding the OAU and African subregional
organizations, we propose that the Working Group
facilitate periodic meetings and constructive dialogue
between members of the Security Council and
members of the future African Union Peace and
Security Council. Such meetings would seek to adapt
views and approaches to changing conflict situations
and to harmonize decisions and actions in the area of
preventive diplomacy and in organizing joint field
missions.

Once again, Mr. President, I would like to thank
you for having invited me to this meeting and for
having allowed me to share these initial proposals with
Council members. I am sure that we will have another
opportunity to sit down with members of the Working
Group to see which of these proposals could ultimately
be endorsed, and that we will see a fine harvest from
the debate.
Before I conclude, allow me to pay special tribute
to the Department of Political Affairs, with which we
have always worked in seeking to strengthen
cooperation between the OAU and the United Nations.
In so doing, I wish to pay public tribute to
Mr. Ibrahima Fall. His decisive work has done much to
establish a fluid, effective relationship between the
United Nations and the OAU. Thanks to his forward-
looking vision and because of his almost militant
attitude to all African questions, Mr. Fall has helped
the OAU to make progress on several African
problems, particularly in the areas of conflict
prevention and the conclusion of peace agreements. I
wanted to make this public tribute to Mr. Fall, because
of his modesty and his great talent, on behalf of the
Secretary-General of the OAU, and on behalf of all my
associates in the OAU office to the United Nations,
with whom Mr. Fall has played the role of leader and
big brother in the great African tradition. At a time
when he is preparing to leave New York to take up
another post in Dakar, I am sure that Mr. Fall will
continue, together with us, to involve himself in our
great common task in the service of Africa.

