Mr. Ebner (Austria): At the outset, I would like
to thank the German presidency for convening this
debate and for its excellent work in the Security
Council in strengthening the protection of children in
situations of armed conflict. I also wish to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Radhika Coomaraswamy and her Office for their
tireless efforts and important work. We appreciate the
close cooperation between Ms. Coomaraswamy and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallstrom.

Austria aligns itself with the statements made by
the observer of the European Union, the representative
of Switzerland on behalf of the Human Security
Network and the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

Austria welcomes the adoption today of
resolution 1998 (2011), which will strengthen the
existing child protection framework by expanding the
triggers of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on
children and armed conflict. The increase in attacks on
schools and hospitals, including the specific targeting
of girls, are deeply worrying and need to be clearly
condemned. The further expansion of the triggers
requires an increased monitoring and reporting
capacity by the United Nations. Close cooperation
among all child protection actors becomes even more
important. We welcome the Council's resolve, as
reaffirmed in today's resolution, to take action against
those parties to conflict that persist in committing
violations and abuses against children, including by the
adoption of targeted measures.

Resolution 1998 (2011) provides a clear road map
to ensure respect for Security Council resolutions on
children and armed conflict. In that regard, we
welcome the Council's intention to ensure that
provisions pertaining to Violations of applicable
international law relating to the rights and protection of
children are included as listing criteria for its sanctions
regimes. The Sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, provides a good
model in that regard. We highly appreciate the
exchange of information between the Committee and
the Special Representative, which entailed concrete
action.

We would like to encourage the Council to
consider using all tools at its disposal, including the
imposition of targeted measures, to take action against
persistent perpetrators in country situations where no
sanctions committee is in place. We agree with the
Secretary-General that direct contact between United
Nations country teams and non-State actors is
important in order to prepare and implement action
plans, and thereby ensure the effective protection of
children.

Finally, we encourage the Council to continue to
include child protection provisions in the mandates of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. We would
like to highlight the importance of training for both
military and civilian peacekeeping personnel. In that
context, Austria warmly welcomes the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations training initiative to promote
child protection through comprehensive training,
including by reviewing existing training materials.

Let me conclude by expressing my appreciation
for the work of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict under the German chairmanship.
Austria is pleased to hear about the Secretary-General's
efforts to establish a working arrangement for the
Secretariat, and encourages continued support for the
Council's Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.

