Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We recognize that
events in Sierra Leone have been moving in the right
direction since the Lorne Peace Agreement. However,
since the situation in Sierra Leone is still precarious, the
continued involvement of the United Nations in bringing
peace to that country is of critical significance. With the
impending departure of troops of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), it is absolutely necessary that the United
Nations assume a greater responsibility there. Bangladesh
supported the expansion of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), to prevent any security gap in
Sierra Leone that might derail the peace process, and we
welcome the recommendations of the Secretary-General in
that regard.

In that connection, we welcome the briefing we just
received from the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hedi Annabi. We would like
him to brief us, perhaps later, about the conditions on the
ground in the area where additional UNAMSIL personnel
will be subsequently deployed. We are also interested to
know about the situation regarding the civilian police who
will need to train the Sierra Leone police force, which is at
the moment almost non-existent. We would like to find out
whether the number of civilian police, that is 60 at the
moment, will be adequate to undertake that training
responsibility. We would also like to know about the 29
February deadline for disarmament; we might take this
opportunity to request the Secretary-General to keep us
apprised of developments in that regard.

We are happy that the draft resolution that we will
consider later today reaffirms the strong commitment of
the Council to continue to support the efforts for peace
and reconstruction in Sierra Leone. It will provide
UNAMSIL with an adequate mandate and sufficient
strength on the ground to facilitate the full
implementation of the Lorne Peace Agreement.

Here, we would like to support the comment made
by Ambassador van Walsum regarding the resource
situation and its links to the implementation of the
sanctions and other elements of the Lome Agreement.
We would strongly join him in supporting future
discussions in that regard.

The full implementation of the Agreement, however,
ultimately rests with the leaders and the people of Sierra
Leone. It is they who have to strive hard for the
regeneration of a culture of peace in Sierra Leone. Only
then will there be lasting peace and true reconciliation.
We are convinced that the draft resolution upholds that
final objective and will contribute to achieving it.

