Mr. Mabilangan (Philippines): Implicit in the
topic of today's debate is the admission that the
balance sheet of the Security Council on peacekeeping
is, at best, spotty. This is made evident in the paper
prepared by the Netherlands for today's open debate.
Let me congratulate you, Mr. President, for taking this
initiative and for raising this important matter at this
time.

Of course, while there have been success stories
in peacekeeping, there have been failures and
shortcomings as well.

We appreciate the need for a strategy and a clear
set of criteria on when United Nations peacekeeping
operations should exit or be withdrawn from a mission
area. We welcome the remarkable candidness of the
Dutch paper and the comments made today by some
Council members on the lack of discussion in the
Council on exit strategies.

An exit strategy should be an essential component
of any mandate on peacekeeping. The mandate should
be clear and definitive on what the United Nations
would try to accomplish in a particular mission.
Without an objective, any peacekeeping mission would
be a waste of personnel and financial resources.

We are of the view that the lack of a clear exit
strategy in many, if not most, of the United Nations
peacekeeping missions is symptomatic of a deeper
problem that everyone recognizes.

A culture of accommodation among the five
permanent members after the end of the cold war
brought about the dramatic increase in the number of
peacekeeping missions. These missions became known
as "second generation" peacekeeping operations
because of the expanded scope of such missions in
comparison with "traditional" peacekeeping.
Paradoxically, the cooperation by the five permanent of
the Security Council brought about a sort of cozy
elitism that became a subject of concern for non-
members, who felt excluded from the process of
formulating mandates for peacekeeping missions.

The opaque method of consultations in the
Security Council on peacekeeping has contributed to
the difficulty that this open debate is trying to untangle
today. Any credible peacekeeping mission would
require a well-conceived mandate with a clear exit
strategy, a well-supported operation, a well-conducted
execution of plans and, as the underpinning of the
whole mission, a well-coordinated effort by the
international community. The Security Council could
not bypass the input from the United Nations
membership, other organs of the United Nations system
and other international bodies and agencies if the
Council were responding not just to the narrow
national interests of some of its members but to the
broad aspirations of the international community for
peace and security.

We see the transparency of the Security Council
on peacekeeping as requiring two dimensions. These
dimensions represent the partnerships that the Council
should foster and strengthen if it is to fulfil its mandate
enshrined in the Charter.

The first and foremost of these partnerships
would be with troop-contributing countries. The
Security Council must engage in dialogue the countries
that would place the lives of their people on the line in
peacekeeping missions. Such dialogue would foster
trust among the key players in peacekeeping. Without
this trust, the United Nations ability and resolve to
confront conflict situations would have little
international support. Furthermore, the objectives and
exit strategy devised by the Council, without the input
of troop contributors, would lack legitimacy. Troop
contributors should feel involved in the decision-
making process on missions in which they participate.
Indeed, there has been improvement in the area of
consultations between the Council and troop-
contributing countries. The Philippines particularly
welcomes the adoption by the Council of resolution
1327 (2000) two days ago. But much remains to be
done.

The second dimension of the international
partnership for peacekeeping should be particularly
relevant because of the onset of the "second
generation" peacekeeping operations. In United
Nations parlance, these missions have also been
referred to as "complex" or "multidimensional"
peacekeeping operations. Some refer to these
operations as peace-building activities and lament the
fact that these activities demonstrate a "mission creep"
on some Council-mandated peace operations. We do
not see this as mission creep per se, but this seems to
be an area that would require the cooperative efforts of
the Council and the relevant agencies in the United
Nations system, as well as other international bodies,
including the Bretton Woods institutions.

On its own, the Security Council cannot ensure
that United Nations involvement in resolving a
particular conflict would result in sustainable peace
and development. It has no capability to devise a
comprehensive peace and development strategy. To be
successful at bridging the difficult transition from
conflict to sustainable peace and development, the root
causes of conflict should be addressed with political,
social and developmental instruments. There is
therefore a need for a closer partnership between the
Council and other relevant international bodies and
agencies to achieve a comprehensive solution to
conflict situations.

The challenges to peacekeeping are daunting.
Meeting these challenges would require the full
participation and cooperation of the international
community at every stage of the mission - from
formulating mandates to devising exit strategies for
peacekeeping operations. International partnership
would harness international cooperation to achieve
sustainable peace and development for the
communities and peoples that need help.

