Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing.

Bolivia expresses its strong support for sincere,
cross-cutting and transparent dialogue to achieve the
two-State solution. We are convinced, like all other
States Members of the United Nations, that both Israel
and Palestine have the right to live in security as free
and independent States.

As on other occasions, we endorse the initiatives
that lead to a peaceful settlement to the conflict between
Palestine and Israel, such as the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map, and others that seek to ensure
a just and lasting peace for both peoples. In that regard,
we reaffirm our full commitment to multilateralism
and to debate framed by respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the States.

On this occasion, I would like to express our
deepest condolences to the families of the Palestinian
and Israeli citizens who died over the past few days
in violent clashes in the territories of Jerusalem and
the West Bank. As a pacifist State, we categorically
reject all kinds of acts of force that result in the loss
of human life, regardless of who commits them or the
circumstances in which they occur. Our commitment
to the sanctity of life prevails over all ideological
speech or action that embraces violence as a valid
means to achieve an end, regardless of how fair that
end may appear.

Unfortunately, again and as on other occasions,
we are participating in this open debate in a context
that does little to inspire optimism for the long-desired
peace in the Middle East. The Israeli Government
recently sought to justify a number of violations of
international law, including practices aimed at altering
the demographic composition, character and status of
the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
occupied since 1967.

Between 16 July and today, at least eight deaths have
occurred in clashes that took place in East Jerusalem
and the West Bank. As members of the Security
Council, we cannot allow an escalation in the violence
that adds to the deaths, be they Israeli or Palestinian.

On 21 July, last Friday, the Israeli police issued
a communique announcing the implementation of a
series of measures restricting the access of men under
the age of 50 and Palestinian women in general to the
Holy Esplanade. In imposing those new restrictions,
which include metal detectors and metal barriers at the
holy sites that surround the Al-Aqsa Mosque, Israel is
violating the historic status quo. We must recall the
historic General Assembly resolution 181 (II), of 1947,
which refers to the fact that the liberty of access to holy
sites and sanctuaries and religious buildings, as well as
freedom of worship, shall be guaranteed, in conformity
with existing rights and subject to requirements of
public order and decorum.

We join the nations that today are calling on the
parties to heed the call ofhistory and to sit down together
to begin a frank and sincere dialogue, while refraining
from any attitude whose outcome is to increase the
violence in a land already steeped in volatility, a land
in which various faiths and cultures should coexist and
recognize their shared humanity.

We also call upon all parties to refrain from
resorting to the use of aggressive rhetoric, which
fans the flames of hostility between both peoples. It
is crucial that every possible effort be made to avoid
any escalation of violence, which ultimately affects
innocent men, women, children and the elderly.

We express once again our commitment to the
immediate implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
and we encourage all members of the Security Council
to join forces for its implementation without further
delay. We believe that all the resolutions adopted by the
Council should be implemented with the same rigor and
commitment that they demand, with the sole purpose of
guaranteeing international peace and security.

In conclusion, we emphatically reaffirm that the
only long-term solution to the conflict is the two-State
solution, with an Israeli State and a free, sovereign
and independent Palestinian State, within the pre-
1967 international borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly.

