Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Madam President, first of
all, let me thank you for organizing today's meeting.
Ukraine supports the meeting's objectives to further
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional arrangements in conflict
prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The presence with us today of the President of the
Argentine Republic attests to the importance that her
country attaches to the issue. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General and the representatives of regional
and subregional organizations for their respective
insights.

While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement
made on behalf of the European Union, I would like to
make a few comments in my national capacity.

During its sole period ofmembership ofthe Security
Council as an independent country in 2000-2001,

Ukraine paid particular attention to the strengthening
of interaction between the Council and regional
organizations based on the principles of effective and
clear division of labour, complementarity, added value,
comparative advantages and regional ownership. We
welcome the progress achieved since then in ensuring
closer and more operational cooperation. In that regard,
the most recent rehatting experience in Mali comes to
mind. Yet the goal of ensuring the coherence, synergy
and collective effectiveness of joint efforts remains
as relevant as ever. That is why we fully support
today's comprehensive presidential statement aimed at
achieving that purpose (S/PRST/2013/12).

As is rightly pointed out in the concept note
(S/2013/446, annex), the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is one of the two
regional organizations that, along with the African
Union, enjoy the most established interaction with the
Security Council. Since Ukraine has the honour to
chair the OSCE in 2013, let me briefly outline some
suggestions on how to advance the United Nations/
OSCE partnership. For the sake of time, I will confine
myself to general remarks, while the full text of the
statement will be uploaded to my mission's web page.

As was emphasized by the OSCE Chairperson-in-
Office, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Leonid Kozhara,
before this Council in May (see S/PV.6961), the OSCE
is a strong partner of the United Nations in promoting
international peace and security in its area. With a
comprehensive approach to security and in view of
its geographical scope stretching from Vancouver to
Vladivostok, the OSCE enjoys a unique place among
all other regional organizations under Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter.

In March 2006, the OSCE Permanent Council
adopted a Declaration on Cooperation with the United
Nations, welcoming Security Council resolution
1631 (2005) and declaring the OSCE's readiness to
further strengthen cooperation with the Organization.
Consequently, the OSCE has boosted its cooperation
with the United Nations in all three dimensions - the
politico-military, the economic and environmental,
and the human - with particular attention given to
addressing post-conflict challenges, humanitarian
needs and transnational threats.

As security challenges continue to evolve, the nature

of United Nations/OSCE collaboration must evolve as

well, becoming more pragmatic and action-oriented.
We should clearly identify areas where the two
organizations can most effectively work together or in
parallel - but not in competition 7 guided by the needs
and priorities of their member States. In our view, the
OSCE should continue to engage closely on mediation
with the United Nations and its Friends of Mediation,
particularly as the OSCE bolsters its own mediation and
mediation support capacity through various measures.

The OSCE will remain committed to supporting
the United Nations by helping to create more synergies
in key regions of common concern. In particular,
the security, political and economic transitions in
Afghanistan, as well as the withdrawal of international
security forces in 2014, will continue to have security
implications for the OSCE area.

Progress in finding sustainable and long-term
solutions to the protracted conflicts in the OSCE area
is at the top of the Ukrainian chairmanship's agenda.
We greatly appreciate the input of the United Nations
in solving security and humanitarian issues in the area
of conflict in Georgia, within the framework of the
Geneva international discussions, The OSCE mission
in Kosovo is a key component of the framework of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, providing valuable experience and expertise
in institution-building and promoting human rights and
engaging actively with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Development Programme and other international
organizations.

The OSCE pays particular attention to a broad range
of transnational threats. That attention encompasses
close cooperation with the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as well as interaction
on drugs, borders, and proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We therefore see particular merit
in deepening cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). An updated joint action plan with UNODC
for 2013-2014 entered into force in April. In the area
of policing, the OSCE has developed strong ties with
the DPKO's Police Division and is actively cooperating
in developing a new United Nations strategic guidance
framework for international police peacekeeping. I
should recall that in March Ukraine hosted one of the
dedicated regional seminars.

The fight against trafficking in human beings
remains one of the key issues addressed by the
OSCE under Ukraine's chairmanship. In June, the
chairmanship held a high-level international conference
in Kyiv on combating trafficking in human beings.

Other priorities for the human dimensions of
Ukraine's chairmanship include strengthening the
freedom of the media. It is worth noting that OSCE'S
representative for the freedom of media has been
engaged in drafting the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
which is quite significant in the light of the Council's
open debate on that very issue last month (S/PV.7003).
The United Nations and the OSCE continually share
relevant information in this field.
This list of priority areas of cooperation between
the United Nations and the OSCE is not exhaustive, and
the Ukrainian chairmanship will make every effort to
advance our bilateral interaction as comprehensively
and effectively as possible. In closing, I would like
to reiterate Ukraine's commitment to advancing
cooperation between the United Nations and its regional
and subregional partners.

