Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
engagement in facing the alarming situation in
Rakhine state.

In the past months, the number of refugees
fleeing from the region has increased appallingly,
which has created a dangerous humanitarian crisis
with destabilizing impacts on the region. It is the
responsibility of the Council to urgently address
the situation and collectively engage in providing
assistance. The Security Council must send a strong,
unified and constructive message, in line with the
priorities identified by the Secretary-General.

The crisis in northern Rakhine state is the
result of a number of complex factors and requires a
comprehensive response.

First, we must put an end to violence immediately.
In line with requests of the European Union, we call on
the authorities of Myanmar to suspend their security
operations and ensure the full protection ofits civilians.
We condemn the coordinated attacks of25 August by the
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army. We stress the need
for the security response to fully respect international
humanitarian and human rights law. Acts of violence
perpetrated against the Rohingya minority, including
reports of serious abuses against women, children and
the elderly, are a matter of grave concern and cannot
be tolerated. National authorities are responsible for
safeguarding the lives and protecting the fundamental
rights of all people, without discrimination. Safe and
unhindered humanitarian access must be ensured.

WejoinHighCommissionerforRefugeesMr. Filippo
Grandi in his call to immediately re-establish access for
United Nations agencies to Rakhine state. Humanitarian
agencies and donors have mobilized rapidly. The Italian
Government immediately allocated, through the High
Commissioner for Refugees, €1 million to community
projects for minorities and contributed €500,000 to the
World Food Programme's emergency packages. Even
still, needs on the ground exceed the available resources
and access to those in need and those in the most dire
conditions faces major restrictions.

We appreciate that the authorities of Myanmar
have engaged in alleviating such suffering, but it is
urgent that they step up their efforts by ensuring full
international access and cooperation with the United
Nations, especially with the Office ofthe United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. We look forward to
the visit of a group of foreign diplomats and heads of
United Nations agencies to Rakhine state, which is set
to take place on 2 October. We also acknowledge the
steps taken by Myanmar to cooperatively address the
refugee crisis with Bangladesh, and we encourage both
countries to bolster that coordination. We would like to
commend Bangladesh for its decision to keep its border
open, as well as for its solidarity and hospitality efforts.

Secondly, the root causes of the crisis must be
addressed. In its report, the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State outlines a road map for socioeconomic
development and lasting reconciliation. We praise
Myanmar for mandating the Commission in the first
place, as well as for its commitment to following up
on its recommendations with the establishment of an
interministerial Implementation Commission that is
in charge of implementing those recommendations.
Translating the recommendations into concrete actions
is now the priority, because it will pave the way for
disrupting the vicious cycle of discrimination, poverty
and violence that is afflicting communities.

We acknowledge the scope of the challenge and
stand ready to assist, while hoping that the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, led by Kofi Annan, will
continue to be involved. The United Nations system,
by integrating humanitarian aid and development
assistance, is in the best position to shore up the process.
We encourage Myanmar to engage in a constructive
dialogue with the Organization, and we welcome its
decision to participate in today's briefing.

Thirdly, the voluntary, safe and sustainable return of
refugees will be key to defusing tensions and stabilizing
the region. That entails ensuring registration, in line
with international standards, and finding a durable
solution to the problem of statelessness. Also in that
regard, the United Nations can offer its expertise and
assistance.

Finally, building trust among communities
is paramount. We ask the Government to stifle
inflammatory language and foster an interreligious
dialogue. In that respect, those who are responsible for
human rights violations must be held accountable. The
fact-finding mission established by the Human Rights
Council, in cooperation with the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the human rights situation in Myanmar,
could complement Government efforts by exhaustively
and impartially assessing the situation and facilitating
reconciliation.

The United Nations, including the Security Council
and the Secretary-General, can play a constructive role
in helping Myanmar overcome the crisis and advance
on its path towards an inclusive democracy. Respecting
human rights is an essential prerequisite that cannot be
ignored. Italy stands ready to take into consideration
further constructive action by the Council and remains
committed to Myanmar's democratic transition and
national reconciliation.

