Mr. Sauer (Finland): Finland aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union (EU).

Finland welcomes the initiative to discuss the
interlinkages between water, peace and security at this
important forum.

While conflicts have globally decreased in number,
they have also become more complex in nature. The
root causes of different conflicts vary, but competition
over natural resources is likely to increase in the future.
Demand for fresh water is expected to increase by more
than 50 per cent by 2050. At the same time, climate
change, together with environmental degradation, is
putting more pressure on the availability of natural
resources - especially water. The growing interest
in resources is a potential driver for conflict, and
the Security Council, together with the Secretary-
General, should assume its responsibility in terms of
preventive response.

One of the key prevention tools is mediation.
Through our co-chairmanship of the United Nations
Group of Friends of Mediation, as well as in similar
groups in the Organization for Security and Cooperation
and in the EU, Finland has worked hard to strengthen
the normative and institutional basis for mediation. We
aim at equipping mediators with better skills, tools and
partnerships. As part of those efforts, we supported
the joint guidance note entitled Natural Resources
and Conflict: A Guide For Mediation Practitioners,
published by the United Nations Department of
Political Affairs and the United Nations Environment
Programme in February 2015. The guide translates
decades of experience in natural-resources-related
dispute resolution into concise and practical advice,
with specific chapters on water. It creates a framework
for resolving disputes that centre on natural resources.

As experience has shown, water can also serve as
a basis and an entry point for collaboration instead of
for conflict. To achieve that, it is of vital importance
to prove the win-win proposition in sharing resources
and negotiated solutions. Approximately 40 per cent of
the world's population lives in areas that share water
resources with two or more countries, but only a third
of transboundary river basins are covered by proper
cooperation mechanisms. It is therefore of the utmost
importance that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development includes a target to promote cooperation
on transboundary waters at all levels, as appropriate.
We need strong commitments to implement that target.

The steering committee of the Group of Friends
of Water in New York, of which Finland is a member,
has been a strong advocate for the comprehensive water
agenda to ensure the implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 6 and all water-related targets
of the 2030 Agenda. Our own experiences show that
institutional arrangements such as river commissions
and international water conventions, together with very
concrete measures such as regulation of water flows
and fish stocks, measures to reduce pollution and the
monitoring of water quality can be agreed upon in a
manner that benefits all parties to those agreements and
arrangements. In 1966, theInternationalLaw Association
adopted the Helsinki Rules on the Uses of the Waters
of International Rivers. Two international framework
conventions - namely, the 1992 Water Convention, of
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe,
the so-called Helsinki Convention, and the International
Watercourses Convention, adopted by the General
Assembly in 1997 - are now in force. Transboundary
water cooperation and the related water conventions
function as confidence-building mechanisms to prevent
conflicts with a long-term View.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the delegation
of Senegal for highlighting this important aspect
of conflict prevention and to assure the Council of
Finland's commitment to do its share in promoting
the important discussion of the interlinkages of water,
peace and security.

