Mr. Bassole (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
today's initiative and to convey to you the fraternal
support and gratitude of the President of Burkina Faso
for your dedication and personal involvement on behalf
of peace and stability in Africa.
With regard to strengthening the relations
between the United Nations and African regional
organizations in the area of international peace and
security, I should like to express our gratitude and
support for the relevant recommendations made by the
Secretary-General. In order to shorten my statement,
Mr. President, I should like to associate myself with
what you proposed and with what Mr. Kikwete, current
Chairperson of the African Union, just said in his
statement.

West Africa continues to be a theatre of conflicts,
some of which are on the Security Council's agenda.
As a subregional organization, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has
equipped itself with a mechanism for conflict
prevention and settlement, the Mediation and Security
Council, and with a Council of the Wise, which seeks
to prevent or effectively manage the conflicts in the
subregion. ECOWAS has always believed that it had
the responsibility for resolving crises, within the well-
known framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Thanks to the actions of ECOWAS, the situation
in most countries in crisis is certainly encouraging,
although, at the regional level, we are still concerned
by the situations in northern Mali and northern Niger
and by threats such as drug trafficking and the illicit
circulation of weapons of war. Together with the
Security Council and the Secretary-General, we are
following in particular the situation in Cote d'Ivoire. In
his capacities as current Chairman of ECOWAS and
Facilitator of the inter-Ivorian dialogue, President
Blaise Compaore has been able, thanks to the vision
and statesmanship of President Laurent Gbagbo, who
took the courageous political initiative of a direct
dialogue, Prime Minister Guillaume Soro and the
Ivorian political class, to achieve the signing, on
4March 2007, of the Ouagadougou Agreement and,
subsequently, of its supplementary agreements.

Those agreements are, in our view, a successful
example of good collaboration among the United
Nations, the African Union (AU) and ECOWAS. While
they emphasize national ownership of the peace
process, they were concluded as a result of regional
facilitation and benefited from international assistance.
One year after its signing, the Ouagadougou
Agreement is recognized as having paved the way for a
genuine way out of the crisis in C6te d'Ivoire. But,
above all, it is the support of the principal actors for

the process that has been the main driving force. Here,
as elsewhere, that support was possible only because
they were fully involved in defining dispute resolution
mechanisms, assumed ownership of those mechanisms
and participated in their implementation. Moreover,
placing the negotiation process within a subregional
framework certainly provided for a better definition of
parameters and the establishment of the best possible
conditions for success.

In order to illustrate the originality of the peace
process, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Cote d'Ivoire has described it in these
terms: national ownership, subregional leadership and
international assistance. We also note with satisfaction
the engagement of Mr. Choi Young-Jin alongside us
with humility and pragmatism. A good complementary
sharing of responsibilities with the Representative of
the Facilitator, Mr. Boureima Badini, has enabled us to
have harmonious assistance in emerging from the
crisis. However, we hope that, as with peacekeeping
operations, mediations of this type also benefit from
predictable, available and sufficient resources, since
they have often been carried out in difficult contexts.

Those are, we believe, some of the lessons that
could be drawn from this process. We earnestly hope
that it will be successfully concluded with the adoption
of an electoral timetable that sets the date for the first
round of presidential elections on 30 November 2008.
Our wish is that peace and stability will return very
soon to Cote d'Ivoire and that the country can benefit
as swiftly as possible from the support of the
Peacebuilding Commission to ensure stability and
economic progress there. Speaking of the Commission,
we should like to take this opportunity to commend its
work and to express our hope for greater involvement
by the African Union in its activities.

I cannot conclude my statement without drawing
the attention of the Security Council to the current
international economic context, characterized by a
general rise in the prices of foodstuffs, which has
caused scattered riots likely to destabilize a good many
countries, particularly in Africa, where the
phenomenon of poverty could be further exacerbated.
It would thus be desirable, from the perspective of
strengthening the relations between the United Nations
and the African Union in the area of maintaining
international peace and security, to place particular
emphasis on socio-economic factors, such as price
increases, which are likely to cause new crises in some
of our States.

