Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden.

At the outset, we would like to warmly thank the
Malaysian presidency, and particularly the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Dato Sri Anifah Aman, for taking the
initiative of holding this open debate and for showing
leadership on this important topic. We would also like
to acknowledge the crucial role played by the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Leila
Zerrougui, and her Office, as well as the important
work of UNICEF and other United Nations agencies,
and non-governmental organizations in the field. We
would like to thank the Secretary-General and the other
keynote speakers for their valuable contributions this
morning.

In 2015 we celebrate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005). The unprecedented challenges
we see today for the protection of children growing up
in countries affected by conflict illustrate the enormous
importance of that resolution. We very much welcome
today's adoption of resolution 2225 (2015), which we
are all proud to sponsor.

The Secretary-General's annual report (S/2015/409)
paints a very gloomy picture of the situation around
the world for children in armed conflict. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has been listed as
committing all the trigger violations involving Violence
against children, a result of their appalling atrocities.
In Syria, the systematic use of indiscriminate aerial
weapons, such as barrel bombs, accounts for the
overwhelming majority of civilian casualties, including
children. This cannotbe allowedto continue. In addition,
during the hostilities in Gaza last summer, civilians,
including children, bore the brunt of the suffering. At
least 540 Palestinian children were killed and hospitals
and schools, including United Nations facilities, were
severely damaged or destroyed. The scale of the impact
on children was unprecedented and unacceptable.
These facts and all other incidents listed in the
report are profoundly disturbing and raise serious
concerns regarding the observance of the rules of
international humanitarian law, including the principles
of distinction, precaution and proportionality, and
respect for international human rights law, including,
let it be said, in the Security Council.

Given that armed non-State actors account for
the vast majority of Violations, further reflection on
forms of engagement is needed. In thata regard, we
thought that interesting proposals were presented at
the open debate presided over by France in March (see S/PV.7414).

In 2014, the world bore witness to several appalling
cases of mass abduction of children in armed conflict.
We therefore particularly welcome the addition of
abduction as a fifth trigger violation in the report,
which we hope will send a strong signal to all parties to
armed conflict around the world.

I want to highlight three areas of particular concern
to us.

First, the right of children, particularly girls, to
high-quality education in war and disasters is vital
to the protection of children during conflict, because
attendance at school can create a sense of normality
and a vision for a better future in an otherwise chaotic
situation. It is therefore all the more disturbing that
there were attacks on education facilities in at least
70 countries between 2009 and 2013. Since then, the
problem has only escalated in a number of conflicts.
We must intensify our efforts to uphold the right to
education, even in conflict situations. By making
schools safer for children today, we are protecting
the future. The Safe Schools Declaration expresses a
commitment to protecting education from attack. It
merits our full consideration and we hope that it will
be endorsed by as many States as possible. We are
also concerned by the severe impact on children of the
continued use of explosive weapons in populated areas.
Such indiscriminate use of weapons is prohibited under
international humanitarian law and we would support
practical steps to stop it.

Secondly, there is still a lack of accountability
for violations of international law committed against
children in armed conflict. It is crucial to fight
impunity and ensure that victims have access to justice.
Crimes against children must be independently and
impartially investigated and prosecuted to the full
extent of the law. Individual responsibility must be
upheld; that means that all perpetrators must be held
accountable and punished accordingly, regardless
of their status or capacity. The Children in Armed
Conflict Accountability Framework is a step in the right
direction and provides a methodology to both redress
past violations and prevent future violations. My own
country, Sweden, will launch this tool in cooperation
with the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo in Kinshasa
this autumn. The International Criminal Court plays
an important role in ensuring accountability and we
welcome the initiative of the Prosecutor's Office to
develop a comprehensive policy paper on children.

Thirdly, and lastly, we must have a stronger policy for
protecting children's rights in peacekeeping operations.
The recent serious allegations in the Central African
Republic bear tragic witness to that. It is essential that
personnel deployed in the field have adequate training
in the rights of the child. Two of the many steps needed
could be the inclusion in all missions of child protection
structures, including child protection focal points, and
making predeployment training of peacekeepers in
child protection mandatory.

Before concluding, we would like to once again
congratulate the Special Representative and UNICEF
on a successful first year ofthe "Children, Not Soldiers"
campaign. They have our wholehearted support, but, as
today's debate has shown, we have a lot ofwork in front
of us.

