Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate and Under-
Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his briefing. We
welcome the presence of Lieutenant General Obiakor
among us today. I would also like to thank Major
General Paul Cruz, Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye,
Lieutenant General Sikander Afzal, Major General
Moses Bisong Obi and Major General Robert Mood for
their remarks. Taken together, they reflect many of the
achievements of and evolving challenges to United
Nations peacekeeping today. Our guests, along with all
the other Force Commanders and mission leaders,
deserve our deep and heartfelt gratitude for the
extraordinary job they do in the most difficult
circumstances.

The presence of Force Commanders in the
Council today brings to the fore the obvious but
fundamental truth that peacekeeping happens on the
ground. We must trust our mission leaders and not
micromanage them, but we can and should give
missions the strategic guidance and multifaceted
support they need. In this regard, today I will focus on
where we stand and how we see the way forward in
three critical areas: the protection of civilians,
interaction between peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
and field support.

The past year has seen a wealth of conceptual
development and political support for the protection of
civilians in such documents as the joint independent
study of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, resolution 1894 (2009), and
the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. The focus now should be on producing
concrete results on the ground. This is normally a
daunting task, as evidenced by the cases of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, but
one the Organization must perform to the best of its
ability.

In that context, priority should be given to the
preparation of a strategic framework to guide mission
leaders in setting up comprehensive protection
strategies, which are needed to ensure that the
protection of civilians is seen not as a solely military
task, but rather as a mission-wide endeavour. Some of
the most successful peacekeeping missions have been
those where peacebuilding concerns have been most
closely integrated into the mission's work.
Nevertheless, we still need to develop greater clarity
on how peacekeepers can best contribute to
peacebuilding.

Over the next 12 months, important documents
will be released, including the strategy of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) for
the early delivery of peacebuilding tasks by
peacekeepers; the World Bank's report on conflict,
security and development; and the review of
international civilian capacities. We must use those
opportunities to hold a detailed discussion on
peacebuilding and peacekeeping, just as we did on the
protection of civilians. That discussion should be
action-oriented and aim at achieving three main goals
by August 2011: first, a better understanding of the
relationship between security and development;
secondly, a clearer picture of how peacekeeping and
peacebuilding have interacted on the ground, both in
current and in older missions; and, thirdly, a practical
agenda for the way forward that identifies the main
challenges in the areas of field guidance, interactive
coordination and capacity development.

The global field support strategy received careful
consideration and approval from both the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth
Committee. My delegation applauds the efforts of
Under-Secretary-General Susana Malcorra and her
team to guarantee that Member States are fully
engaged in this process through retreats, briefings and
workshops. That level of interaction must be
maintained in the coming months, both with
delegations in New York and with contingents and
mission leaders. That is key to ensuring that all
stakeholders fully understand the impact of the
proposed changes.

In taking forward the global field support
strategy, the Secretariat should continue to bear in
mind that logistical aspects of peacekeeping missions
can directly impact their ability to fulfil their mandates.
That, in turn, relates directly to the Council's
effectiveness in addressing threats to international
peace and security. For instance, modelization can
allow civilian personnel to be safely deployed at an
early stage, with potentially important benefits to our
efforts to bring stability to a given region or country. In
that connection, efficiency gains mean a safer world.
That is where the strategy's ultimate significance lies.

Before I conclude, I would like to refer to the
seminar entitled "A new horizon for United Nations
peacekeeping: perspectives from the South", which
was held in Rio de Janeiro in June. The seminar made a
practical contribution to our collective thinking on how
best to face the dilemmas of twenty-first century
peacekeeping. Issues such as the linkage between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the use of force and
relations between missions and local populations were

thoroughly discussed. One of the key conclusions
reached at Rio - the summary of which will soon be
circulated to Member States - was that exit strategies
must be based on effective staying strategies, in the
sense not of over-staying but of ensuring that a
mission's achievements are preserved and built upon.
We believe that the current efforts in the Organization
being led by DPKO to improve peacekeeping go
precisely in that direction. Brazil will continue to
contribute to that endeavour.

