Mr. Naidu (Fiji): I wish to join you, Sir, and all
others who have spoken in expressing our sympathies
to the families affected by the devastating earthquake
that struck India and Pakistan.

Fiji is greatly honoured to continue to serve the
United Nations goals in pursuit of global peace and
security. To this end, we have committed 195 of our
military personnel in East Timor under the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), and we acknowledge the Singapore
presidency for the Security Council initiative again to
allow troop-contributing countries such as Fiji to
contribute to the discussion on this mission.

Fiji acknowledges the immense developments to
date under the leadership of Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, in furthering the Security Council mandate in
East Timor. The recent visit to Dili and Suai by the
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Harri Holkeri,
is a source of great comfort indeed to the East
Timorese and to Fiji. Suai is where Fiji soldiers are
stationed. This gives us real hope that lasting peace and
real independence for the people of East Timor will
ultimately be attained. We recognize, therefore, that the
extension of the UNTAET mandate is inevitable and
critical, and we commend the Secretary-General's
vision in that process.

The slogan that you also referred to in your
statement, Mr. President, "No exit without strategy", is
now most apt for East Timor today. All United Nations
resources and commitments deployed thus far to assist
Indonesia in the devolution of power to East Timor in
their collaborative path to full and free elections and
independence for East Timor would be wasted if
United Nations peacekeeping were withdrawn without
a proper consultative process with all stakeholders.

It will boost the morale of the people of East
Timor and cement their faith in the United Nations for
its positive engagement in post-conflict peace
processes if United Nations presence is sustained. A
viable exit strategy may be taken in phases, each
preceded by close monitoring and evaluation of the
security situation, needs assessment and appropriate
responses by development partner agencies with United
Nations facilitation.

Despite relative peace in East Timor, crucial
humanitarian relief operations are severely hampered
by persistent and violent militia elements. This
situation underscores the continuing need for United
Nations presence in East Timor.

Fiji recognizes, however, that the United Nations
engagement in East Timor is two-pronged. Peace
settlement is the immediate goal. Perhaps the more
important objective is securing peace within a sound
infrastructural foundation to achieve a truly enduring
solution. If such a goal necessitates further extension of
the UNTAET mandate, the Government of Fiji would
fully endorse it. After all, it is a fact that peace and
poverty are mutually exclusive, and East Timor
deserves not only good will, but also tangible financial
and technical support to attain reasonable international
standards.

Now more than ever, the United Nations is being
called upon to provide military, civilian and
infrastructural leverage in the rebuilding and
rehabilitation of East Timor at a time when her needs
are greatest, to ensure that peace is profoundly
bolstered by sustainability, thereby affording her
people genuine opportunities to work towards political,
social, economic and cultural independence.

Finally, Fiji would welcome future visiting
missions to East Timor that would include
representatives of troop-contributing countries, which
will have greater beneficial effects as well as provide a
boost to the morale of peacekeepers in the field.

