The President (spoke in Arabic): I will now speak
in my national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to join other speakers
in thanking Mr. Yamamoto and Ms. Samar for their
briefings. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for her contribution to our deliberations
earlier in the meeting.

The State of Kuwait highly appreciates the
efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the vital role played by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto. We also appreciate the contribution
of all United Nations staff in Afghanistan, who make
dedicated efforts to support the people of Afghanistan
in difficult circumstances. We further commend the
important role of the bodies and institutions of civil
society in Afghanistan and their contributions in such
areas as human rights and the fight against corruption.

We reiterate our congratulations to Afghanistan
and its courageous people on the first parliamentary
elections to be held since 2011. The Afghan people
have faced many challenges and made major sacrifices
in order to choose their representatives in Parliament,
demonstrating their attachment to their political
rights. We support the friendly Afghan people and
encourage them to pursue the democratic process by
holding presidential elections during this year. We
are fully confident that the presidential elections, for
which preparations have been diligent, will be crowned
with success.

I fully agree with those who have spoken before
me concerning the importance of the current political
process, which requires all the wise and political leaders
in Afghanistan to work in the national interest rather
than for partisan gain in order to ensure that all Afghans
enjoy a safe and dignified life following decades of war
and conflict. We hope that the preparatory work for the
presidential elections will include more meetings and
consultations with all parties so as to ensure that the
right candidate is chosen as President of Afghanistan
for the upcoming period. We in the Council must step
up our efforts to support the political process and
UNAMA, as well as to encourage the holding of the
presidential elections in September.

With respect to security, like the Secretary-General
we are concerned by the instability in Afghanistan,
although the number of civilian casualties has slightly
declined compared with last year. The incidence of
suicide attacks targeting electoral facilities during
the parliamentary elections has fallen by 72 per cent.
Fighting between Afghan security forces and their
adversaries has continued throughout the country,
accounting for the majority of security incidents.
That demonstrates the difficulty of the task facing the
Afghani Government and the international community,
especially in light of the fact that the Taliban and
Da'esh continue to launch terrorist attacks on villages
and unarmed civilians. We urge all parties to the
conflict to honour their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law and to take
immediate measures to avoid civilian casualties.

Addressing the political reconciliation process and
security situation in Afghanistan requires us to consider
the vital regional and international role in these two
basic issues. We have followed with satisfaction the
participation of Afghanistan at all levels in bilateral
meetings with many countries of the region so as
to reach understanding and ultimately improve the
security, economic and political situations. We also
welcome the efforts of many countries to promote
the political reconciliation process in Afghanistan by
sending their representatives and envoys, including the
efforts made by Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, United States
Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation,
who has held many bilateral and multilateral
meetings with parties to the conflict and others at the
international level in order to strengthen the process of
political reconciliation.

The State of Kuwait has followed the issue of
humanitarian assistance and displaced persons because
we believe in its importance. Continued fighting and
acts of violence, in addition to drought and natural
disasters, led to the displacement of more than 110,000
people between I January and 16 May. We are more
alarmed by the fact that 58 per cent of those displaced
were children. It is regrettable that those figures are
the result of increased attacks on health facilities and
medical staff, in addition to restrictions on conducting
vaccination campaigns against polio.

The State ofKuwait believes that peace and stability
in Afghanistan and the region will be the result of a
negotiated diplomatic settlement, and that the time is
right for achieving a comprehensive political settlement
to the conflict in Afghanistan involving all parties in
a constructive manner and participating in diplomatic
efforts to attain a lasting peace in that country.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey.

