Mr. Bukeni (spoke in French): I wish to express
my deep appreciation to the Government of France for
having organized this debate and inviting to the
Council a representative of civil society. In particular, I
would like to thank the Permanent Mission of France
to the United Nations for its remarkable leadership in
chairing the young Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

We are pleased with the appointment of
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy to the post of Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
we thank her for the important work that she has done.
We also thank UNICEF for the important work it has
done on the ground and pledge our cooperation in an
ongoing basis.

My name is Bukeni Beck. I am director of
AJEDI-Ka/Project Child Soldiers, which is a
Congolese non-governmental organization for the
rights of children. We are working in Uvira, in South
Kivu. My organization is an active member of the
Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict, whose goal
is to protect children and to monitor and report abuses.

I am chagrined to have to report that in the
eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo grave violations of children's rights continue
and are even intensifying, particularly in rural areas.
The reason for this is simple - there is nothing there
to protect them.

The action of the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has certainly been
beneficial, but it remains limited in scope. The
response to violations must be strengthened in towns
and carried into the villages to put an end to killing,
mutilation and torture of children, to recruitment of
child soldiers, to attacks against schools and hospitals,
to rapes and other sexual violence, and to the spread of
HIV/AIDS. Stronger efforts must also be made to
ensure access of children to humanitarian resources,
including those of psychosocial sustenance.
I find it particularly alarming that we have
learned that Bunia rebels in the Ituri region continue to
enlist children into their army. "What good are all your
reports and tables on abuses suffered by children", I
am asked by inhabitants of my village, "if the culprits
go unpunished?"

Monitoring and reporting of abuses against
children is an essential starting point to ensure their
protection. However, that is not the end of our duty. We
also need to confront declared violations and put an
end to impunity for their perpetrators. Today, thanks to
resolution 1612 (2005), the Security Council and the
United Nations system as a whole are in a position as
never before to prosecute thousands of guilty parties
for their crimes against children.

Meanwhile, it is my honour to present a number

of recommendations to change the life of children in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

First, the Security Council should mobilize the
political will that is necessary, after so many years of
promises, to arrest the guilty and help the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to establish
national tribunals that would arrest and try those who
violate children's rights, as well as follow up in
support of the work of the International Criminal Court
in the country.

Secondly, it is up to the Member States to support
the Security Council and the United Nations so that
definite measures to improve the protection of children
can be implemented.

Donors can ensure the financing of monitoring
and reporting mechanisms that not only work for
disarmament and demobilization but also help in long-
term reintegration, particularly of girl combatants.

The United Nations bodies and agencies must
remain committed in equal and transparent partnerships
with civil society to carry out monitoring and reporting
in the ultimate goal of an appropriate response to
declared violations.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo must ensure implementation of the sanctions
imposed by the Security Council against those
responsible for violations of the rights of children.

Finally, the international community has made a
great deal of progress in combating the terrible crimes
perpetrated against children in armed conflicts
throughout the world. The children of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and of other countries expect of
us that we put an end to attacks and to the impunity
that allows violence to continue. The time has come to
act. They can wait no longer.

