I thank you, Sir, for convening today's debate on this important topic, and I also thank today's briefers. Ireland fully aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex 28). At the outset, I would like to express Ireland's support for efforts to contain the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory. The rapid increase in cases over recent weeks is deeply worrisome, and we urge full cooperation in efforts to control the virus and ensure access to health care for all those in need. The sharp rise in cases in densely populated refugee camps is of particular concern, and we applaud the exceptional work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in providing vital health-care services to Palestine refugees. At the 23 June pledging conference, Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defense Simon Coveney announced an additional €1 million in Irish funding to UNRWA, on top of our €6 million allocation for 2020. UNRWA continues to face an extremely difficult financial situation, and we encourage all donors to consider extending additional support to the Agency. I must once again express Ireland's deep concern regarding the threatened annexation of parts of the occupied Palestinian territory. We share the assessment of Secretary-General Guterres, who told the Council on 24 June (see S/2020/596, annex I) that annexation, if implemented, would constitute a most serious violation of international law, grievously harm the prospect of a two-State solution and undercut the possibilities of a renewal of negotiations. We must also recognize that annexation would compound existing violations of the human rights of Palestinians in the affected areas of the West Bank, which is already negatively impacted by illegal settlements. The annexation of any part of the occupied Palestinian territory would also threaten regional stability and would have inevitable and negative consequences for Israel's relations with the international community, including the European Union. We urge Israel, as an important partner, to refrain from taking such a damaging step. Ireland remains committed to a negotiated two-State solution that ends the occupation that began in 1967, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, on the basis of international law, the internationally agreed parameters and relevant Security Council resolutions. This accords with the European Union's firm position and with General Assembly resolution 73/89, of 6 December 2018, which Ireland introduced (see A/73/PV.47), on a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. We stand ready to support all efforts towards the achievement of this goal. I turn now to the situation in Syria. The conflict in Syria continues to cause unimaginable suffering, particularly in the north-west and north-east. Although a ceasefire in Idlib holds, the potential for escalation remains all too real. Economic destabilization, the spread of COVID-19 and new restrictions on the cross-border delivery of aid further threaten deeply vulnerable Syrians. We welcome the recent renewal of the cross-border mandate for the delivery of humanitarian aid, but deeply regret that just a single crossing remains to serve the millions of people in the north- west who rely on aid, many of them children. Ireland strongly condemns all violations of international law in Syria and welcomes every effort in pursuit of accountability and justice. We thank the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic for its important work, including its report of 2 July (A/HRC/44/61). We reiterate our support for the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism, and call again for the situation in Syria to be referred to the International Criminal Court. Ireland joins the call for a nationwide ceasefire in Syria, and it supports the Special Envoy for Syria in his efforts to bring about a genuine, inclusive and comprehensive political solution, based on resolution 2254 (2015).
