Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to extend to the delegation of the United
States our deepest sympathy and solidarity on the
tragedy that occurred yesterday. We share with the
delegation of the United States and its Government the
conviction that this is an attack not only against this
country but also against the community of civilized
peoples, the values of humanity and a future of peace.
I should like to echo the words of the statement
made yesterday by the Government of Colombia
condemning and rejecting these cowardly attacks.
Nothing can justify thousands of innocent victims
paying with their lives for the intolerance and hatred of
a group of extremists.

Let me say also that on the initiative of Colombia,
just yesterday in Lima the annual meeting of the
Organization of American States adopted a vigorous
condemnation of terrorist attacks and expressed the
need to strengthen hemispheric cooperation to combat
this scourge, which yesterday shook the entire world
and the community of nations of the Western
hemisphere.

I wish to propose a thought on the regular
activities of both the Security Council and the United
Nations in general in light of the terrorist acts of
yesterday. It should be our understanding that anything
that means unnecessarily interrupting our regular work
will be a victory for those criminals who organized the
barbarous acts of yesterday that bring us to meet today.
It is a reality that additional security measures are
needed both in New York and at facilities where the
United Nations operates in this city. However, I wish to
make an appeal that we respond with greater
commitment, with greater presence and with additional
effort in our search for the decisions that the
international community of nations is expecting, the
community that both members and non-members of the
Council represent. Thus, we will be giving the best
possible response to those who simply cannot prevail.

Finally, may I express my delegation's
willingness to participate with all members of the
Council in the adoption of immediate measures in
keeping with the responsibilities of the Council under
the Charter.

