Mr. Marker (Pakistan): Permit me, Mr. President,
to associate my delegation with your remarks and to
express our sincerest condolences to the Government and
people of Japan and to our colleague, Ambassador
Owada, on the tragedy and loss of life that has resulted
from the devastating earthquake in that beautiful country.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General
for the most valuable and thought-provoking supplement
to his report of June 1992 entitled "An Agenda for
Peace". We have read the Supplement with great interest.
Indeed, the "position paper", as the Secretary-General
describes the document, makes some very pertinent points
and contains some far-reaching suggestions. Since the
position paper is now being carefully examined by my
Government, the comments that I wish to offer today are
necessarily preliminary in nature.

 

Let me express our hope that in due course this
supplementary report will be discussed in the General
Assembly also and that, in view of other pressing matters
that engage the attention of the general membership,
sufficient time will be allowed before any decisions or
decisions are made. As a major troop-contributor to United
Nations peace-keeping, Pakistan will maintain a close and
positive interest in this issue.

The Secretary-General has rightly pointed out that the
end of the cold war led to a period of hope and change and
rising expectations from the United Nations. In fact, what
has happened is that a world marred by super-Power
rivalry has been replaced by one riven by numerous
inter-State and intra-State conflicts. While the United
Nations has scored notable successes in some trouble spots,
such as Cambodia, South Africa and Mozambique, in others
the results have been disappointing.

The position paper graphically presents the rapid
increase in United Nations activities related to peace and
security over the last six years. Today, peace-keeping is a
major United Nations activity involving contingents from
dozens of countries. The number of military personnel
deployed on peace-keeping duties has increased sixfold
since 1988, while the financial outlay required to meet the
peace-keeping demands on the United Nations has gone up
more than 15 times. In the light of these developments as
well as those mentioned in the Secretary-General's report,
the importance that he has placed on the subject of peace
and security is fully understandable. My delegation would
wish to pay a particular tribute to the Department of Peace-
keeping Operations for the initiatives and the innovative
approach that have characterized the work of this
Department in dealing with the difficult circumstances that
have prevailed in the recent past.

We endorse the Secretary-General's view that it is far
better to prevent conflicts than to undertake major politico-
military efforts to resolve them after they have broken out.
It is unfortunate that States, while continuing to announce
their commitment to resolving disputes peacefully, balk at
proposals for United Nations help. The Secretary-General
has rightly called for the creation of a climate of opinion,
or international ethos, in which the norm would be for
Member States to accept an offer of United Nations good
offices.

The Secretary-General has also correctly identified
some of the practical problems confronted in the sphere of
peace-keeping. Unity of command is, in our view, an
important principle, especially when a peace-keeping
mission is operating in a dangerous or hostile
environment. The experience of the United Nations
operation in Somalia, where more than 100 United
Nations peace-keepers lost their lives, provided a dramatic
and poignant emphasis to this point. Another important
aspect of peace-keeping operations is to keep the
troop-contributing Governments fully informed and
abreast of the situation where their troops are deployed,
as well as to consult them before taking decisions having
a bearing on the mandate as well as the welfare of their
contingents.

We have noted with interest the idea of a rapid-
reaction force to act as the Security Council's strategic
reserve for deployment. The idea would need to be
further developed before it could be seriously considered
by the general membership of the United Nations. The
idea of establishing a reserve stock of standard
peace-keeping equipment also needs to be examined with
care.

The importance of disarming the sides involved in a
civil war or an internal conflict is well established. United
Nations efforts in this regard met with success in
Mozambique. However, in Somalia the consequences
were quite disastrous. The obvious conclusion is that
"micro-disarmament" works when there is a prior
agreement between the parties involved and there is also
the political will on their part to honour their
commitments. As for arms trafficking, we agree with the
Secretary-General that this problem can be effectively
tackled on a regional basis.

The Secretary-General has raised some very
pertinent issues as regards the subject of sanctions. The
increasing use of the instrument of sanctions by the
Security Council has led to many difficulties for countries
that are neither involved in the crisis situation nor
consulted on the Council's decision that led to the
imposition of sanctions. We accept that the decisions of
the Security Council are binding for the entire United
Nations membership. However, at the same time we
strongly believe that the problems created for third
countries as a result of Council decisions ought to be
effectively addressed. In this context we welcome the
suggestion of the Secretary-General to establish a
mechanism to, inter alia, explore ways of assisting
Member States that are suffering collateral damage due to
Security Council sanctions and to evaluate claims of such
States under Article 50. This could prove to be an
important step towards institutionalizing a system
whereby the burdens placed on third countries as a result

 

of Security Council-imposed sanctions are equitably shared
by all United Nations Member States.

The authority of the United Nations to take
enforcement action against those responsible for threatening
or breaching the peace is enshrined in the Charter. But once
aggression has taken place and been recognized by the
Security Council and a decision has been taken by it, then
the United Nations - or, more specifically, the Security
Council - is compelled to rely on the Member States to
implement the terms of that decision. Despite the
precedents of the Security Council's authorizing a group of
Member States to take enforcement action against a
delinquent State, the need for the Council to exercise the
utmost discretion and care in this regard cannot be
overemphasized. In authorizing enforcement action, the
Security Council should in all instances clearly establish the
act of aggression and ensure that its action has the support
of the general membership of the United Nations.

In conclusion, while expressing support for the
statement made by the Ambassador of Indonesia on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, I wish to state that we hope
to refine and expand our position on the various subjects
handled in the position paper as the discussions on them
proceed.

