Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the briefing
made by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov on the latest quarterly
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
and the illegality of the Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories.

I will begin by reiterating what was mentioned in
letter contained in document S/2018/454, of 14 May,
regarding the timely distribution of a written report
on resolution 2334 (2016). We thank the Secretary-
General for having heeded our request last June and
we reiterate that that must become common practice,
in accordance with the usual practice stated in the
provisions of paragraphs 62 and 64 of presidential note
S/20l7/507.

As a pacifist country, Bolivia has persistently
echoed the innumerable calls of the international
community for Israel - the occupying Power for more
than 70 years - once and for all to stop its expansionist
and annexationist policies, which violate international
law and Council resolutions. Yet once again today we
must express our outright rejection of the manifest
intention demonstrated by the Government of Israel to
impose its illegal policies in the occupied Palestinian
territories through violent actions, in clear violation of
resolution 2334 (2016) and in accordance with the report
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs of 30 November.

Sixty-three structures been demolished in the
West Bank in just the past month, which has resulted
in the displacement of at least 35 people. We reiterate
that the demolition of civilian buildings forms part of
the coercion affecting many Palestinians in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, which also means
restrictions on accessing natural resources. The denial
of basic services and safe housing for Palestinians
is a product of Israeli plans to relocate communities
to urban municipalities, such as the case of Khan
Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu.

During the two years that we have occupied a seat
on the Security Council, we have categorically rejected
the criminal actions of the Israel Defence Forces, which
used lethal weapons to end the lives of more than 228
Palestinian civilians, including 43 children, in various
circumstances during what was called the Great March
of Return. We have seen a marked deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip as an explicit
result of the violent incursions of the Israeli army.

The ll-year-long land, air and sea blockade imposed
by Israel on Gaza has paralysed its economy, resulting
in high levels of unemployment, food insecurity and
dependence on international aid. Gaza's economy is in
free fall, according to the World Bank. Unemployment
reached 54 per cent in the second quarter of this
year, with more than 70 per cent of young people and
78 per cent of women unemployed, while poverty has
skyrocketed to 53 per cent and food insecurity to 68 per
cent.

There were power cuts in Gaza for between 18 and
20 hours per day during most of this year, which have
prevented the provision of basic services. Productive
activity has also seriously deteriorated, especially in
hospitals, water treatment facilities and sewage and
solid waste collection services, which rely almost
entirely on the emergency fuel provided by the United
Nations.

In the multilateral forums to which it belongs,
Bolivia will question how a Member State can be
allowed to infringe upon the human rights of the
Palestinian population in such a way before the
international community. Accordingly, we demand
that Israel fully comply with its legal obligations and
responsibilities under the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949. In that regard, we cannot fail to
mention the great spirit of solidarity of the Government
of Qatar, which provided a significant amount of fuel
in October that led to a significant improvement in the
supply of electricity to the population of the Gaza Strip.

We again express our firm commitment to all
international efforts that lead to a peaceful solution and
end to the Palestinian occupation. In that regard, we
endorse initiatives such as the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and others
that constitute guarantees for a just and lasting peace,
so that both peoples can safely live within recognized
borders.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our conviction that the
only long-term solution to the occupation suffered by
the Palestinian people is that of the two-State solution,
whereby a free, sovereign and independent Palestinian
State can finally become a full Member of the
Organization, within the pre-1967 international borders
and East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions.

