Mr. Paudel (Nepal): First of all, Mr. President, I
would like to express my sincere gratitude to you and
the members of the Council for providing this
opportunity to share our views in this meeting. I also
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month.

We appreciate the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/221) on United Nations support to the peace
process. We would like to thank Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
insightful briefing to the Council and we appreciate the
role of the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN)
in our peace process under her able leadership. We
have taken note of the views expressed by Council
members and we appreciate their contribution. We also
appreciate the pledges of support to the Government
and people of Nepal for the success of the peace
process.

We have witnessed Nepal's historic transformation
process moving forward with many ebbs and flows
since the signing of the peace agreement. We are
confident that the peace process will not drift from its
progressive and steady course, since the political forces
of Nepal are resilient and accommodative in nature. We
believe that the flexible attitude of the political parties
will guide them towards the logical conclusion of the
peace process.

We are also confident that current situation in
Nepal will be resolved soon through dialogue and
consensus among the political parties in the
Constituent Assembly. It will in no way jeopardize the
peace process.

I would like to reiterate before this Council once
again that the political parties, despite their differences,
are engaged in dialogue to forge consensus in the spirit
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The
Constituent Assembly has been working vigorously on
drafting a constitution. The Nepalese people are eager
to see how their concerns and voices will be reflected
in the new constitution-making process, once the
Constituent Assembly puts forward a draft constitution
for a final round of consultations among the people.

Similarly, the Special Committee on army
integration and its Technical Committee are at work.
Preparations to discharge the minors are making
significant progress with the help of UNMIN and other
United Nations agencies. We are determined to carry
out our obligations in that regard.

We believe that the Council fully understands the
throes of Nepal's historic transformation and that it
stands by our side as a gesture of international support
that will revitalize our efforts in the peace process. I
would like to assure the Council that the Government
of Nepal will make every sincere effort to allow
UNMIN to complete its given activities by the end of
its current mandate.

