Ms. Coninsx: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the tenth report (S/2020/95) of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh) and the range of United Nations efforts to support Member States in countering the threat. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his overview of the report. I commend both the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Analytical and Sanctions Monitoring Team, led by Mr. Edmund Fitton-Brown, for their collaboration in preparing the report with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), among others. I also welcome the opportunity to hear Ms. Mona Freij share her experiences as a survivor of ISIL rule and her efforts to heal her community and build resilience against future radicalization to violence. I commend Ms. Freij for her bravery and willingness to share her experiences with us today. It is vital that we listen to the voices of those directly affected by ISIL's atrocities and recognize the essential role played by women in building peaceful and resilient communities and preventing terrorism and violent extremism. Despite its military defeat in the Syrian Arab Republic and the death of its leader, Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi, ISIL continues to adapt and evolve. We will continue to face significant challenges in countering its activities. The magnitude of the problem is well documented and the solutions are not easy, but inaction is not an option. Thousands of ISIL-associated women and children remain in makeshift camps in appalling conditions. Leaving them to fight for survival, facing threats of further radicalization, would not only be contrary to our shared principles of humanity but also detrimentalto our counter-terrorism efforts. To help Member States better understand the associated challenges and trends, CTED published two analytical briefs in September on the repatriation of ISIL-associated women and children. They highlight current approaches and challenges, while emphasizing the urgent nature of the issue. Understanding the motivations and drivers of radicalization among ISIL associates, including women, is complex and multifaceted. We should avoid stereotyping, generalization and oversimplification in developing appropriate policy responses, particularly as women have often had simultaneous roles as victims and perpetrators. They therefore require gender- responsive, tailored prosecution and rehabilitation strategies that are consistent with international human rights standards. Nevertheless, the rate of return of ISIL-associated women remains significantly lower than that of men and children. Children, regardless of their affiliation, are primarily victims and must be dealt with as such. As the most vulnerable victims, they have experienced tremendous trauma and suffering under ISIL. The internment of a generation of children is neither acceptable nor sustainable. Through repatriation and rehabilitation efforts, the international community must work together to prevent recurring cycles of violence and further victimization and offer those children a life of dignity and safety. I welcome the steps taken by some Member States to repatriate all or some of their nationals from this group. Other impacted States should also seek to develop and implement comprehensive repatriation strategies that are in line with international law, including the principle of non-refoulement. The longer we wait, the less likely we are to succeed. The ways in which we address prosecution, repatriation and rehabilitation efforts now will resonate for generations to come. Bringing ISIL perpetrators to justice continues to be of critical importance. CTED has been working closely with Member States and United Nations agencies to facilitate support for that effort. We continue to help States identify gaps and facilitate delivery of technical assistance to strengthen national counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism responses. During our recent assessment visits to Africa, we noted the lack of mechanisms to address radicalization within correctional facilities, ineffective training of officials to manage violent extremist detainees and the absence of rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for prisoners upon release. Last November's Arria Formula meeting discussed those issues and highlighted the varying degrees of success among Member States' strategies to prevent radicalization in prisons and develop effective rehabilitation processes. Terrorists continue to be adept at using the Internet to spread their propaganda and ideologies. That was the focus of discussion in last week's Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) open meeting, which emphasized the need for a whole-of-society approach in countering terrorist narratives. During our assessment visits and dialogue with Member States on behalf of the CTC, we have also seen the prosecution-related challenges associated with a lack of admissible evidence, a failure to guarantee due process and a fair trial, the determination of criminal responsibility and jurisdiction. All of those challenges undermine States' efforts to bring ISIL associates to justice through prosecution. To mitigate one aspect of that problem, in December CTED issued the Military Evidence Guidelines, aimed at strengthening the collection, handling, preservation and use of evidence collected by the military to prosecute terrorism-related offences. Taken together with CTED's joint initiative with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on electronic evidence, the guidelines will help facilitate evidence collection and preservation for use in criminal and terrorist prosecutions, in compliance with international law. In that regard, I commend the efforts of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to collect and preserve witness testimony, including its recent support for prosecutions in Finland, to prosecute ISIL members for crimes committed in Iraq. ISIL's depravity is evident from their numerous crimes. But its institutionalization of sexual violence and slavery requires special attention. I am deeply troubled by the continued lack of progress in bringing ISIL perpetrators of sexual violence to justice. Women and children abducted by ISIL have yet to be reunited with their families, numerous children conceived through rape lack legal recognition and a culture of impunity for sexual crimes persists. Member States must act decisively to address that issue. Adopting a survivor- centric and rights-based approach to judicial remedies and reparation efforts is the only way to deliver justice to the survivors. In that regard, I welcome the launch ofthe Global Survivors Fund, which will provide much- needed reparations and redress mechanisms to victims of sexual violence worldwide. ISIL has destroyed entire communities, uprooted families and brainwashed thousands by spreading its toxic and misguided ideology. Today the international community has an opportunity to prosecute the perpetrators, rehabilitate the victims and facilitate reconstruction and community development in places destroyed by ISIL violence. The repatriation of women and children will accelerate that process. And the prosecution of ISIL fighters and their affiliates, in accordance with international human rights law, will help bring closure to victims. This is one of the defining counter-terrorism challenges of our time. Inaction now will only make our future counter-terrorism efforts harder. In that regard, rest assured that CTED will continue to do its utmost to support the global counter- terrorism community in facing those challenges.
