Mr. Zarif: At this time last year, the National
Security Council of Liberia endorsed the Government
of Liberia's plan for the transition of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). This marked
the beginning of an historic undertaking, led by the
Government of Liberia, to assume full responsibility
for security by 30 June 2016, in line with the deadline
set by the Security Council.

With less than four months remaining, the
Government of Liberia has intensified its efforts to
implement the plan. Last month, the Government,
with UNMIL and other international stakeholders,
conducted a stock-taking exercise to assess progress
and reprioritize activities within the plan so as to
ensure that its most important targets are met by
30 June. Both the Government and UNMIL are
confident that, with sustained political commitment,
the priority targets of the plan will be achieved.
However, more concerted efforts by the executive and
legislative branches are required to ensure the urgent
enactment and implementation of critical legislation
relating to the security sector. In January, after long
delays, the Senate approved the draft firearms and
ammunition control act, which now remains before the
House of Representatives. Other important outstanding
legislation, such as the police and immigration service
acts, are still pending with the Senate and have yet to be
submitted to the House.

The implementation of the plan has been uneven,
with a number of activities falling behind schedule. In
addition to delays in the passage oflegislation, challenges
in releasing the necessary Government funding for
security transition have been a considerable constraint.
Competing priorities for Government spending and the
deteriorating economic outlook recently compelled the
Government to announce austerity measures and to
revise national budget projections downward. While we
understand that these revised projections are unlikely to
affect the commitments undertaken by the Government
with regard to the security transition, there are still
major funding gaps for security transition tasks, such
as arms inspection or training, and equipment for
the Liberia National Fire Service, which will require
external support. I appeal to bilateral and multilateral
partners to provide support to the security transition,
particularly to those activities that enhance public trust
and confidence in security sector personnel. Failure
to do so may result in a fragile security transition,
which could undermine the many gains made in peace
consolidation in the country.

Meanwhile, UNMIL has continued to hand over
security responsibilities to national security agencies,
such as the Liberian National Police, the Bureau of
Immigration and Naturalization and the Bureau of
Corrections and Rehabilitation, including the provision
of security at Monrovia Central Prison and the National
Palace of Justice in Zwedru, and at one of the country's
two airports. The Mission remains engaged with the
Liberian security agencies to advance the development
of institutional structures and legal frameworks for the
justice and security sectors, as well as the establishment
of accountability mechanisms. This includes the
training and mentoring of their senior management,
assisting in the drafting ofrequired legislation, policies
and standard operating procedures, supporting the
further decentralization of security services at the
regional and county levels, and the establishment of
county and district security councils.
In parallel, UNMIL has continued to implement
its drawdown plan and the authorized reductions
in its military and police personnel, in accordance
with resolution 2239 (2015). After the completion of
the security transition, UNMIL's residual force and
formed police units will be concentrated in and around
Monrovia, as well as in Gbarnga and Zwedru. UNMIL
will maintain critical enablers to ensure its mobility
and quick deployment in support of Liberian security
agencies and to protect civilians in the event of a
deterioration of the security situation that could threaten
a strategic reversal. With the reduction of the military
component, the 50 military observers will redeploy
in the five UNMIL offices in Gbarnga, Greenville,
Harper, Voinjama and Zwedru, and will work closely
with the United Nations civilian police and the field
support component to perform their duties.

UNMIL has also continued to consolidate its
deployments and streamline its activities in line with
the mandated tasks. By 30 June, UNMIL will have
consolidated its 13 county offices into five regional
offices. As part of the consolidation process, we have
also proposed a reduction ofover 30 per cent in UNMIL's
civilian staffing for the 2016-2017 budget cycle. The
closure of the field offices has been accompanied by
a proactive public information campaign, including
the holding of town hall meetings between senior
Government officials and local communities. I have
personally attended most of these meetings to explain
the objectives of the security transition, to emphasize
the importance of the Liberian security actors exercising
full responsibility, to remind the communities of their
role in maintaining peace and security, and to assure
them of the United Nations continued support.

While we will continue to convey these messages,
there is an increasing sense of unease and apprehension
among Liberians across the board about the UNMIL
drawdown and the prospect of its eventual departure. As
Council members are aware, President Johnson-Sirleaf,
in ajoint letter with President Ouattara of cote d'Ivoire,
urged the Secretary-General to request the Security
Council to maintain the quick-reaction force and United
Nations forces in both countries until after the elections
in Liberia. The events of 13 March in C6te d'Ivoire
strengthened the perception among the Liberians of an
inadequate local capacity to deal with security threats
in Liberia. Three opposition political parties and
several civil society organizations, under the umbrella
ofajoint action committee, called for the postponement
of the UNMIL departure until after the elections. This
petition was formalized in a memorandum addressed to
the Council, which was handed over to me on ll March.

Concerns remain about the slow pace of key
political and institutional reforms that are essential to
promoting and sustaining reconciliation. The enhanced
political commitment of all Liberian institutions and
civil society to constitutional reform, decentralization,
land reform and good governance is vital in order to
address the root causes of past and potentially future
conflicts, and to establish a new compact between the
Government and the population it is intended to serve.
Lack of action on the various key pieces of legislation
is a major cause of the slow progress in the security
transition. In addition to the bills already mentioned,
other essential pieces of legislation awaiting to be
enacted include the land rights act, the land authority
act, the local governance act, the gender equity bill,
the whistle-blowers protection act, the corrupt offences
act and the domestic violence act. I would like to take
this opportunity to appeal to members of the Council to
call for the expeditious adoption of all these bills. This
is the responsibility not of the executive branch alone,
but of the Liberian Government as a whole, particularly
the legislature.

As UNMIL draws down, it becomes critical to
invest in capacity-building and strengthening the rule
of law andjustice sectors. In that regard, it is important
that the Liberian judiciary system, with the support of
UNMIL and the international community, intensify
efforts to improve the provision of services, ensuring
that the population and communities are empowered
to settle disputes, and to ensure the protection of their
interests. Some additional priorities include the need to
reduce the high level of pre-trial detentions, promote
justice in relation to children and sexual and gender-
based violence, improve conditions in prisons and, last
but not least, implement the national human rights plan.

Liberia's long-term security and stability also
require continued focus on improving regional
cooperation, including cross-border cooperation
with Cote d'Ivoire. Both countries enhanced security
measures along the border following the fatal clashes
related to illicit cross-border farming. These have
included the temporary deployment of the armed
forces of Liberia to reinforce national security agencies
operating in the area. The Liberian Minister of Defence
has indicated the possibility ofdeploying ajoint military
operation, together with Ivorian counterparts, to deter
cross-border attacks. The issue will be discussed at
the quadripartite meeting of the heads of the armed
forces of the two countries and the Force Commanders
of the two Missions later this month. Such discussions
will be held within the framework of the next session
of the joint commission for bilateral cooperation
between Liberia and cote d'Ivoire, as proposed by the
Liberian Government.

The second joint council of chiefs and elders of
Liberia and C6te d'Ivoire, held in January, was also a
positive development in efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts at the local level through peaceful means.
The Mano River Union plan to hold technical and
ministerial meetings in Abidjan in April, with the
support of UNMIL and the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire, to discuss enhanced collaboration in the
areas of maritime security, border security and counter-
terrorism is another welcome development. In the
meantime, progress has been achieved in the voluntary
repatriation of Ivorian refugees from Liberia. Following
the resumption of the process in December, 10,654 of
some 37,000 remaining refugees have returned to Cote
d'Ivoire so far. We are hoping that tomorrow there will
be another 200 refugees returning to their country.

The expected completion of the security transition
on 30 June will be one ofthe most significant milestones
for Liberia and the international community since the
end ofthe country's civil war and the signing ofthe peace
agreement in 2003. It will also mark the beginning of
a new phase in United Nations engagement in Liberia.
However, Liberia and the international community must
not lose sight of the still arduous path to a genuinely
sustainable peace in Liberia and the region, which will
require the long-term engagement and support of the
international community.

Before concluding, I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, and all members of the Security Council
for the strong support being provided to UNMIL and
its operations.

