The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Argentina for his kind words
addressed to my country.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution (S/1997/989) to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President (interpretation from Spanish): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1144 (1997).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.

Mr. Richardson (United States of America)
(interpretation from Spanish): It is an honour to
participate in this meeting under your able guidance as
President and in light of the leadership shown by your
country in this and in many other issues.

(spoke in English)

The action of the Security Council today to approve
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), demonstrates our
continuing commitment to peace in the region. Since
yesterday, we have assembled to debate in open session
on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a little more
than two years after the General Framework Agreement
for Peace was signed. We face many challenges ahead,

 

but our debate has highlighted the impressive level of
accomplishment thus far and should give us a renewed
sense of hope and resolve, however tempered by the
difficulties before us now.

Most importantly, a stable military environment exists.
Stockpiles of armaments are being reduced, and the
Standing Committee on Military Matters is helping to
bridge the gap between former adversaries. Thanks to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the
multinational Stabilization Force (SFOR), the threat of war
has receded, affording the parties the opportunity to make
peace and to build a stable and democratic society. The
presence of these international armed forces is the biggest
factor contributing to implementation of the Peace
Agreement at the current time.

Despite lingering memories of war and conflict, the
seeds of reconciliation are growing. With the assistance of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), democratic elections have been successfully held
for all levels of government, and new governmental
institutions are beginning to function. National institutions
have been established, and Federation joint institutions are
formed and operating. Although municipal election results
are being contested in some areas and implementation can
be slow, multi-party democracy is beginning to take hold in
Bosnia. While many of these institutions and structures may
not yet function fully or independently, the fact that they
exist and provide a potential forum for joint decisions and
policy-making was inconceivable to many just last year.

Meanwhile, economic prospects are brightening. In the
Federation, the gross domestic product is rising and
unemployment is falling. International reconstruction
assistance has made great strides in rebuilding
infrastructure, providing electric power, utilities, housing
and schools. Progress is being made on an integrated
telecommunications system, and airports in Sarajevo, Banja
Luka and Mostar are being opened to civil air traffic. We
hope that increased cooperation on implementation of the
Peace Agreement in the Republika Srpska will soon allow
more international assistance to be made available in that
entity as well. Assistance from the international community
must remain conditional on compliance with the Peace
Agreement and subsequent obligations.

Despite the encouraging signs, we cannot deny that the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina - and the international
effort to assist them - continue to face daunting odds.
While there has been progress on common institutions,
more is needed. The leadership in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must do more to make economic revival self-sustaining.
Return of refugees and displaced persons also has not
been as rapid as we would like, even though it is perhaps
the key element of the reconciliation and rebuilding effort.
On this issue in particular we must make a concentrated
and concerted effort, on an urgent basis. While more than
400,000 refugees and displaced persons have returned
home, four times as many were displaced by the war.
Moreover, the remaining returnees are mainly those from
areas in which they are "the minority" group and where
they face even greater obstacles to their return. If we fail
to support the right of refugees to return home in safety,
we accept and legitimize the results of ethnic cleansing
and brutality on a scale which has no place in the late
twentieth century. Even worse, we create the conditions
for a new cycle of displacement and conflict which will
threaten lasting peace in the region.

Our focus on reconciliation also means political and
material support for the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and continuing the pressure for
the surrender of all persons indicted by the Tribunal.
While gratified by recent improvement in cooperation
with the Tribunal by some parties, and strongly
supporting recent SFOR actions in this regard, we
reiterate that other parties' failure to cooperate can mean
only continued isolation.

The full establishment of independent media
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina is also a pressing
priority for reconciliation efforts.

Another essential factor in the reconciliation process
and the rebuilding of civic life is the International Police
Task Force, which we have just addressed. The IPTF has
made valuable contributions to the retraining and
restructuring of local police and in helping to achieve
significant improvement in freedom of movement.
Increased and enhanced international contributions to the
IPTF are needed, especially in providing monitors with
specialized qualifications, and we warmly welcome the
pledges that have already been made in this regard. Police
reform is critical for all aspects of Dayton
implementation, including refugee returns, freedom of
movement and good governance. We strongly support the
recommendations made at the Peace Implementation
Conference in Bonn to restructure the IPTF to provide
maximum support to the most pressing civilian
implementation needs, particularly the creation of
specialized units to train Bosnian police to address more
effectively key public security issues.

 

The meeting of the Peace Implementation Council held
in Bonn last week demonstrated that the international
community remains unified and resolute in its efforts to
help the parties create lasting peace in the region. The
Council reinforced the authority of the High Representative
in the broad range of responsibilities related to civilian
implementation of the Peace Agreement. We strongly
support the important initiatives taken by the Peace
Implementation Council to ensure that the civilian
implementation effort has adequate authority and
sufficiently robust mechanisms to function assertively and
decisively, especially when addressing the serious problem
of corruption.

For our part, we will remain actively engaged with
NATO allies and SFOR partners in considering options for
the multinational follow-on force to SFOR to provide a
secure environment for civilian implementation in Bosnia
beyond June of 1998. It has become clear that continued
progress in Bosnia necessitates a follow-on military force,
led by NATO, after SFOR ends. In that light, President
Clinton yesterday announced that the United States can take
part in a security presence in Bosnia when the multinational
Stabilization Force withdraws this summer, to enable
intensified civilian and economic efforts in the region to
proceed in an atmosphere of confidence.

My Government agrees with the Secretary-General's
view that the future of the IPTF is closely linked to the
continued presence in Bosnia of a NATO-led peacekeeping
force. It therefore makes sense that further extensions of the
IPTF's mandate should be considered only when the details
of what will follow SFOR become clearer. That is why we
have supported a six-month extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As the debate on an SFOR follow-on force moves
ahead, we expect that IPTF will assume as much
responsibility for public security as it can. We should all
be thinking about how IPTF can play a more effective
role in pursuing our shared goals. My Government has
made a number of suggestions to improve IPTF's
performance under its current mandate. We believe these
should be implemented, especially those related to reform
of personnel policies. We do not claim a monopoly on
good ideas, however, and we welcome suggestions from
other IPTF contributors and the Secretary-General.

We have not pressed for changes in IPTF's mandate
in the context of this renewal. However, a prolongation of
the status quo is not acceptable. We have not foreclosed
the option of changing the mandate in the future if that
would help to improve IPTF's effectiveness. In the
meantime, we look forward to a constructive dialogue
with our United Nations partners on how to maximize
IPTF's contribution to peace and stability.

I would also add that my Government believes that
changes, for now, can be kept within existing financial
resources. Our vote in favour of this resolution should not
be interpreted as authorizing any increase in costs for the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Finally, we join in expressing our deep appreciation
to the Secretary-General's Special Representative and all
the international personnel serving the cause of peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We remember, in particular the
victims of the 17 September helicopter crash. Their
sacrifice and those of many, many others in the years
since the war began strengthen our resolve as we continue
our efforts to ensure a just and lasting peace in the
region.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of the United States for his kind words
addressed to my country.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of

its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.

