Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing and for
his efforts in actively pushing forward the de-escalation
of tension and the easing of the humanitarian crisis in
Gaza. I listened carefully to the statements made by
the representatives of Palestine and Israel, as well as by
Mr. Hagai El-Ad.

The current Palestinian-Israeli situation is very
fragile and tense, with frequent violent confrontations
and ongoing risks of escalation. The Palestinian Great
March of Return demonstration in the Gaza Strip has
been going on since March, with Palestinian civilian
casualties continuously on the rise. Settlement activities
continue on the West Bank of the Jordan River and in
Jerusalem and the demolition of Palestinian houses
is still taking place. That seriously challenges the
prospects for the two-State solution on the basis of
the 1967 border. The violent conflict and political
confrontations have further exacerbated the mistrust
between the two sides, with more restraining factors
for the relaunch of the Palestinian-Israeli peace talks.

The grim humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is
not conducive to regional stability and the Middle East
peace process. The party in question should fully lift
its Gaza blockade at an early date. The use of force and
violence for violence are not conducive to the settlement
of the issue. The relevant parties should proceed from
the goal of the overall security and peaceful coexistence
of the peoples in the region, exercise restraint and
avoid escalation. The international community should
fully implement the General Assembly resolutions
concerning the protection of Palestinian civilians in
order to ease the current situation in Gaza.

Faced with the current situation, the international
community should have an enhanced sense of urgency.
The Security Council should strengthen its unity in a
common effort to return the Palestine question to the
track ofa negotiated solution. First, the Council should
push for but not weaken the two-State solution. The
two-State solution is the right way to settle the Palestine
issue. The international community should implement
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the land-for-
peace principle, the Arab Peace Initiative and the road
map to Mideast peace and, on that basis, strengthen
political and diplomatic efforts. Efforts should be
made to abandon any and all measures that weaken
the prospect of the two-State solution, implement
resolution 2334 (2016), stop all settlement activities in
the occupied territories, and adopt measures to prevent
violence against civilians.

Secondly, the Council should be united and
cooperate to push for an early end to the stalemate ofthe
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks. Parties with significant
influence on the Middle East peace process should play
a constructive role, promote the mutual confidence of
the two sides, start a new round of efforts to promote
peace and try new mechanisms of good offices. All
parties should work to break away from the vicious
cycle of escalating confrontation between Palestine
and Israel and accelerate the internal Palestinian
reconciliation process.

Thirdly, the Council should properly address
the final status of Jerusalem. That is a complex and
sensitive issue and has a bearing on the future of the
two-State solution and regional peace and stability.
In dealing with related issues, all parties should be
prudent and avoid imposing unilateral solutions that
lead to renewed confrontation. All parties should
uphold the principles of respect for their diverse history,
adherence to fairness and justice, implementation of the
international consensus and the realization of peaceful
coexistence. On the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions and international consensus and through
final-status negotiations, they should reach a settlement
that takes the interests of all parties into account.

China resolutely supports the Palestinian people
in establishing a Palestinian State that enjoys full
sovereignty and independence on the basis of the 1967
border, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We support
the greater integration of Palestine into the international
community, with a View to its active participation in the
affairs of the United Nations. China will continue to
play a constructive role in taking the Middle East peace
process forward.

For many years, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) has played an important role in providing
health care, education and other basic services to the
5.3 million Palestinian refugees. The international
community should provide UNRWA with more
adequate, predictable and sustainable funding. We
appreciate those who made additional contributions
to UNRWA and appeal to all to continue to strengthen
their support to UNRWA and to countries receiving
Palestinian refugees. Over the past 30 years, China has
made annual contributions to UNRWA. This year, we
increased our contribution to UNRWA in view of its
urgent needs. China will continue to do what it can to
provide assistance to UNRWA so that it may implement
its mandate.

