Ms. Rasi (Finland): Finland fully associates itself
with the statement made by the Netherlands on behalf
of the European Union.

Finland played an active role in the process
leading to the publication of the report of the
Secretary-General on transitional justice and the rule of
law in conflict and post-conflict societies, which is
under discussion today. Together with the United
Kingdom, other interested delegations and the
International Center for Transitional Justice, Finland
organized a series of seminars bringing together
interested Member States, the Secretariat and civil
society, thereby facilitating inclusive discussions on
themes central to the report.

Finland views the report of the Secretary-General
as an important milestone. It has given the United
Nations a chance to consider the lessons learned in this
area and, perhaps even more importantly, to reflect
upon what should be done in the future. The report
recognizes that the Organization has in recent years
increased its focus on transitional justice and rule of
law issues in its efforts to bring peace and stability to
conflict-torn societies. There is an increased demand
for United Nations action, which has been responded
to, inter alia, by including rule of law and justice
components in the recently established United Nations
peace operations in Liberia, C6te d'Ivoire and Haiti.

In planning the United Nations response, it is
important that the strategy be based on national needs
and that local actors are fully engaged in the planning
and implementation process. Any strategy should aim
to strengthen the capacity of State institutions. After
all, there is no long-term stability if national
institutions are unable to take over when the
international presence ceases. We view the rule of law
and respect for human rights as essential to achieving
long-term sustainability. Without the rule of law and
respect for human rights there is a risk that a State
could revert to conflict.

Dealing with atrocities against civilian
populations - and especially against women, children,
minorities and refugees - becomes a core issue in the
process of establishing trust in the judicial system in
States emerging from conflict. In that connection,
Finland wishes to give its full support to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and to ad hoc
tribunals. The International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda have played a significant role in
ensuring accountability where national judicial systems
have failed to do so. As for deterrence and prevention,
the impact of the ICC may well be even more
important. The ICC has the great advantage of being
available when need arises. That means, among other
things, that enhancing respect for the rule of law must
not be left to the post-conflict phase, but should be
addressed while a conflict is still raging.

At the same time, the ICC is an institution for
exceptional situations only. The primary responsibility
for bringing offenders of international crimes to justice
continues to rest with States. The impact of the ICC
will have to be measured also by its indirect effect in
encouraging States to incorporate and apply the rules
of the Statute in their national jurisdictions. One could
speak of the role of the Court in mainstreaming
accountability for the most serious crimes and in
building local rule of law. That term also emphasizes
the role of the ICC in setting standards for national
jurisdictions, including a high level of due process
rights for defendants.

Finland believes that the increase in the demand
for the involvement of the United Nations in rule-of-
law and transitional justice-related issues should be
met by enhancing the capacity of the Organization. To
that end, adequate resources should be created at
United Nations Headquarters. We hope to see proposals
from the Secretary-General on that matter in the near
future. We especially hope to see the capacity of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
enhanced in this area, as we recognize that it is vital
that the issues relating to the rule of law are addressed
from the beginning of an operation. In DPKO,
resources are perhaps most urgently needed in the
Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Unit, the currently
two-person Unit responsible for the judicial and
corrections components of a growing number of United
Nations peace operations, as well as in the Civilian
Police Division.

Meeting the growing challenges also requires
effective cooperation within the entire United Nations
system. Finland therefore strongly believes that rule-
of-law and transitional justice issues warrant their own
dedicated entity in the United Nations Secretariat. For
that purpose, Finland has prepared a non-paper,
together with Germany and Jordan, reflecting upon the
possibilities for future institutional structures in the
United Nations. The non-paper has just been presented
to the Council by my German colleague, and it was
circulated to all the Permanent Missions prior to this
Security Council debate. Our sincere hope is that the
ideas presented in the non-paper can provide a starting
point for future Executive Committee on Peace and
Security deliberations on enhancing arrangements by
the United Nations system for supporting the rule of
law and transitional justice.

The United Nations should strengthen partnership
arrangements with regional organizations, individual
Member States and civil society organizations, which
often have valuable expertise and resources in this
area.

Effective coordination among all those involved
in the rule of law and transitional justice projects,
including those of UNDP, in conflict areas could
ensure complementarity of action and success in
delivering positive results. More cooperation is also
needed to provide the United Nations with competent
staff to deploy to its operations.

Finland hopes the report of the Secretary-General
will enable the United Nations to further develop its
action in the area of rule of law and transitional justice.
To that end, it is crucial that the various
recommendations laid out in the report be effectively
implemented. We want to emphasize that the report can
lead to results only if matched by a commitment on the
part of the United Nations and Member States to
provide adequate resources and political support. In
that respect, we were pleased to hear Secretary-General
Kofi Annan affirm in his speech to the General
Assembly on 21 September (see A/59/PV.3), and again
today, that he would make strengthening the rule of law
and transitional justice a priority for the rest of his term
of office.

Finland wants to express its commitment to
continue working towards strengthening the rule of law
and transitional justice and calls on other interested
Member States to join in this process.

