Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would like to thank
the French presidency for convening this open debate
and initiating the Security Council's adoption of a new
resolution on countering the financing of terrorism
(resolution 2462 (2019)). We need to better understand
the link between financial activities and terrorism,
despite the fact that the nexus between financial and
terrorist activities is becoming more complicated,
with the emergence of new technologies and tools
such as cryptocurrencies. We therefore attach great
importance to strengthening international cooperation
and mechanisms in the area. In that understanding, we
were glad to be a sponsor of today's resolution.

Countering the financing of terrorism is an
important element in Turkey's overall counter-
terrorism policies. Turkey is a committed member
of the Financial Action Task Force, which sets the
international standards on countering the financing
of terrorism and money-laundering. Turkey's national
financial intelligence unit, MASAK, oversees the
implementation of our national and international legal
frameworks for countering the financing of terrorism
and money-laundering. As a member of the Egmont
Group's international financial intelligence sharing
platform, it works closely with its counterparts in this
field. The Turkish National Police and MASAK work
extensively together to prevent terrorists' access to the
Turkish financial system and to disrupt illegal money
transactions. As in other areas of countering terrorism,
Turkey also contributes to strengthening international
efforts to counter the financing of terrorism and
money-laundering through its constantly improving
national capacity. Turkey supports the Security Council
resolutions in this field, and we integrate them fully
into our legal system. Accordingly, updates on United
Nations sanctions lists pursuant to Council resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) are integrated
expeditiously. Turkey has supported and sponsored
a number of resolutions that included entities and
individuals in those updates, and we will continue to
play an active role in that area.

We should also bear in mind that many terrorist
organizations, such as Da'esh, the Kurdish Workers
Party and its Syrian branch, Partiya Yekitiya Demokrat/
People's Protection Units, also resort to conventional
methods for money transactions, such as hawala, to
finance their activities through front organizations.
Other terrorist organizations, such as the Fethullah
organization, benefit greatly from illegal monetary
activities under the pretext of being legal entities, and
engage heavily in shadowy criminal activities.

In line with Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), asset freezing has proved to be an effective
tool for depriving individuals and entities of their
financial capabilities and preventing them from using
and abusing legal financial systems. We believe that
selective approaches in the implementation of this tool
only promotes the degeneration of the system envisaged
in resolution 1373 (2001). In that regard, consistency
should be our guiding principle if we are to have an
effective system to prevent financing of terrorism and
bridge the gaps in this field.

Clearly, the task of addressing financing of
terrorism of is daunting. It requires ever-increasing
international cooperation. We deem this resolution to
be a step forward in the right direction. Turkey will
continue to do its utmost to achieve further progress in
this field in the period to come.

