Ms. Qwabe (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to thank The Honourable Justice George Gelaga
King and the Prosecutor for the Special Court,
Mr. Stephen Rapp, for their briefings to the Council.
We also thank the Deputy Secretary-General for her
comments.

My delegation is pleased with the progress made
since the adoption of Security Council resolution 1315
(2000) and the subsequent agreement signed between
the United Nations and the Government of Sierra
Leone establishing the Special Court for Sierra Leone.

The operational and logistical challenges that
faced the Court have since largely been addressed, and
the Court is effectively and judiciously executing its
mandate. Significant progress has been made in the
three trials before the Special Court, and we look
forward to the conclusion of the Revolutionary United
Front trial later this year. This bodes well for the
implementation of the completion strategy in 2009, as
set out by the Special Court.

South Africa believes that the prosecution of
those responsible for the violation of international
humanitarian law, as well as the law of Sierra Leone,
will serve to discourage others from committing human
rights violations in the future.
A hallmark of the Special Court has been its
contribution to precedent-setting in international
humanitarian law, as well as the aspect of national
ownership of the Court. In that regard, my delegation is
particularly encouraged by the large number of Sierra
Leoneans employed by the Special Court, by its work
in the area of public information and dissemination of
information, and by the legacy project to ensure that
the role of the Court in upholding the supremacy of the
rule of law resonates in Sierra Leone long after the
completion of its work. Those initiatives are
noteworthy and innovative, and we congratulate the
Special Court on those remarkable achievements.

Whereas significant progress has been made in
fulfilling the mandate of the Special Court, the
continued assistance of the international community
remains critical. The projected budget for the next
three years totals $90 million, and international donors
are urged to continue their support for the work of the
Special Court. In addition to the subject of funding, my
delegation wishes to call on all States to cooperate,
support and rally behind the appeal by Justice King for
concluding agreements for the enforcement of
sentences, the relocation of witnesses and the
identification of assets of convicted offenders.

In conclusion, South Africa believes that the
holding of free and fair elections on 11 August 2007
will contribute to a peaceful and stable Sierra Leone
and that the Special Court's functions are also integral
in the creation of a stable political and security
environment. South Africa will continue to support the
Government of Sierra Leone, both bilaterally and
through the Peacebuilding Commission, in
strengthening its institutions during the post-conflict
reconstruction phase.

