Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this meeting, which makes it possible to
strengthen the dialogue and coordination between the
African Union and the United Nations on the question
of Somalia. In that respect, I should like to thank
Commissioner Lamamra for having made the trip to
New York to present the positions of the African
Union, as well as the Ministers of Kenya and of
Uganda. Lastly, I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
presentation.

On the political front, a key milestone was
achieved with the adoption on 6 September last by the
Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) in Somalia, the
Presidents of Puntland and of Galmudug, and
representatives of Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a of the road
map setting out the priority tasks to be carried out by
20 August 2012. The timely implementation of all
components of that road map is now imperative.
Although the TFIs face considerable challenges, they
must nevertheless take advantage without delay of the
favourable developments in the security situation in
Mogadishu so as to implement the objectives set out in
the road map. We also expect the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) to be genuinely proactive in the
fight against maritime piracy.

The report of the Secretary-General dated
9 December 2011 (S/2011/759) makes clear that
insufficient progress has been made in the
implementation of the road map. Moreover, the
parliamentary crisis that started on
13 December with the attempt to dismiss the speaker
continues. In those conditions, our vigilance with
respect to the action of the Transitional Institutions is
only heightened.

As the Council has already pointed out, the
continuing support of the international community for
the Transitional Institutions will depend on the
implementation of the road map in the set timeframe.
Those who would impede the peace process, as well as
peace and security in Somalia, could be subject to
Security Council sanctions.

However, we must also note the positive
developments. Significant progress has been made on
the constitutional aspect of the road map and on
parliamentary reform. The national conference on the
constitutional process, which was held from 21 to
23 December 2011 in Garowe, in Puntland, was a
relative success, as it made it possible to set clear
principles for the next steps of that process. That
progress must now be consolidated and the efforts
continued and supported.

On the security front, the success of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
security forces in recent months has made it possible to
regain control of new areas of Mogadishu and its
surroundings. Such results must be welcomed, while
the troops deployed on the ground undertake their work
in particularly difficult conditions. Such progress on
the ground was confirmed by the visit of the Secretary-
General to Mogadishu last December, for the first time
in 18 years, and the announcement of a return of
United Nations agencies to the Somali capital. Those
are positive signs for the future, on which we can
congratulate ourselves and that we welcome.

Similarly, the intervention led by Kenya since
October 2011, which was simultaneously carried out by
Ethiopia, relying on militias in the Somali west, have
also helped to weaken Al-Shabaab. We are delighted by
that weakening of Al-Shabaab, which is an
encouraging sign for the future of the political
transition.

In that context, the African Union has submitted
detailed requests to the Security Council to strengthen
AMISOM, while the situation indeed seems
favourable. As we have heard, those requests in
particular entail raising the troop ceiling and extending
the scope of the logistical support package. The new
strategic concept for AMISOM. on 5 January (see S/2012/19, annex) specifies the context in which those
requests are made. That strategic concept must now
undergo a thorough political, operational and financial
review, in particular on the basis of the report that the
Secretary-General will soon submit to us.

Moreover, we recall that establishing credible
Somali security forces is also essential. That is an issue
of political credibility for the Transitional Federal
Government. It is those forces that should take over
from AMISOM. as soon as possible, and thus complete
the stabilization of the country in terms of security.

I will conclude by raising the humanitarian
situation, which is still a matter of concern. Four
million people, including 3 million in the south, still
need food assistance, while access to humanitarian aid
is possible only for approximately 1.5 million people,
given the deteriorating security situation and cases of
food aid being diverted.

The United Nations, like humanitarian
non-governmental organizations, provides vital support
to the population affected by the famine in the entire
region. We continue to stand ready to respond to the
food crisis in the Horn of Africa. Unimpeded access of
humanitarian aid must be ensured.

