Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Mr. Ibrahim Gambari for his
extensive and clear information about his recent visit to
Myanmar. He has brought us credible testimony about
the painful situation suffered by the people of
Myanmar. Peru is concerned by the violation of human
rights and the worrisome information about the
humanitarian crisis that Myanmar is going through.

This situation has worsened over the past year, as
the military authorities have intensified repression
against the political opposition and ethnic minorities,
which has led to the displacement of hundreds of
people within and outside the country. We join in the
general rejection by the international community of the
repression witnessed over the past few days against
peaceful demonstrators. Also, the restrictions on
fundamental freedoms, unjustified detention, cases of
torture and other forms of maltreatment - all of these
are unacceptable. We reject the arbitrary detention of
Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi and of other political leaders,
despite repeated appeals from the international
community.

This week, the Human Rights Council in Geneva
has acted in accordance with its main responsibility,
namely to respond when there are victims. As a
member of the Human Rights Council, Peru actively
promoted the adoption of the resolution.

Further, the increase in the number of internally
displaced persons and refugees is creating a serious
situation of instability, which threatens security in the
region. In that context, Peru would like to highlight the
urgent need to promote cooperation and dialogue as a
way of seeking political solutions designed to bring
about a democratic transition and genuine national
reconciliation. In this task, the participation and
cooperation of the neighbouring countries surround
Myanmar is very important, as well as that of the
countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) and of the international community as a
whole.

In conclusion, Peru would like to express support

for the continued good offices mission undertaken by

the Secretary-General through his Special Envoy,

Mr. Gambari, leading to a dialogue between the
Government and leaders of Myanmar.

