Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Sidikou, Permanent
Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel);
Mr. Buyoya, African Union High Representative for
Mali and the Sahel; and Mr. Serrano, Deputy Secretary-
General for Common Security and Defence Policy
and Crisis Response at the European External Action
Service, for their valuable briefings.

I would like to address two main issues as
part of our discussion today: first, security, and
secondly, development.

First, concerning security, the deteriorating security
situation in the Sahel and the proliferation of terrorist
attacks throughout the region, including the attack on
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force headquarters in June, are
very worrisome and constitute serious challenges. The
increase in the number of attacks against military forces
in Mali and neighbouring countries has contributed to
the deterioration of the security situation and insecurity
among civilians, which must be addressed as soon as
possible. We look forward to the Malian Government's
investigations into the killing of a number of civilians
in May.

We call on the Joint Force to use the United Nations
expertise in order to build up its human rights capacity.
I would like to seize this opportunity to commend
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, United Nations agencies,
the European Union and the African Union for their
efforts in that regard.

Pertaining to the Joint Force, we value the
commitment made by the five countries to advance
and promote the work of the Joint Force, especially at
the organizational, logistical and operational levels,
to enable it to fight terrorist groups in the Sahel. We
look forward to the full operationalization of the Force.
The financial, security and logistical challenges facing
the five countries impede them from carrying out their
responsibilities. It is only through sustainable funding,
as requested by the Force at the high-level meeting held
on the margins of the General Assembly in September
and as stressed by the Secretary-General in his latest
report (S/2018/1006), that the Force will be able to
confront the serious challenges as it should that threaten
the security and stability in the region.

We cannot discuss the challenges in the Sahel
without addressing the political situation in Mali. As
the Council heard last month (see S/PV.8376), strides
have been made to that end. We have seen positive signs
of a renewed commitment by all the relevant parties in
the country to implementing the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. The Malian Government
has stepped up its efforts to extend its authority over
areas under the control of terrorist groups, after those
groups were able to expand their areas of operation
to neighbouring countries. The Government has also
sought to provide order and justice to citizens in those
areas. The Joint Force has an important role in building
trust with the communities that had been under the
control of terrorist groups.

Secondly, regarding development, stability in the
region requires sustainable development. Undoubtedly,
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel leads to that end. We welcome
the decision by the Peacebuilding Commission during
its annual session to focus on development in the Sahel.
As stated by the Deputy Secretary-General during

that session, the region has huge potential and natural
resources. However, it suffers from a lack of financial
and human resources. We believe that development has
a pivotal role in the prevention of conflicts. Kuwait
has therefore supported the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, and we have cooperated closely
with all countries of the Sahel to support various
development projects. Kuwait has also provided nearly
$150 million over the past three years through the
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development.

We welcome the continuing cooperation among the
countries of the region, the United Nations, the African
Union and all international stakeholders in the region
to strengthen capacities in the areas of governance,
building police capacities and the participation of
women and youth. Those have a direct effect on
development and stability, which would contribute to
building trust between the Joint Force and the people
and creating the necessary environment to support the
Force in fighting terrorism. My country commends the
G-5 Sahel in efforts to that end through the Priority
Investment Programme.

In conclusion, I reiterate our support for the Joint
Force, which will be unable to achieve its goals without
the support of the United Nations and the international
community to curb the spread of threats across the
region. The Force can also play an important role in
ensuring the development of the Sahel. We stand ready
to cooperate with all members of the Security Council
to address the future steps to be taken by the Joint
Force. In that regard, we support the press statement
proposed by the French delegation.

