Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open debate, which makes it
possible for the entire membership of the United
Nations to participate. Their opinions will assist us in
our consideration of the topic before us. We join
previous speakers in thanking the Permanent
Representative of the United States and head of the
Security Council mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, for his
very enlightening words, which complement the
written report that has been distributed to us. We also
thank most sincerely Ambassadors Levitte, Ouane,
Andjaba, van Walsum, Ben Mustapha and Greenstock
for their great personal efforts.

These are difficult times for the United Nations in
Africa. The conflicts in Sierra Leone, Eritrea/Ethiopia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, just to
mention the most urgent ones, are testing our capability
to respond. Sending the mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and then to Ethiopia and Eritrea
is in and of itself a very important sign. We cannot
skimp on resources in this situation, which demands all
our effort and imagination so that we can find
appropriate solutions. The mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a demonstration of the kind
of response that we must give. The detailed report
submitted to us today reaffirms our conviction that we
can and must redouble our efforts to deal with a
delicate situation in an equally delicate regional
context.

In the mandate we gave to the mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we were clear.
There is no doubt whatsoever that the mission fully
discharged that mandate. It had direct contact with the
protagonists and emphasized to them the imperative
that they strictly abide by the ceasefire, with a view to
reaching speedy and full implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and resolution 1291 (2000). We agree with
the observations and recommendations put forward and
would like to touch upon some points that we think are
important.

First, the report makes it evident that there is a
consensus among the parties on the need to implement
phase II of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), as
provided in resolution 1291 (2000). There is no doubt
that this is essential in order to make progress in the
peace process and thus we are hopeful that the
conditions established in the resolution will be created
so that the Secretary-General can recommend the
speedy deployment of personnel.

The joint declaration of Rwanda and Uganda on
the demilitarization of Kisangani, which was reached
through the mediation of the mission, is doubtless a
demonstration of this consensus. We regret that after
the declaration was made, military confrontations took
place, and we hope that these were merely isolated
events that will not be repeated.

Another essential aspect for making progress in
the peace process is the inter-Congolese dialogue. In
this connection we reiterate our support for the
facilitator of that dialogue, the former President of
Botswana, Sir Ketumile Masire. We hope he will be
able to overcome the difficulties that exist with regard
to the current plan of work.

We would like to reiterate our concern about the
consequences of this conflict for the civilian
population. We deeply regret that there were innocent
civilian victims of the recent confrontations in
Kisangani. We are also alarmed by what was said in
paragraph 51 of the report regarding the incidents in
Mwenga. These incidents must be investigated, and the
perpetrators of these truly grotesque acts must be
punished.

We would like to support the proposal of holding
a meeting in New York this June of the Council and the
Political Committee. We believe that this is a positive
step that would surely help with the implementation of
the peace process. Finally, we also support the
recommendation of the mission for the Security
Council to rapidly establish an expert group to consider
the question of the illegal exploitation of natural
resources.

We believe that the conclusions of this report are
clear, and they give us the hope that progress can be
made in the speedy implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and of Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 1291 (2000).
By way of conclusion, we would like to reiterate
our commitment to the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to Africa. We must not let
recent events in the region undermine our efforts.

