Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank the
delegation of Angola for organizing this open debate
on one of the regions of Africa that has taken up a
very large part of the Security Council's time over the
past two decades. I also want to thank the briefers,
especially Special Envoy Djinnit, Mr. Chergui, and
Mr. Pillai of the World Bank, for their helpful briefings
on the contributions of their institutions to the ongoing
efforts in the Great Lakes region.

In the past two decades, the Great Lakes have
witnessed some of the most brutal and devastating
conflicts since the Second World War. The genocide in
Rwanda in 1994 set in motion events that resulted in
three major African wars and the deaths of a further
5 million people in the years that followed. For much of
that period, the positions of the international community
were characterized by missed opportunities and an
inability or unwillingness to act. Africa's institutions
have also struggled. Today we are still working through
the consequences of those failures. And the costs in
terms of lives lost, women and children traumatized,
infrastructure shattered and development foregone
continue to rise.

We must acknowledge that much work has been
done by the African Union, regional organizations
and players, the United Nations, the World Bank and
intergovernmental and non-governmental actors. There
have been bright spots. As the United States Ambassador
pointed out, there have been impressive economic
gains - in Rwanda in particular, but also in Uganda.
As she also noted, however, political developments and
human rights have not kept pace and undue weight has
been given to the cult of personality, to the detriment of
the long-term future of those countries.

Furthermore, we cannot honestly claim to be even
close to achieving sustainable peace. In the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, many of the same
militias that played a central role in the previous
conflicts continue to operate, largely with impunity,
and the potential for violence around the upcoming
elections poses serious risks to national and regional
stability. In Burundi, we have watched as many of the
gains of the past decade, in terms of development and
national reconciliation, have crumbled away in a matter
of months, while the President of the country and those
around him have prioritized their personal ambitions
over the good of Burundi, its people and the collective
national commitment to reconciliation reflected in the
Arusha Accords.

Regional engagement and a focus on confidence-
building measures are essential for achieving long-
term and sustainable solutions. We therefore welcome
the United Nations Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework, which requires a consistent approach to
implementation and active follow-up by the countries of
the region. We also welcome the Great Lakes plan was
just presented by the Secretary-General. The Security
Council must actively support those processes.

During New Zealand's campaign for election to
the Council, we heard time and time again that the

single greatest priority for improving the Council's
effectiveness was to strengthen its performance in the
prevention of conflict. However, 10 years on from the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1625 (2005), the
Council continues to shy away from putting conflict
prevention into practice, including in relation to the
Great Lakes region.

My delegation recalls the sense of optimism that
greeted the establishment in 2002 of the Council's
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa. Initially, that Working Group
provided practical leadership on specific country
situations and pioneered innovative working methods
that have since been adopted by the Peacebuilding
Commission's country-specific configurations. We
would like to see such leadership again.

Since joining the Council, New Zealand has
advocated for more serious and effective efforts to
address emerging conflict risks. Effective conflict
prevention requires a willingness to be flexible and to
work patiently and discreetly with national and regional
stakeholders. It also requires a genuine commitment
by stakeholders to look for solutions, rather than for
excuses for delaying engagement. New Zealand argued
for early, discreet engagement on the part of the Council
in Burundi, including through the dispatch of a mini-
mission to support the efforts of the African Union
(AU), thr Secretariat and regional partners. It took six
months for that visit to happen. By that time, the crisis
was entrenched, and the scope for quiet diplomacy was
seriously diminished.

We cannot afford to allow opportunities for early
preventive engagement to slip through our fingers. In
our View, there are a number of steps that the Council
can take to improve its game.

First, we must find ways to improve the Council's
awareness of risks of evolving conflict, so as to enable
more timely, consistent and effective attention to its
role in managing them. To achieve that, we will need
to be open to some changes in our working methods,
so as to enable Council members to better engage
using a problem-solving mindset. We also need to
invest in building a real working relationship with
the Department of Political Affairs and to strengthen
the quality of information that we receive from the
Department and the wider Secretariat.

Secondly, improving our game also means making
practical improvements to the Council's willingness and
ability to work with regional organizations, particularly
the AU, on emerging conflict risks. The Council's
interaction with the AU Peace and Security Council in
Addis Ababa in January demonstrated the value of such
engagement. We need to find ways to make meaningful
engagement an everyday habit, particularly in dealing
with complex challenges, such as the conflict risks
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South
Sudan. Perhaps the Ad Hoc Working Group could play
a greater role there.

Thirdly, both Council members and national
and regional stakeholders need to move beyond the
current false dichotomy between confrontation and
non-intervention, which so often leads to inertia. Early
engagement to prevent conflict is both a legitimate and
a necessary role for the Council. At the same time, such
efforts are more likely to be effective when conducted
in a manner that is sensitive to concerns of national
sovereignty and when stakeholders see the Council as
a body committed to working with them in order to
try to resolve real problems. That means proceeding
early before problems are entrenched; it means being
respectful and genuinely listening to national and
regional actors; and it means coming to discussions
without political agendas, other than the prevention of
conflict and the saving of lives.

Fourthly, in order to be effective in preventing
conflict, the Council must take a more inclusive
approach, involving the countries concerned, important
regional stakeholders and others who can contribute
to our discussions in a balanced and collegial way.
We think that we should make more use of informal,
interactive formats aimed at deepening our political
analysis of the issues involved and building shared
understanding of the drivers of conflict. If we do not
understand the issues properly, we will come up with
the wrong solutions.

More broadly, New Zealand remains concerned that
the international community and the United Nations
itself continue to underfund conflict prevention. The
review of peace operations identified the urgent need
to shift our focus from investing resources when we
respond to crises to the far more cost-effective and
humane business of preventing conflict. We call
for urgent and favourable consideration by the Fifth
Committee of the modest proposals put forward in
that regard by the Department of Political Affairs.
We need stronger mediation and analytical capacity
in the United Nations, and we need to invest more in
regional engagement.

It is vital that we pay close attention to the Great
Lakes region in the year ahead, particularly the
evolving situations in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and that the Council be ready
to act - discreetly and sensitively, with the Secretariat
and regional partners - to ensure that the people of
that region are spared further tragedy so that they
can build a future commensurate with the human and
natural resource capital of the region.

