Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by thanking Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
very comprehensive briefing.

Everyone here knows that the situation in the Middle
East and the Palestinian cause are marked by a freeze
in negotiations and a deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip. Also, there is a stalemate on
the vision of a two-State solution, as a result of Israeli
settlement activity. We simply do not know what the
consequences will be for the security and stability of
the Middle East as a whole. This year has witnessed
further unprecedented expansion of settlements.

The Israeli occupation forces have mobilized their
legal arsenal, their settlers and their armed forces to
conquer more land following the expulsion of residents
from their homes and after crops and trees that form
their only source of income have been uprooted. The
illegal settlement policy has been repeatedly affirmed,
and the international community has repeatedly
condemned the situation and Israel's expansionist
policy. Even so, the Israeli authorities have pursued
their policy of settlement, including in East Jerusalem.
The Security Council has been unable to reaffirm
its position against such illegal settlements. The
Palestinian people have, however, continued to negotiate
or to express their readiness to resume negotiations,
responding to them favourably and showing their good
intentions and good will. About that there can be neither
doubt nor question.

Unfortunately, that has not been the case with
Israel, which has persisted in its expansionist settlement
policies, bringing to naught the vision of a two-State
solution. Its policy of gradually isolating the city of
Jerusalem from its natural Palestinian surroundings,
which has already been implemented in the region,
clearly speaks to a premeditated plan to ensure that a
two-State solution is too difficult or even impossible to
achieve.

The city of East Jerusalem is experiencing troubling
changes. Indeed, the rate at which settlements are being
built and religious and holy sites desecrated is alarming.
The Al-Quds Committee, chaired by our sovereign,
categorically rejects the report ofthe Israeli legal advisor
who claimed that the Al-Aqsa Mosque was an integral
part of Israeli territory. The Kingdom of Morocco
denounces, condemns and rejects his irresponsible and
unacceptable position, which threatens the holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque and runs counter to United Nations resolutions,
which reject any changes to the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. The Kingdom
of Morocco understands the real intention behind those
statements, which are accompanied by repeated steps
to Judaize the city of East Jerusalem that have changed
the religious and cultural character of the city. We wish
to warn against such a policy and its consequences,
and urge the international community to assume its
responsibilities.

First and foremost, we urge the Security Council to
ensure that the historical and legal nature of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif is respected and that its Christian and
Muslim holy sites are not violated. Israel is maintaining
its settlement policy and, at the same time, depriving
Palestinians of their right to build on their lands. The
recent decision of the occupation authorities to destroy
eight villages in order to build an Israeli training camp is
yet another manifestation of the defiant and provocative
policy carried out by Israel.

We reaffirm the need for Israel to put an end to
such practices, and we thank the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and all
organizations that back the right of the Palestinians to
build homes and facilities on their own land. We also
condemn acts of violence and intimidation against
Palestinians by settlers in East Jerusalem and the West
Bank.

Israel continues to impose its blockade on the Gaza
Strip, which has lasted for years now and deprives
the inhabitants of Gaza of all forms of livelihood and
well-being. The decisions of the Security Council
and the Quartet are important in that respect, and we
invite them to step in to put an end to the settlement
policy, including the seizure of Palestinian land in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank, especially now that the
Levy Commission has reaffirmed that Palestinian lands
are not occupied or settled. That added insult to injury,
with blatant disregard for all international resolutions
and laws.

Furthermore, Israel's intransigence and the failure
of the international community to implement the vision
ofa two-State solution make the resumption ofthe peace
process almost impossible. The Quartet's decision to
send a special envoy to encourage the parties to make
specific proposals regarding territory, borders and
security has yielded no palpable results. The political
stalemate benefits no one, including Israel. To the
contrary, a final legal solution to the Palestinian issue
would promote peace, security, stability and prosperity
in the entire region, including Israel.

We cherish the hope of seeing Palestinian national
reconciliation and hope that the obstacles to it will be
eliminated. We are aware that Palestinian unity will
strengthen the position of Palestinian negotiators. We
have spoken at length of the Palestinian issue, because
it lies at the very heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict and
because the likelihood of a resolution, unfortunately, is
currently being threatened from all sides.

That does not mean that we are not concerned
about or do not understand the severity of the situation
in Syria, which has dominated the Council's agenda
of late. What is very important in that case is the
occupation of the Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon
by the Israeli armed forces. That occupation must
be brought to an end. Morocco, like all other Arab
States, is committed to seeing a negotiated, just and
comprehensive solution that will afford the Palestinian
people a viable, independent State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and that would guarantee the security and
safety of all States in the region.

