Mr. Heusgen (Germany): As we sat around the
table to discuss the programme of work on Monday,
I wondered why you, Sir, were so insistent about
convening today's debate on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We have
already heard 46 minutes worth of statements. It has
been very repetitious; much of it we have heard before.
I think we have found a very good solution for reducing
the amount of discussion we have around the table on
the issue.

I would subscribe to everything that my colleague
of the United Kingdom, Ms. Pierce, has said with regard
to developments in the country and only reiterate that
Kosovo has made considerable progress since 2008.
With respect to dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia,
we have the Brussels dialogue, facilitated by the
European Union, although it is not making the kind of
progress we want. Nonetheless, we have it. Therefore,
I do not see the importance of having such discussions,
in particular on UNMIK, here in the Council.

I would like to thank Mr. Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and his team
for their work and for the briefing. I listened very
carefully to what he said. Unfortunately, he also stated
that there are many antagonistic gestures and many
things that can and should be improved. He pointed
to the work being done and we very much support the
person-to-person contacts, youth exchanges and the
participation of women and empowerment of women
leaders. That is all very important. We believe that it
can all be taken over either by the Kosovar institutions
themselves or by other international organizations.
Therefore, in our opinion, it is time for a strategic
assessment of UNMIK and we should align the Mission
to the situation on the ground. As I said, many or all of
the tasks can be taken over by other institutions.

I would like to highlight one point in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/102) that we find
very important. It is that Kosovo has made significant
progress in recognizing the survivors of conflict-
related sexual violence. We welcome that survivor-
centred approach as a positive example for others in
the region and beyond to follow. We believe that it is
very important that we look at the victims of violence,
in particular women, in the various conflicts on the
Council's agenda, from South Sudan to Myanmar to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We always see
that women are the victims and we must take care of
them. Tomorrow, Germany will host an Arria Formula
meeting on that issue and on the very important question
of accountability.

Let me briefly turn to the normalization dialogue.
We think - and both briefers have stated - that
the European perspective is very important. Special
Representative Tanin also said that the European
perspective is very important for Kosovo. I do not
understand how the issues that have been discussed are
in conformity with the European perspective.

First of all, with regard to the Kosovo Government,
we look forward to Kosovo becoming a member of
the European Union and to the removal of tariffs and
trade barriers. Tariffs on products from Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina are at odds with the European
perspective and I would urge that they be removed. At
the same time, with regard to Serbia, the President of
Serbia has launched a very good initiative to create a
free-trade zone in the Balkans. Not allowing Kosovar
products into Serbia is at variance with that initiative.

With regard to the Serbian initiative, in his
intervention Mr. Dacie mentioned that there have been
13 withdrawals of recognition. From reports, I also know
that Ivica Dacie has travelled to some ofthose countries.
He has made some beautiful trips to the Caribbean and
the Pacific islands, but I do not understand the logic
behind that. The Kosovo declaration of independence
was recognized by the International Court of Justice
as being in conformity with international law. There
is an independent Kosovo. The only way that Serbia
will enter the European Union is if the normalization
dialogue is successful and by recognizing Kosovo. By
travelling to various countries to encourage them to
withdraw their recognition of Kosovo, he is shooting
himselfin the foot. I still do not understand the logic of
it because I have always believed that Serbia wanted to
join the European Union.

Lastly, with regard to the Brussels dialogue and
the Brussels Agreement, nothing in the Agreement
mentions border adjustments, border changes or
territory swaps. Germany does not think that such ideas
contribute to a solution. We believe that such efforts are
risky and could destabilize the entire region.
