The President: I thank the representative of the Czech
Republic for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Germany.

My country has voted in favour of extending the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL). I should, however, like to state the following:

We are very much concerned that concrete progress in
the implementation of the peace accords is still lacking.
This concerns especially the establishment of the cease-fire
and the installation of the Council of State. We regret that
UNOMIL is subject to numerous restrictions in the field
and is therefore not able to fulfil its mandate in a
satisfactory manner.

We hope that the ongoing negotiations among the
member States of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the parties to the conflict
will, in the end, yield a peaceful solution to the conflict.
In this context, the forthcoming meetings in Abuja are an
opportunity not to be missed.

Although the people of Liberia bear the ultimate
responsibility for achieving peace and national
reconciliation, the continued efforts of ECOWAS States
to harmonize their policies on Liberia and to promote the
implementation of the Accra agreement, including
tightening the application of the arms embargo, will play
a decisive role. We recognize the important role which
the cease-fire Monitoring Group of the ECOWAS States
(ECOMOG), together with UNOMIL, is playing in the
efforts to contribute to the peace process in Liberia.

It should, however, be clear that the mission of
UNOMIL with its present tasks and force strength can be
continued in a meaningful way only if conditions in
Liberia allow it to fulfil its mandate. The mission will,
therefore, have to be converted into a good offices
mission if substantial progress in the peace process cannot
be demonstrated by the end of its present mandate. In this
context, the parties to the conflict will be held to the letter
of the resolution which the Security Council has just
adopted.

They should install the Council of State, re-establish
a comprehensive and effective cease-fire, disengage all
forces and agree on a timetable for the implementation of
all other aspects of the peace agreements, in particular the
disarmament process. We strongly urge the parties to the
conflict to seize this opportunity, which may be the last.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on the agenda. The Security Council will
remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.
