Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I thank Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Onanga- Anyanga for their very comprehensive briefings. Recent events have proven just how much relations between the Sudan and South Sudan have improved. I am, of course, referring to the peace talks among Sudanese authorities and groups held in Juba. Belgium also welcomes the discussions concerning the Abyei Area held in Khartoum in September. They were a further positive signal that the will exists to find a political solution for the status of the Abyei. However, these signals are not enough. A number of discussions must resume on several levels to achieve progress on certain points. I am thinking, in particular, of the decisions taken by the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, the points relating to the Athony airstrip, as well as the pending visas for police units. The situation in the Abyei Area remains fragile. Belgium condemns the attacks on the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and the intercommunity violence. These incidents, as well as those related to criminal activity, underline the importance of maintaining the current force strength of security and police forces within the mission so as to uphold the rule of law and protect civilians. This situation amplifies our concern already mentioned regarding the issuance of the visas pending for the three formed police units and the 108 police officers in addition to those formed units. Despite numerous appeals from the members of the Security Council in this regard, the risk of a situation of understaffing and an absence of police in most operational bases remains. We commend the Mission's efforts to promote dialogue towards conflict resolution, for example, involving local leaders. We also welcome the actions in favour of an increased role for women and young people in local political life. The European Union is also active in this field - for instance, in the peacebuilding project it funds, carried out in collaboration with the International Organization for Migration and the non-governmental organizations Concordis International and the Green String Network. It has recently made it possible to organize training courses for women and young people in conflict resolution and negotiation. We are also pleased to note the commitment of UNISFA in the area of sexual violence, with several prevention activities. In conclusion, we cannot envisage the drawdown of UNISFA without a solution to the Abyei issue, but the mission cannot play the role of the State indefinitely. We call on the parties to redouble their efforts to close this chapter in the history of the Sudans.
