Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, we thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman for the information he provided to us
in connection with the first report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in the Lake Chad basin region
(S/2017/764). We also thank Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam
for the statement she delivered to the Council today.

Bolivia expresses its concern over the ongoing
threat posed by Boko Haram to the Niger, Chad,
Cameroon and Nigeria. The terrible attacks perpetrated
by the group against the civilian population - murders,
kidnappings, the use of girls as suicide bombers,
sexual Violence against women, the recruitment of
children - all clearly show the urgent need for the
international community to join forces in countering
the extreme violence of Boko Haram. As a result, the
region faces a devastating humanitarian situation.
As indicated in the Secretary-General's report,
10.7 million people need humanitarian assistance.
This is an alarming number that must force us to sit up
and take note and compel us to undertake efforts that
will allow the Governments of the Lake Chad basin to
move forward.

In the short term, we are focusing on the fight
against food insecurity and the basic needs ofinternally
displaced persons, refugees and the most vulnerable
people and, in cases of return, ensuring that their
return be voluntary, safe and dignified. We echo the
appeal made by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for the necessary funds to be
earmarked and for assistance to be provided to the
people in need.

Recalling the message conveyed by the Deputy
Secretary-General to the Council at our meeting
of 10 August (see S/PV.8022), we must pay special
attention and respond to the impact that this conflict
has on women in the region. While sexual violence
in conflict does not distinguish based on gender,
it primarily affects affect women and girls. They
are Victims of Violence, rape, sexual slavery, forced
prostitution, forced marriages, forced sterilization and
other forms of Violence, in addition to stigmatization
when they return to their communities. All of this is the
result of Boko Haram's Violent extremism.

In this regard, the empowerment of women in
the fight against that terrorist group is crucial. The
full and equal participation of women in conflict
prevention, mediation and resolution processes must
be ensured in the strategies that are being executed.
It is therefore fundamental to ensure compliance with
Security Council resolutions related to women and
peace and security, especially resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 2242 (2015).

We express our concern about the effects of climate
change on the Lake Chad basin, such as water scarcity,
desertification, drought, among others, all of which
increase the instability of the region. We must develop
strategies that address these risks as they largely affect
socioeconomic development and food insecurity. In
View of this terrible situation, we must acknowledge
and commend the work of the Governments of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission - Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria - in the fight against terrorism.
Thanks to the committed and coordinated work of these
four countries, significant progress has been made in
reducing Boko Haram's capacity.

In that respect, we welcome the Commission's
initiative to hold the first regional conference in
October, which will allow us to define mechanisms
to tackle the region's crisis, in addition to dealing
with the root causes of the conflict. We are confident
that the leadership of these countries will allow us to
establish a regional strategy that will address these
root causes, as that is one of the main shortcomings
that we are currently facing. In that connection, we
should also consider developing a regional strategy to
address disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation
and reintegration of former members of Boko Haram.

The participation of regional organizations in
these efforts is also essential. The African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, and
the Economic Community of Central African States
have assisted in the establishment of the Multinational
Joint Task Force, which has considerably reduced the
capacity of Boko Haram in recent years. In this regard,
we call on donors and the international community to
honour their pledges, to cooperate with countries in the
region and to strengthen their governance and State
institutions, as well as to contribute to the efforts of
the subregion and the Multinational Joint Task Force in
the fight against terrorism, as stated in resolution 2349
(2017). Boko Haram is not only a threat to the Lake
Chad basin region, it is also a threat to the international
community as a whole.

