Mr. Von Ungern-Sternberg (Germany): First of
all, Mr. Minister, I would like to join others in
welcoming your presence at this very important
meeting.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Montenegro, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

The theme of today's debate has many aspects:
prevention of the conflict, crisis management,
sanctions regimes, peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding, governance and cooperation among
various actors at the national and international levels.
Let me share our perspective and explain some of the
activities of the European Union in this field.

The European Union recognized at an early stage
the importance of addressing the exploitation of natural
resources as a cause of and factor contributing to
conflicts. We welcome the fact that the Security
Council has tried to limit the disastrous effects that the
improper exploitation of resources can have in conflict-
prone situations. Imposing sanctions on commodities
such as diamonds and timber helped to end conflicts in
Angola, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

There is still room for improving the
effectiveness of sanctions by coupling them with other
measures so that, together, they can better limit the
scope of a conflict or even bring an end to it. Making
greater use of past experience, for example, by
strengthening the institutional memory within the
United Nations Secretariat and the various groups of
experts could be one element of improvement.

Despite the positive effect of the Kimberley
Process on the exploitation of "blood diamonds", we
face new risks. The number of oil-producing countries
with poor populations is increasing, especially in
Africa. Some of those States are extremely fragile,
with rebel movements contesting the authority of the
Government. Here, the United Nations as a whole,
including the Security Council, has an important task:
monitoring such situations before a conflict can break
out.

As water is becoming a scarce resource sought
after by competing users in some parts of the world, an
integrated approach to its management can also foster
security and stability. The EU Water Initiative
contributes to sustainable development and the
peaceful use of this essential resource.

An important question is: under what
circumstances should a natural resource be considered
a so-called conflict resource? The Secretariat could
possibly provide some guidance in that respect. A
common understanding of the issue would certainly
help to shape a more coherent approach on the part of
the international community.

Good governance is key to preventing conflicts
over the sharing of revenue derived from natural
resources. Therefore, the EU promotes transparency
and responsible management of resources. The
Governance and Economic Management Assistance
Program in Liberia is a good example of how better
accountability can contribute to stabilizing a country in
a post-conflict situation. We think it has helped the
Liberian people, because, with improved oversight,
more money remains in the State budget.
Obviously, it is not only States that can contribute
to improving the proper governance of natural
resources; producers, traders and consumers are also
key actors. Monitoring and certification schemes such
as the Kimberley Process, currently chaired by the
European Commission, play an important role in
preventing the use of revenue derived from natural
resources for conflict purposes.

The EU is also committed to initiatives aimed at
improving revenue transparency, such as the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative, which receives
funding from the European Commission. The
endorsement of that initiative by the Security Council
and the General Assembly would certainly be very
welcome. We have also started integrating provisions
aimed at supporting good governance of the mining
sector into some of our country programmes, such as
that for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Obviously, accountable and transparent natural
resource management is also important during the post-
conflict phase. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities need to take due account of that concern.

A conflict resources facility will shortly be
developed within the new EU Stability Instrument so
that we can better tackle resources and conflict as a
cross-cutting issue. Our goal is to make resources a
catalyst for development in commodity-rich countries.
We will pursue those aims in close cooperation with
the United Nations system and other relevant actors.
Therefore, we welcome the draft presidential statement
to be adopted today, and we look forward to follow-up
on a more coordinated approach by the United Nations
and the regional organizations and Governments
concerned.

