Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretaries-General Jenca and Mueller and
Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik for their briefings
and for their calls for the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements.

We are nearing to the five-year anniversary of the
start of Russia's aggression against Ukraine, which has
left more than 10,400 dead and 1.6 million displaced,
as well as 3.5 million more in dire need of assistance.
Let us be clear. It is Russia that must end this conflict.
Withdrawing its military troops from eastern Ukraine
and Crimea is the only acceptable outcome, and
the only one we should accept. The United States
underscores its unequivocal position on Ukraine. We
do not, and will not, recognize the Kremlin's purported
annexation of Crimea. We will never accept anything
less than the full restoration of Ukraine's control
over its own territory, whether in eastern Ukraine or
Crimea, including its territorial waters. Our Donbas-
related sanctions will remain in place until Russia fully
implements the Minsk agreements. Our Crimea-related
sanctions will also continue until Russia returns the
peninsula to Ukrainian control.

Russia called today's meeting to discuss the Minsk
agreements. This is ironic given that Russia has clearly
failed to honour and implement them. The Minsk
agreements call for the sides, among other things, to
implement a ceasefire, allow the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe to monitor that
ceasefire and withdraw support for "all military armed
formations". Russia is clearly violating all three of
those key elements. Russia continues to arm, train,
lead and fight alongside its proxy forces in eastern
Ukraine, in direct contravention of its commitments
under the Minsk agreements, including establishing
an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire. Russia
has flouted its commitments from the very beginning
of the establishment of the agreements, using the
military forces under its control to capture new
territory. While Russia has ignored or undermined the
Minsk agreements, Ukraine, France, Germany and the
United States remain committed to supporting their
full implementation.

We welcome the Ukrainian Government's continued
commitment to a peaceful resolution of the conflict
and the full implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Ukraine has demonstrated that commitment by taking
steps, including by extending the law on the special
status for Russia-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine.
For its part, instead of using the Minsk agreements as
the path towards the resolution of the conflict, Russia
reverts to distracting attention from its unmistakable
and unjustifiable central role in fomenting it. Moscow
disingenuously argues for a protection force that would
use expensive international forces to cement the status
quo and end up protecting Russia's proxies.

In a serious escalation - and another violation
of international law - in November Russia prevented
Ukrainian vessels from passing through the Kerch
Strait, firing upon and seizing the vessels and personnel.
We again call on Russia to release the detainees,
return the Ukrainian ships and end its restrictions on
international shipping transiting to Ukrainian ports in
the Sea of Azov.

The United States stands with the European Union
and its member States, and many other countries, against
Russia for its unacceptable conduct in Crimea, eastern
Ukraine and the Black Sea. We will continue to stand
with the people of Ukraine against Russian aggression.
In the name of international peace and security, which
members of the Council are committed to uphold, we
call on Russia to respect Ukraine's sovereignty and
territorial integrity within its internationally recognized
borders, extending to its territorial waters.

