Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): First, let me thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary Lowcock for their briefings and their efforts in working for the sake of the Syrian people. The main takeaway of the briefings is simple. As it is now, the Constitutional Committee is dysfunctional. The Astana format is dysfunctional. Since our last regular meeting (see S/PV.8715), little progress has been made towards convening a third session of the Committee. At the same time, war in Syria continues with full force. Instead of dedicating itself to a political process pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015), the Syrian regime continues to block any steps towards de-escalation. Letus not forget that it is not only a rhetorical stalemate. The empty promises are followed by attacks against fleeing civilians in Idlib, who now number more than 900,000. That is why Estonia joins today those countries that are calling for an immediate nationwide ceasefire and unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need across the country. Unfortunately, the Syrian regime and Russia have chosen a military solution over a political one. It is a grave mistake. The so-called liberation of demolished cities is one thing, but actually rebuilding a country is a completely different thing. Our Syrian colleagues in the Chamber need to understand that Russian and Iranian bullets will not feed their nation. That is also a reason that almost no people are willing to return to regime-held areas. Estonia and the members of the European Union remain fully committed to finding a lasting and credible political solution to the conflict in Syria, as defined in the resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). That includes an actually working Constitutional Committee, political transition with free and fair elections, the release of arbitrarily detained people and accountability for those who have violated human rights and committed crimes against humanity. Accountability mechanisms, such as the General Assembly's International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, the Human Rights Council's Commission of Inquiry and the Fact-Finding Missions of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, all play a central role in collecting evidence and uncovering crimes against Syrians from both sides. We fully support those efforts and hope to bring them closer to the Security Council and its agenda. However, if the Government in Damascus decides to ignore the demands of resolution 2254 (2015) and continues carrying out attacks, then, instead of recognition, the Syrian Government will face growing international isolation. The Caesar Act of the United States, the recently expanded European Union (EU) sanctions and other similar means underscore the pariah status of the Syrian regime. The EU already has on its sanctions lists 277 persons and 71 entities. Those numbers are destined to grow. The European Union has made it clear that support for the reconstruction of Syria can come only when a comprehensive and inclusive political transition is under way, based on the resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique.
