Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): Twenty-five years ago,
14 island States gathered in the Maldives. Together
they decided to work in unity to seek international
cooperation to protect the small States of the world
from the dangers posed by climate change, global
warming and sea-level rise. Today the Republic of
Maldives is proud to represent the Alliance of Small
Island States, which was born at that meeting. We
thank the Government of New Zealand, President of the
Security Council for the month of July, for convening
this important debate, a debate that signals a true
mark of international cooperation towards small island
developing States (SIDS).

We hope that this debate will be a beginning
that marks a turning point in how the international
community, and the Security Council in particular,
view peace and security as they relate to the world's
small island nations. To be sure, even as a host of crises
with profound implications for the work of this body
increasingly impact our communities, insufficient
attention is paid and resources made available to ensure
an effective response. In fact, in our recent SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
document we reaffirmed that peace and security, the
rule of law, respect for human rights, and other issues
relevant to this body play a crucial role in achieving our
sustainable development goals. Peace and security is a
prerequisite to health and prosperity. At the same time,
the lesson of history is that peace will prevail only
when we promote sustainable development practices.

SIDS understand that reality well. For centuries
communities in our small islands have promoted
practices and values that not only help to protect the
fragile ecosystems of the islands, but also promote
peace and harmony within and among communities.
More recently, SIDS have also taken on important
responsibilities in promoting peace and security on the
international stage.

We, the SIDS, provide a disproportionate
number of peacekeepers to missions throughout the
world and host many operations in our own backyards.
Yet our voice at the Security Council is vastly
underrepresented. For the past 25 years, only six
SIDS have served on the Council out of the 125 elected
members during that period. That must change.

The smallest in the world, said Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon in Samoa in the past year, are like a
magnifying glass - when we look through the lens, we
see the vulnerabilities we all face. And the most profound
vulnerability we have is climate change. Climate
change is humankind's defining challenge. The science
is clear that climate change has exacerbated existing
problems and causes new ones, including threats to
our food and water security, displaced communities,
loss of adaptive capacities, ecosystem services and, for
some of us, territorial integrity. We have stressed that
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change policy should remain the primary forum for
climate negotiations. Yet, we have to recognize that
climate change is a threat to the survival of humankind,
and our response to the threat requires us to redefine
the concept of security.

Indeed, the utter devastation seen in the wake
of Cyclone Pam, in particular to Vanuatu and other
neighbouring countries like the Solomon Islands,
Tuvalu and Kiribati, as well as from two recent
typhoons, Maysak and Dolphin, which hammered
the Federated States of Micronesia, underscores the
unique circumstances of life in SIDS. Our small size,
geographic isolation and high exposure to impacts like
powerful tropical storms and other extremes make it
challenging to prepare for disaster before it strikes.
More effective programmes for disaster risk reduction
must be part of the efforts to build resilient and
sustainable island communities.
We are all too aware that we cannot do this on our
own. Criminals often exploit the vast oceans off our
shores to evade the rule of law on land. While our waters
are home to some ofthe most productive marine habitats
in the world, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
also deprives us of the resources on which we depend
for our food and income. At the same time, drug dealers
and human traffickers increasingly escape detection in
these isolated places. Maritime piracy has also been a
challenge for some of our countries. Because we have
a limited surveillance capacity, we are unable to detect
and deter illicit activities that have security implications
for the entire international community.

The SIDS are ready to lead. We are an important
part of the solution. Vulnerability is a fact in SIDS,
yet we refuse to be defined by it. Although we are
vulnerable, we also are valuable contributors in
proposing global solutions to common problems. Since
the acceptance of the first small State in the United
Nations nearly five decades ago, SIDS have shown the
world that small States are not only viable, but in fact
have an extraordinary ability to survive and even thrive
in the turbulent global political arena. We have engaged
the United Nations on the serious security threats that
small States face and proposed a mechanism to address
such threats. We have highlighted the links between
the dangers of climate change and the full enjoyment
of human rights. We continue to show that through
genuine and durable partnerships, we can address our
challenges and face adversity.

We live in a time of dramatic change and
uncertainty. Our pursuit of international peace and
security faces new obstacles that will test our resolve at
every turn, but we also have the expertise and resources
to make the world more secure - in all countries, large
and small, on the mainland and in the oceans. We have
a significant task before us, one that will require our
attention over decades. Let us consider this discussion
as the beginning of that effort and commit to doing
what is necessary to achieve our common goals.

