Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I join others in
welcoming the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Joachim Rucker, and thank him for his
presentation. I welcome the presence of the President
of the Coordinating Centre of the Republic of Serbia
for Kosovo and Metohija, Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic,
and I also welcome Prime Minister Ceku's presence
among the delegation of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

Greece associates itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

Greece welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the standards, in particular of the
Contact Group's 13 priorities for standards
implementation, and stresses the need for the continued
commitment of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government in that regard. The effective fulfilment of
the standards, which should by no means be limited to
the 13 points mentioned above, is central in achieving
a sustainable multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo,
living in peace and stability.

The recent adoption of legislation such as the
laws on freedom of religion, the use of languages and
cultural heritage is a significant development, and we
look very much forward to their full implementation.

Progress made in the functioning of the
Ministries of Justice and Internal Affairs marks
positive steps. We emphasize that the prevalence of the
rule of law is key to a working democracy. However,
we note that there seems to be no substantial progress
on decentralization beyond the first three pilot projects,
although originally there were supposed to be five, and
we call on all parties involved to take the process
forward.

We fully support the principled stance of the
Secretary-General with regard to the strong
condemnation of violence. We express our concern
with regard to the recent explosions on railway tracks
in central Kosovo and reports on the setting up of
checkpoints by masked gunmen. We note that attacks
against religious sites have decreased and reiterate that
such incidents should have no place whatsoever in a
modern and democratic society.

Positive developments have marked the economic
sector as well, aiming at attracting foreign investment
and establishing the Central Banking Authority of
Kosovo. We understand that Belgrade made an offer on
the provision of electricity and that currently UNMIK
and Belgrade are very close to agreeing on how that
offer could be accepted. We would appreciate further
information on those talks, as we very strongly support
any initiative that improves the everyday life of the
population of Kosovo.

As the Secretary-General also mentioned in his
report, concerns still remain with regard to the low
number of minority returns. The limited results cannot
be attributed solely to the lack of economic
opportunity. We cannot ignore the fact that the
perception, or the reality, of security and freedom of
movement remains the elementary factor that
determines progress in that area.

We cannot but stress once more the need for the
involvement of the Kosovo Serbs and the importance
of their engagement with the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government. The participation of the Kosovo
Serbs in those Institutions is key in serving their own
best interests, and we therefore urge Belgrade to
encourage them in that direction.

Finally, with reference to the political process for
the determination of Kosovo's future status, I would
like to reiterate my country's position that the best
possible and most sustainable outcome of the future
status process is a mutually acceptable solution. We
therefore welcome the fact that the international
community has realized the need for a certain
flexibility in the timeframe that allows for a more
genuine status process and gives the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government, among others, the
necessary time to press on with their efforts on
standards implementation.

