Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for
participating personally in our meeting today and for
his informative briefing on the subject.

The aspects that the Bolivian presidency touched
on today relating to the issue of States' sovereignty over
their natural resources are extremely important and are
apparent in many of today's regional conflicts, as was
rightly noted. Strictly speaking, however, these issues
are beyond the scope of the Security Council's remit
and belong in the mandates of the High-level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development and the Second
Committee of the General Assembly. In that regard,
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
States Members of the United Nations reaffirmed that
each one of them
"has, and shall freely exercise, full permanent
sovereignty over all its wealth, natural resources
and economic activity".

Based on that principle, combating illegal activities
in the extractive industries is also first of all both the
prerogative and the responsibility of the Governments of
the countries that own the resources. In that regard, the
priority is assisting vulnerable States in strengthening
their State institutions and applying sustainable
environmental management models in the interests of
socioeconomic development and trade.

Resolution 1625 (2005) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2007/22 define the parameters for further work
aimed at preventing the illegal exploitation of natural
resources from fuelling armed conflicts. In our View,
however, the Council's task in that regard lies not in
conducting generic discussions but in ensuring strict
compliance with the principles of sovereignty and
non-interference in the internal affairs of particular
countries and regions. We consider it unacceptable
to politicize these issues by artificially assigning
them conflict-generator status and thereby creating a
basis for potential crises or worsening existing ones.
We see many examples of how natural resources can
become the object of competition, including in the
form of armed confrontations both within and between
States. As a rule, we see this kind of issue in countries
with weak Government control over national mineral
resources. However, armed conflict, whether domestic
or international, can exacerbate the problems associated
with their illegal exploitation, but we want to emphasize
that such clashes are caused not by natural resources
per se, but as a result of acts of aggression by various
forces, and often external actors.

In such cases, what we could term "delayed-action
mines" laid down in colonial times play a significant
negative role. Former imperial powers also made use
during the Cold War of schemes devised in those far-
off times for plundering territories under their control.
And in our own era, behind the opposing parties to
conflicts we find players from outside the region or
global corporations, while loud slogans about the
struggle for democratic values are a mere fig leaf for
commercially driven efforts to take over one or another
country's natural wealth.

We believe that the right way to discuss this topic
is in relation to situations in specific countries and
regions. For example, the region of the Middle East and
North Africa, rich in oil and gas reserves, has always
been an area that big States have competed over. The
energy issue was a significant contributing factor at
the start of the period of shocks prematurely termed
the Arab spring. The current crises in Syria and Libya
are a clear illustration of the growing link between
security and global competition for resources. The so-
called international coalition, operating on Syrian land
uninvited by the national Government and unsanctioned
by the Security Council, has occupied the territory east
of the Euphrates where oil and gas fields are located
and together with its client structures has established
what is essentially shadow hydrocarbon extraction.
A policy aimed at reinforcing this state of affairs,
Violating Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity, is
being carried out before our very eyes.

After the acts of aggression against Libya in
2011, the country became a springboard for external
players' struggle for its rich natural resources, and it
is still in a fragmented state to this day, despite all of
the efforts of the United Nations to implement a model
for a political settlement based on unifying the country
and its State institutions. We would really like to see
Libya's national wealth serve the interests of ordinary
Libyans, not foreign corporations. And we do not have
to look very far to find other examples in the Middle
East, where we have the destabilization of Iraq due to a
foreign invasion in 2003, as well as the war in Yemen.
In both those cases, however, it was terrorist forces
that at various points in time got access to their natural
resources and used hydrocarbons primarily in order to
fuel their destructive activities.

One of the reasons for the continuing turbulence
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo is
the illegal exploitation and export of natural resources
in the interests of large transnational companies
conducted by illegal armed groups to finance their
activities. Suppressing this kind of activity would help
to create the conditions for stabilizing the situation in
the country and help it to develop.

The question of revenue-sharing from oil and
other mineral resources is a serious factor in Somalia's
centrifugal tendencies and has been an obstacle to the
completion of federalization in Somalia. The agreement
signed in June 2018 between Mogadishu and the federal
states on the rights to the ownership, management and
the sharing of income from the extraction of mineral
resources was an important achievement. However,
doubts remain about the parties' willingness to comply
with those agreements.

The problems involved in controlling natural
resources where the demarcation of maritime and land
borders is concerned have the potential to become a
source of inter-State conflicts, and there are many
examples of that in Africa. Take, for instance, the
situation concerning the ownership of major oil and gas
fields in the coastal areas of the Gulf of Guinea, or the
non-recognition of existing borders by the many tribes
in the Sahara-Sahel region that have taken up arms to
defend their rights to natural resources. The situation
in South Sudan is another clear example in which both
internal and external players are shamelessly trying to
use the country's natural resources to enrich themselves.

The activities of various States and transnational
corporations interested in getting access to the
resource base of countries of the region is a significant
destabilizing factor in a number of Latin American
nations. Unfortunately, little has changed there in the
twenty-first century, and the situations in Venezuela
and Nicaragua are clear proof of that.

We believe it is both dangerous and short-sighted
to blame all the problems in countries that are rich
in natural resources and that are openly subjected to
outside interference and pressure, including through
sanctions, on the poor management of those resources.
Framing the question that way is one short step from
direct military intervention. History can teach us
ruthless lessons about that, but there are many who do
not want to take those lessons to heart.

The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
for the importance of strict respect for States' sovereign
right to manage their natural resources. Partnerships
for their development should be mutually beneficial and

based on unquestioning respect for the sovereignty of
the host State. Those who claim the role of peacemaker
and friend should have no hidden agendas or desire
to take advantage of others' problems for their own
mercenary, self-serving interests.

