Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I thank the Malaysian
delegation for convening this important debate. I
commend the Secretary-General for his remarks made
earlier this morning. I also would like to thank the
briefers for their incisive briefings and for sharing their
thoughts with us.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Iran on behalf ofthe Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries on this subject.

At the outset, I wish to reaffirm Nigeria's
commitment to the ideal of a nuclear-free world. We
regard the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their means of delivery as a grave threat
to our collective security. That indeed is a global
challenge, which requires a concerted and sustained
effort on the part of the international community,
including the Security Council.

We are deeply concerned about the potential for
the immediate, indiscriminate and massive death and
destruction that could be caused by the detonation of
any nuclear weapon. The long-term effects of such an
action on human health, the environment and other vital
economic resources could endanger the lives of both
present and future generations. We furthermore express
deep concern about the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of any use of nuclear weapons and call
upon all States to comply, at all times, with applicable
international law, including international humanitarian
law.

Nigeria reiterates its commitment to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
We regard the NPT as the cornerstone of the global
non-proliferation regime. As no country is immune to
the dangers posed by nuclear weapons to our common
security, it is essential that we all remain committed
to the globally agreed ideals set out in the NPT and
other relevant instruments. We recognize the right of
any party to pursue a peaceful nuclear programme.
However, that must be pursued within the ambit of the
NPT and other relevant international instruments. We
stress that efforts aimed at nuclear non-proliferation
should dovetail with simultaneous efforts aimed at
nuclear disarmament.

Nigeria is concerned about the slow pace ofprogress
towards nuclear disarmament and the lack of progress
by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the task of
the total elimination of their nuclear stockpiles. We call
on the nuclear-weapon States to fulfil their multilateral
legal obligations on nuclear disarmament.

We appreciate the role of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in assisting States
and international institutions in the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
by considering requests from States regarding the
provision of technical assistance in the energy and
extractive industries. That allows States and institutions
to implement the relevant Council resolutions.

Nigeria reaffirms its view that resolution 1540
(2004) and its effective implementation remain a key
component of the global architecture for countering
the danger posed by the threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We continue to believe
that the establishment of effective precautionary
measures and systems to address potential nuclear,
chemical or biological proliferation is a collective
responsibility incumbent upon all Member States. We
must all take the lead.

We recognize the relevance of the Secretariat in
facilitating, coordinating and supporting cooperation
between and among the various United Nations entities
in preventing the proliferation of WMDs to non-State
actors. Indeed, the Security Council, consistent with its
primary responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations, must continue to play a vital role in that regard.

In conclusion, I wish to restate Nigeria's conviction
of the validity of multilateral diplomacy in the field of
disarmament and non-proliferation. We shall continue
to advocate for multilateralism as the core platform
for negotiations in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation.

