Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council in December and by assuring
you of my delegation's full cooperation during this
busy month. Let me also thank Ambassador Mayr-
Harting and the delegation of Austria for their excellent
stewardship of the Council last month.

I should like today to welcome the Tribunal
Presidents and Prosecutors back to the Council and
thank them for their assessments. The United States
commends the representatives and staff of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their work to bring the
perpetrators of some of the world's most heinous
crimes to justice. We particularly appreciate the efforts
of ICTR President Byron, ICTY President Robinson,
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow, and Registrars
Dieng and Hocking. We salute their continued
dedication to the cause of justice as they prepare for
the closure of the Tribunals. An efficient closure that
continues to support the victims and ensures that they
receive a measure of justice for these crimes will
require difficult, dedicated work.

The United States believes it is important to
create a residual mechanism to manage the necessary
functions of the Tribunals after the completion of their
pending trials and appeals. We thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the administrative and
budgetary aspects of such a mechanism (S/2009/258),
which will help decision makers develop an effective
and cost-efficient one. We urge both Tribunals to
continue to strive to complete their work by the earliest
possible date, and we thank the Security Council
Working Group chaired by Austria for its efforts to
address and resolve residual issues.

We must remember why the Tribunals were
established - to identify and hold accountable those
responsible for some of history's worst crimes. We
must not lose sight of the historic importance of this
task. We must work to establish residual mechanisms
that do not allow the 13 outstanding ICTY and ICTR
fugitives to escape justice. Individuals indicted by the
Tribunals who remain at large must be apprehended
and brought to justice without further delay. We call on
all States to fulfil their legal obligations to cooperate
with the Tribunals and to take the necessary steps to
ensure that the remaining fugitives are apprehended.

In particular, I should like to underscore the need
to reinforce efforts to bring ICTR fugitive Felicien
Kabuga to face international justice. We are concerned
that the Government of Kenya has not responded to the
Tribunal's request for certain Government records
relating to Kabuga's assets and has not provided details
to support the claim that Kabuga has left Kenya. We
urge Kenya to act immediately on the Tribunal's
recommendations and to take effective steps to deny
Kabuga access to his support networks.

The United States acknowledges Rwanda's desire
to receive transferred cases from the ICTR. We
commend the Prosecutor's support for that effort as
well as the work by the Rwandan Government and
others to build up capacity in the Rwandan legal
system to make such transfers possible. We welcome
the transfer last month of eight individuals convicted
by the Special Court for Sierra Leone to Mpanga
Prison in Rwanda, an achievement that highlights
Rwanda's growing capacity and commitment to
meeting international standards. The ICTR's ability to
transfer cases to Rwanda and other States as
appropriate is a critical step towards meeting the
Tribunal's completion strategy.

The United States commends the efforts of States
to cooperate with the ICTY, but vital duties remain
unmet. The two remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladic' and
Goran Hadzic, must be arrested and transferred to the
Tribunal to face justice. Cooperation with the ICTY
remains a fundamental obligation for all States in the
region. We commend the Government of Serbia for its
improved cooperation and we urge it to continue to do
everything in its power to locate, arrest and transfer
Mladic to the Tribunal. The arrests of Mladic and
Hadzie are important for the successful completion of
ICTY's mandate, for Serbia's full Euro-Atlantic
integration and for the cause of justice and
accountability.

We welcome Croatia's efforts to response to the
Trial Chamber's September 2008 order to deliver
artillery documentation from Operation Storm or
engage in a credible investigation into its fate. We
believe that latest ongoing investigation and
establishment of a task force by the Government of
Croatia are significant steps forward. At the same time,
we encourage the Croatian authorities to explore
additional measures, such as using outside expertise
and more aggressive investigative techniques that
might help recover additional documents.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made great strides to
cooperate with the Tribunal, and ICTY has done a
commendable job in supporting the development of
domestic courts. But last month, the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina informed
us that domestic war crimes prosecutions and reform of
the justice sector have suffered due to the inability of
leaders to reach political decisions that advance
national goals. We note the critically important work
that international judges are doing in that country and
we support the extension of their mandate beyond
December. International judges and prosecutors have
worked tirelessly to bring justice to the victims of
atrocities regardless of ethnicity.

I wish to thank again the Presidents, Prosecutors,
Registrars and Tribunal staffs for their dedication.
Their work remains critically important to the fight
against impunity and for stability and reconciliation in
the regions involved.

