Mr. Ghafoorzai (Afghanistan): I should like to
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of April. We
all know the outstanding contributions you have made to
the work of the United Nations, especially during the
many United Nations gatherings over which you have
presided, at which your wisdom and patience have been
recognized.

I should also like to pay a special tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Legwaila of Botswana, who
presided with ability and wisdom over the Security
Council meetings held during the month of March.

Allow me to extend to you, Sir, and to each member
of the Council, my delegation's appreciation for the
convening of this orientation debate on Afghanistan, as
well as for the opportunity provided to the delegation of
the Islamic State of Afghanistan to address the Council.

The nations that are determined to live independently
and free from alignment, as positive elements of world
peace and tranquillity, have placed their trust and hope in
the United Nations Organization. This trust is placed in
particular in the obligations under the Charter of the
Security Council, which bears the crucial task of the
maintenance of global and regional peace and stability.

Quite naturally, it is primarily the Security Council
that sovereign nations look to whenever there is a threat
to the peace or a breach of the peace with an act of
aggression.

Therefore, the delegation of Afghanistan has been
looking for such an opportunity to have the voice of the
Afghans heard by this Council. The Afghan delegation

 

would like to ask the Council why the people of
Afghanistan, who have been the victims of aggression and
foreign interference since 1978, have once again been
exposed to a conspiracy and foreign military intervention.
Why has the civilian population - including women,
children and the elderly, especially in the capital, Kabul -
which has long undergone hardships, bereavement,
deprivation, hunger and homelessness, come constantly
under inhuman rocket attacks and sometimes aerial
bombardment, by the mercenaries called "Taliban", causing
deaths, injuries and destruction?

Yes, the Afghan nation, after enduring the sacrifice of
1.7 million human lives, contributed to, among the most
important factors, the diminishing of the threat of a nuclear
confrontation, the end of the cold war, the preservation of
human values and the further strengthening of the
framework of a world order based on democracy and
human rights. This nation deserves sympathy from the
world community. It should have been supported in its
national endeavours aimed at overcoming the problems left
by 17 years of war, as well as in the serious challenges it
faces in its reconstruction.

Ironically, we note with anguish that, over the last four
years, conspirators and interventionists linked to Pakistani
military intelligence circles, sometimes in connivance with
other outside supporters, have been attempting to overthrow
the Government of the Islamic State of Afghanistan and to
enthrone a Pakistani-approved regime in Kabul. This hostile
and unjust scheme has given rise to a renewed, widespread
Afghan resistance, while creating legitimate concern for the
countries of the region.

It is common knowledge that the motive behind
convening this meeting is not to make allegations, but,
rather, to seek a trusted and credible way out of the
ongoing conflict in my country, Afghanistan. However,
since identifying the root causes of the conflict is an
indispensable prerequisite for a genuine search for a lasting,
credible and comprehensive solution, we must elaborate on
and analyse the factors shaping the conflict.

I cannot but underscore briefly the unfriendly, and
indeed hostile, behaviour of those Pakistani intelligence
circles, acting against the most sincere will of the Pakistani
nation and their valued historical and moral capital -
namely, the fraternity of the Afghan people.

Pakistani circles, led by the Inter-Service Intelligence
(151), the military intelligence service, jeopardize peace
through hypocritical attempts masquerading as efforts for
peace, and supplement the tension by fanning the flame
of ethnic hatred among our people. These circles sponsor
meetings, gatherings and ventures, with the hope of
forging an anti-Government coalition, to attempt to assault
Kabul and to sabotage an inter-Afghan dialogue which
would be conducive to national reconciliation and
reconstruction.

Since the establishment in April 1992 of the Islamic
State of Afghanistan, Pakistani military intelligence circles
have covertly been working towards their goal by
supporting, provoking and stirring up their stooges to
seize power in Kabul. This malicious conspiracy has
caused vast devastation and human losses. The
inter-Afghan dialogues were once sabotaged outright. The
world witnessed the abortive coup attempt of 1 January
1994 against the Islamic State of Afghanistan by armed
groups, some of them quartered on Pakistani soil. During
the coup, more than 3,000 rockets were showered on the
innocent inhabitants of Kabul and on residential targets in
the city. These acts of aggression took over 4,000
innocent lives and wounded approximately 8,000 people,
mostly women and children.

Pakistani military and intelligence elements were
physically involved in that abortive coup attempt and
brutal attack on Kabul. The Government captured 25
heavily armed Pakistani militiamen; they were later
released to His Highness Prince Turki Al Faisal, Minister
of National Security of Saudi Arabia, who, in a goodwill
mission, visited Kabul to secure their release.

Furthermore, on different occasions, including during
recent weeks, as a gesture of good will on the part of the
Islamic State of Afghanistan, a considerable number of
captured Pakistani saboteurs and spies have been released.
As related in our statement before the General Assembly
at its fiftieth session, some still remain in our custody:
their names and descriptions appear in document
A/50/PV.95.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Security Council very briefly to some hard evidence
of the interventions of Pakistani intelligence circles in
Afghanistan.

First, Pakistani military intelligence, coupled with
the Pakistani Ministry of the Interior, created in
September 1994 a group of mercenaries called Taliban.
This group was trained in Quetta, Pakistan, and sent into
Afghanistan along with Pakistani intelligence officers and
Pakistani frontier militia. The evidence and facts proving

 

the Taliban to be a creation of the Inter-Service Intelligence
(151) and the Pakistani Ministry of the Interior can be found
in the statement made by the Afghan delegation on 19
December 1995 before the 95th plenary meeting of the
General Assembly (A/SO/PV.95), and also in international
news media reports.
Secondly, during 1995 and early 1996, Pakistani
aeroplanes transporting arms and ammunition violated on
numerous occasions the airspace of Afghanistan and landed
in Kandahar, Shindand and Herat airports. Some instances
of these violations were identified before the General
Assembly, as contained in document A/50/PV.95.

T hirdly, on 28 September 1995, the Pakistani state-run
Telecommunication Corporation, without the agreement of
the Afghan Central Government, laid new telephone cables
for military occupation purposes in southern and western
Afghanistan.

Fourthly, on 9 December 1995, when the Government
of Pakistan decided to site its Embassy in Jalalabad, the
administrative centre of the eastern Afghan province of
Nangarhar, that decision was taken, like others before it,
unilaterally and without consultation with the Afghan
Government. The Pakistani Government also decided to
send Ambassador Qazi Homayun and staff members of the
Embassy to Jalalabad. It is ironic to note that Mr. Qazi
Homayun had been accredited as Pakistani Ambassador to
the Government of Afghanistan in the capital city, Kabul.
He had been received by President Rabbani and had
presented his credentials to him.

Fifthly, on 5 November 1995, Mr. Sardar Aseff
Ahmad Ali, Pakistani Minister for Foreign Affairs,
accompanied by Ambassador Qazi Homayun, paid a sudden
visit to Mazar-i-Sharif in the northern province of Balkh of
Afghanistan, for "negotiations" with Mr. Abdul-Rashid
Dostum, a military leader of the opposition. The visit took
place without prior information being communicated to the
Afghan Government, in violation of all recognized
international norms.

Sixthly, as a result of the recent endeavours of the
Islamic State of Afghanistan, sustained dialogue for further
broadening the base of the Government, as well as
consolidation of the political process in the country, has
taken place. Consequently, initial agreement among the
three members of the opposition coalition was secured.

To sabotage Kabul's efforts, the Pakistani authorities,
on 7 February 1996, convened a special three-day gathering
of the Afghan opposition in Islamabad. Red-carpet
treatment was given to the leaders of the opposition
groups. By this notorious manoeuvre, Pakistani authorities
managed to foil the initial understandings reached
between the Government and the opposition.

The correspondents of renowned newspapers around
the world have recorded the statements of their
eyewitnesses concerning the direct involvement of
Pakistani conspirators and saboteurs in the internal affairs
of our country. Here, on the record, I should like to
mention a few examples, from among many, of the
Pakistani newspapers' and politicians' views about
Pakistan's intervention in Afghanistan.

As early as 20 October 1995, a prominent Pakistani
newspaper, Dawn, featured an editorial written by a
senior Pakistani political analyst and writer, Mr. M. Baqir
Naqvi. Analysing the root causes of the conflict, the
editorial says,

"politicians in Islamabad would do well to pause and
ponder that the Taliban's umbilical cord to
Pakistan has been visible to all".

The ideas expressed by Mr. Naqvi were confirmed
after thorough study by the well-known American
journalist and analyst Mr. John Burns, who in The New
York Times of 27 March 1996 says that

"after 18 months of covert military and financial
backing for a guerrilla group that has imposed
Muslim fundamentalist rule on more than half of
Afghanistan, Pakistan appears to have shifted
towards a policy that aims to bring an end to the
civil war".

The article continues,

"for years Pakistan's involvement in the Afghan
conflict has been managed by an assortment of
civilian and military agencies that have often worked
at cross purposes, so the change has not been
clear-cut. Some officials, including the powerful
Interior Minister, Nasirullah Babar, still strongly
support the Afghan fundamentalist group, Taliban,
while others, including officials in Prime Minister
Benazir Bhutto's office, condemn the
fundamentalists for their hard-line policies towards
women and their brutal law-and-order policies."

The article also says that

 

"Senior Pakistani officials have acknowledged that
there have been second thoughts about the
consequences for Pakistan of a Taliban government in
Kabul, which might foment Muslim fundamentalism,
and possibly even secessionism, in Pakistani-ruled
tribal areas bordering Afghanistan."

The Pakistani newspaper Nation, on 3 December 1995,
published an article entitled "Punjab wants Lahore Rule in
Afghanistan", which reads

"Quetta - Mahmood Khan Achakzai, Member
of the Pakistan National Assembly and the Chairman
of the Pakhtoon Khawa Milli Awami Party (PMAP),
while accusing the Punjab and Inter-Service
Intelligence of the destruction of Afghanistan, claimed
'Both want to impose the rule of Lahore over Kabul
through the Taliban"'.

There can be no in-depth consideration of the situation
in Afghanistan without a realistic analysis of the newly
emerged group called the Taliban, whose name means
students of religious schools, and its political and social
agenda.

In all Islamic countries there are many religious
schools known as madrassas, as well as other educational
institutions, where various subjects related to the Islamic
religion are taught. The purpose of these schools and
institutions is to prepare Muslim youth to work for religious
services on behalf of their countrymen. In no madrassa in
the Islamic world are taught the arts of modern warfare,
such as the usage of artillery and rockets and the flying of
helicopter gunships and jet fighters. This type of education
is the work of military academies.

The Taliban claim that they want to implement
"Islamic teachings". Unfortunately, their conception of
Islamic precepts is far from the genuine principles of Islam.
They believe that cutting off a hand and a foot of a man or
woman accused of being a thief is imperative, without
adequate investigation or proof and without the right of the
accused to be defended in a fair trial. They do not want to
recognize that the application of these punitive norms,
known as hadd in genuine Islamic jurisprudence, requires
that appropriate and strict conditions be met.

The main and most dangerous precept of the Taliban
is to forbid girls and women to come out of their houses.
According to the Taliban, for a female, going to school is
un-Islamic. Women teachers are ordered to refrain from
teaching in schools. Many of these female instructors were
also teaching in boys' primary schools. Many boys'
primary schools have even been closed under Taliban rule
because of the absence of the female teachers.

Women are not allowed to work anywhere outside
their homes. Herat - one of the most famous cities of
Islam since the second century of Hijra, where schools
for girls existed for many centuries - and other towns in
the provinces of Kandahar, Nimroz and Farah are now
deprived of women's education. These cities are
condemned by Taliban rule to maintain their female
populations in darkness and ignorance and even to be
deprived of the Islamic knowledge taught in women's
schools throughout Afghanistan. Since the young girls are
to be wives and mothers, they will not be able to provide
adequate Islamic teaching to their children in the
framework of their families, and that is a very important
concept in an Islamic society. This obviously leads an
Islamic society to degradation and cultural downfall. The
Taliban, however, do not understand these facts and claim
to monopolize the absolute truth and righteousness of
Islam.

Christiane Amanpour of CNN reported on 3 April
1995 from Herat that a group of armed Taliban had
broken into homes in Herat province and smashed tape-
recorders and VCRs, arguing that religion forbids these
devices. According to the report, armed Taliban in the
streets of Herat stop vehicles and search for stereos.
Television owners are sometimes seen in the streets with
their smashed televisions and cassettes hanging from their
necks. This act has been called "TV execution". The
report on television also covered the scene of protest of
as many as 30 veiled Afghan women on a street,
demanding the opening of the girls' schools.

In the wake of these extreme attitudes, the United
Nations Children's Fund and many non-governmental
organizations have lately discontinued their operations in
the areas under the military occupation of the Taliban.

The attention of the Council is hereby drawn to the
fact that, contrary to the negative and ruthless conduct of
the Taliban with regard to human rights, especially those
of women, the situation is completely different in the
areas under the administration of the Government. This
has been reported by the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights for Afghanistan (A/50/567, annex). In these areas, women are actively participating
in the political, social and economic life of the country.
There are 383 women officers in the Afghan army,
ranging in rank from Lieutenant-General to captains and

 

pilots. Many women diplomats are in the foreign service,
enjoying co-education at the university level.

It is my sad duty to draw the Council's attention to a
looming catastrophe threatening our region and beyond: the
cultivation, processing and trafficking of narcotics in
Afghanistan, which are widening dreadfully under Taliban
rule and have assumed dangerous dimensions. Poppy
cultivation in the areas held by the Taliban has dramatically
increased. In addition to the cultivation of poppies on the
outskirts of Herat, hundreds of new acres of land between
Gereshk and Herat are now producing poppies.
It is a matter of serious concern that, according to
reliable reports, the Taliban, with the support of the
politico-military Mafia of the adjacent country, have been
able to get their hands on advanced portable drug-
processing and refining machines that even produce
morphine and heroin. These machines have so far been set
up in Helmand and Kandahar. Accordingly, for the first
time in the history of Afghanistan, opium is now being
processed into morphine and heroin inside the country, in
the Taliban-controlled areas. According to the report, in the
past five months more than 200 tons of narcotics have been
exported outside Afghanistan from the areas controlled by
the Taliban. As a result, the Taliban have an additional
source of income to continue their military operations,
which, according to them, are the only means of achieving
their goals and objectives.

It is interesting to note that in mid-February 1996 two
correspondents from The Times of London visited Herat.
There they met with senior Taliban officials and the
"governor of the province". On returning from Herat to
Kabul, the correspondents confirmed Government reports
regarding the dramatic increase in the cultivation of
narcotics in the province. They also added that the
Turkmenistan authorities had officially admitted having
arrested 500 Taliban on the charge of illicit drug-smuggling
into Turkmenistan.

The British journalists had "funny experiences" in
Herat as well. When they asked the "governor's"
permission to take pictures of the city, the "governor"
denied it because they were non-believers. The "governor"
requested them to convert to Islam first, after which he
would grant them permission to take as many pictures as
they wanted. When the "governor" was asked why the
administration was not banning the cultivation and
trafficking of illicit drugs, his reply was "too simple":
because drugs end up in Europe and the United States they
are endangering only the lives of Kafirs - the unfaithful.
Drug trafficking is therefore a "holy trade".

Concrete experience elsewhere in today's human
societies has proved that drug trafficking practised by
armed groups automatically brings organized crime,
banditry and terrorism; the case of the Taliban in
Afghanistan, is no exception for the following reasons.

First, bearing in mind the tendency of the Taliban to
aim for the possession of power and their reluctance even
to share power with the other parties, should they fail to
achieve what they are promised, they will naturally resort
to terrorism as a means of revenge.

Secondly, the Taliban are currently in a series of
close contacts with some fundamentalist groups, such as
Sepah-e-Sahaba in Pakistan, that are inclined to practise
armed hostilities against other sects.

Thirdly, the possession of military bases, together
with operational fields inside Afghanistan, would further
provide them with the chance to expand throughout the
region and even beyond.

Fourthly, complementary to the trends towards, and
a certain agenda for, terrorism, a terrorist group needs to
accumulate funds and weapons, with which Taliban seem
to have already been well supplied.

The promoters of the Taliban, both those close by
and those linked at a distance, unequivocally believed that
deploying this group would secure them a permanent
influence in Afghanistan. Our estimation is that since the
emergence of the Taliban in September 1994 a vast
budget, probably exceeding $2 billion, has been
channelled through and by Pakistani intelligence circles to
this group.

They have consequently managed to secure a
tyrannical military presence in a number of provinces of
Afghanistan, while hatred and resentment of their
uncivilized and retrograde practices has been on the rise
among civilians. With the passing of time, the real nature
of Taliban and their links with foreign quarters have
become known to our countrymen. Even in the rank and
file of Taliban themselves, this fact has been sometimes
been resented and objections have been voiced. The
disclosure of the facts has caused discontent and a
centrifugal trend among those Taliban who are patriots
and who had participated in good faith in the actions of
these retrograde mercenaries.

 

Let me now turn to the ongoing peace process in
Afghanistan and the United Nations Special Mission's
contribution to it. The people and the Government of
Afghanistan are thankful to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and to the Head of
the Special Mission, His Excellency Ambassador Mahmoud
Mestiri, and his colleagues for their continuous endeavours
aimed at achieving a lasting peace in Afghanistan. The
Afghan Government also highly appreciates the valuable
endeavours undertaken and the role played by the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC). The efforts
of His Excellency Mr. Hamid Algabid, Secretary-General
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, Ambassador
Ibrahim S. Bakr, Special Representative of the OIC
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and Ambassador Engin
Ansay, the Special Envoy of the OIC for Afghanistan, are
to be mentioned with gratification.
We are committed to cooperating with the United
Nations Special Mission in order to enable it to succeed in
accomplishing its mandate. It is on the basis of this
commitment as well as our realization that we bear a
historic responsibility to defend our national sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity that we have to point out some
shortcomings in the endeavours of the Special Mission. We
hope these shortcomings will be remedied soon. There has
been a failure: first, explicitly to identify foreign
interference as the root cause of the conflict and to
recommend effective measures to terminate it - although
it is a matter of gratification to see that paragraph 17 of the
recent report of the Secretary-General (A/50/908) cites
foreign interference as one of the outstanding causes of the
continuation of the conflict; secondly, to identify and
observe a logical sequence for the stages of the peace
process on a pragmatic and realistic basis, which should
include the transitional period required for a political
process to generate an overall negotiated settlement; and
thirdly, adequately and in a timely manner to identify the
true nature of the mercenaries called Taliban at the time of
their emergence in September 1994, and subsequently,
when their objectives became clear in early 1995, to reveal
their well-known foreign linkage.

Casting an eye over earlier peacemaking activities of
the United Nations in other areas of the world such as
Cambodia, Angola, El Salvador and so forth, we realize
that to some degree there is a unified pattern for
peacemaking operations that has been carried out step by
step. The first step in all these patterns, as we stated before
the General Assembly, is to distinguish the status of the
parties in an internal conflict, namely the Government and
the insurgent forces. This makes it possible to ascertain
their views on a negotiated political settlement. Through
the whole process, any United Nations mission needs to
maintain its strict impartiality. Generally, the continuous
contacts and delicate negotiations with the main actors
lead to a formal agreement among the parties, which
usually includes, inter alia, two chapters: political and
military.

The political chapter includes agreements on an
immediate cease-fire, structure of power during the
transitional period, transfer of power, electoral law, the
holding of elections, adoption of a constitution, and so
forth. The military chapter of such an agreement generally
deals with disengagement, the demobilization of irregular
forces, and the building of a national security force.

We understand that in all peacemaking operations,
after securing a genuine positive national environment
conducive to peace, the United Nations, as an honest
broker, develops a practical and pragmatic approach to
ensure an overall agreement and to supervise its
implementation. However, in Afghanistan it seems that
the United Nations Special Mission - in spite of the rich
experience of past United Nations peacemaking activities,
in the absence of a political agreement and of due
consideration for elements and factors that are imperative
for a peaceful political process - has in the past been
emphasizing only one element, namely, the transfer of
power. This approach might give one the impression that
the Mission has lost sight of other major elements and
stages as basic components of the peace process and as
prerequisites for a durable, just and credible political
settlement.

The Afghan Government has welcomed the
strengthening of the United Nations Special Mission
through the appointment of four new advisers to directly
assist Ambassador Mestiri in his highly arduous and
complex task. The peace process in Afghanistan, because
of its intricate nature, will be better facilitated now that
the Mission enjoys the experience and technical advice of
this outstanding group of experts.

However, the failure of the Special Mission to
identify the actual stumbling block in the way of the
United Nation peace endeavours has always been one of
the causes delaying the momentum of the peace process.
For instance, Taliban leaders on various occasions have
castigated the United Nations role in Afghanistan as
"futile and vain". They have also rejected any form of
negotiation with the Government.

 

As recently as last week, with the help of Pakistani
circles, the Taliban convened a gathering called a shura, or
council, in Kandahar. It is again with dismay that I note
that, according to reliable reports, at 9.30 am. on 29 March
1996 a Pakistani 143-type military transport aeroplane,
departing from Karachi, landed at Kandahar airport,
bringing a Pakistani political and intelligence delegation
which took part in the organization and the convening of
that council. In addition, the participants in this shura, or
council, were brought to Kandahar by aeroplanes and trucks
from Pakistan.

This gathering was held with arrogance, and without
the participation of any of the main Afghan groups. The
final resolution of the Kandahar council, adopted on 3 April
1996, declared Akhound Molla Mohammed Omar, the
nominal head of the Taliban, "Amir al-Mominin - the ruler
of the faithful", a title not claimed since the end of the
Ottoman Caliphate in Istanbul. The content of this decision
indicates the pretension of the Taliban to extend their rule
not only in Afghanistan but also into neighbouring Islamic
countries.

This burlesque and extravagant meeting was
condemned not only by the Afghan Government but also by
the opposition other than Taliban.

All along, the Taliban's dogmatic abstention from
negotiations has been based mostly, we believe, upon their
possession of the fire-power constantly provided them by
Pakistani intelligence circles, typified, among numerous
instances, by the Taliban's reported receipt of new Pakistani
long-range rockets.

As large a city as Kabul, the capital and home to over
a million innocent citizens doomed to horrible
bereavements, gives testimony to the crimes of the Taliban,
who every day open new files of atrocities.

In the past the Afghan delegation has presented
accounts of the violation of international humanitarian law
by the Taliban. The following is a brief report of rocket
attacks on civilian targets in the capital, Kabul, perpetrated
by the Taliban. This is, and should be, a matter of serious
concern for the Security Council.

First, in late December 1995, the Taliban fired over
205 rockets at the residential areas of Kabul, killing 25
civilians and wounding 47 others, while many houses
sustained serious damage.

Secondly, during January 1996 Taliban mercenaries
launched as many as 331 rockets on residential areas of
Kabul, resulting in the loss of 60 lives, and leaving 225
civilians wounded and 65 houses demolished.

Thirdly, during February 1996 a total of 71 rockets
were showered on Kabul civilian targets, killing 12 people
and injuring 54 others, while leaving 11 houses destroyed.

Fourthly, during March 1996 they launched 111
rockets on the residential areas of Kabul, killing 31
inhabitants, wounding 44 and inflicting serious damage
upon 23 houses.

Fifthly, this month as many as 149 rockets have
been launched by Taliban, killing 34 people, wounding
114 and destroying 22 houses.

In addition, as a result of a Taliban aerial
bombardment on 23 December 1995 33 citizens of the
city of Kabul were martyred. That number includes seven
professional film-makers whose production studio took a
direct hit, as well as nine children; 140 were wounded. As
many as 40 children have not been accounted for.
On 28 January 1996 Taliban bombarded central parts
of the capital, resulting in the loss of 10 citizens and
leaving many others wounded.

On 6 February 1996 a Taliban jet fighter dropped
three 250-kg bombs on residential sectors of the city.
Happily, this time no casualties were involved.

Elaboration of those facts and references to
unfriendly attitudes in Pakistani circles do not necessarily
imply an intention on the part of the Islamic State of
Afghanistan to advocate an antagonistic attitude towards
the central Government and the people of Pakistan.

The principled foreign policy of Afghanistan requires
sincere friendship and cooperation with all States, and
with neighbouring countries in particular.

We are of the conviction that only such an
atmosphere will give our nation the opportunity to
reconstruct its war-ravaged country.

We remain indebted to the fraternal, friendly
Pakistani nation, which stood by us in our days of trial.
This was a chapter of history during which the Afghan
nation exerted itself to fight not only to defend itself, but

 

for the benefit of countries far beyond which were in the
way of the former Soviet Union's southward thrust,
including Pakistan and other countries in the region and
perhaps the entire free world, shielding them from potential
threat. As we have stated on numerous occasions, we would
like to re-establish close and friendly ties with Pakistan.
Obviously, this means that ties are to be based upon mutual
respect for sovereignty national unity and territorial
integrity and on non-interference in each other's internal
affairs.

Afghanistan, together with Pakistan, can play a
significant role in strengthening and broadening cooperation
between all countries in the economic as well as the
cultural fields. We believe that an effective realization of
regional cooperation, coordinated by the Economic
Cooperation Organization (ECO), cannot be achieved
without a peaceful and cooperative relationship between the
two countries.

Pakistani circles, in a barren attempt to justify the
naked interventions of the ISI in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan, have long accused the Government of the
Islamic State of Afghanistan of receiving military assistance
from certain countries. For the sake of the record of this
Council, I should like to elucidate the fact that if the
Government of Afghanistan had not been committed to the
preservation of its sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and the need for a perpetual non-alignment
policy, no reasons to endure such sacrifices, pains and
rigours would have remained.

For the Government of Afghanistan, an aggressor of
any sect or philosophy, Muslim or non-Muslim, neighbour
or non-neighbour, is regarded as nothing but an aggressor.

Afghanistan, as a sovereign State, reserves its
legitimate right to seek the assistance - political, moral,
and humanitarian - of any country, near or far, in
conformity with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter,
and based upon internationally recognized principles. We
assure the Council that, despite the unbearable hardships
resulting from foreign interference, conspiracies and diverse
other acts, Afghanistan has not entered into any
commitment, regional or beyond, which would pose a threat
to the national security of the countries in the region or
jeopardize in any way the non-aligned status of
Afghanistan. We remain committed to this policy.

We are further of the conviction that an end to these
blatant interventions would pave the way for peaceful
endeavours by the United Nations Special Mission to bring
about a far-reaching and just solution to the destructive
conflict in Afghanistan.

We believe that it is high time for both the Afghan
and Pakistani Governments to immediately start serious
dialogue and negotiation for the restoration of mutual
trust and a cooperative relationship that would definitely
contribute to the creation of a sound atmosphere
conducive to the restoration of peace in Afghanistan.

A well-known philosopher and poet of the
sub-continent, Alama Iqbal, has said:

"The essence of Asia is a moving mixture.
Of that blend, the Afghan nation is the core.
Its tranquillity is Asia's peace, and

Its turmoil is Asia's turbulence."

Afghanistan, due to the interference that I have
described, is in turmoil. The peace and stability of the
region, as recognized by the Security Council in its
statement to the press of 13 December 1995, is in
jeopardy. The Security Council, on the basis of the
mandate the Charter has given it, as well as the
expectations of the suffering nation of Afghanistan,
should focus its attention and take an appropriate decision
to remedy the situation.

At this stage I wish to present three specific
suggestion for the consideration of the Council.

The first is to establish a United Nations monitoring
post along the southern border point of Speen Boldak
between Afghanistan and Pakistan. The monitoring post
would halt the flow of illicit arms and ammunition inside
Afghanistan into the hands of the Taliban mercenaries.
This would undoubtedly contribute to achieving the
objective of the General Assembly resolution of
19 December 1995, and in this particular case would
perform a deterrent role in minimizing the tension and the
scope of the armed conflicts. Perhaps the existing military
personnel of the Office of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan (OSGA) could be promptly assigned to do
the job. There is an imperative need for their presence in
the south of the country.

Secondly, the United Nations should send a fact-
finding mission to the Taliban-occupied provinces in
Afghanistan in order, first, to observe the magnitude of
the Pakistani military intervention in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan, and, secondly, to investigate the cultivation,

 

processing and illicit trafficking of narcotics in the Taliban-
occupied areas.

As for the Taliban and drug trafficking, Afghanistan
has prepared a detailed and elaborate report covering the
cultivation, processing and trafficking of narcotics,
especially in the south and south-western provinces of
Afghanistan. That is an alarming new phenomenon. The
report is to be submitted to the United Nations drug control
authorities for appropriate action.

The fact-finding mission would also verify the wide
range of reports of human rights violations, especially
against women, in the areas occupied by Taliban, and it
would study and evaluate, to the extent possible, the
situation and circumstances in the Taliban-controlled areas
in respect of institutionalized criminal and terrorist
activities.

Thirdly, as I reported in my letter dated 14 September
1995 to the Secretary-General (S/ 1995/795), following the
events of 6 September 1995 Pakistani military transport
planes and transport vehicles began the systematic transfer
of heavy and light weaponry - belonging to the Afghan
Ministry of Defence - from Herat towards Quetta,
Pakistan. Some of these weapons have since been handed
over to the Taliban mercenaries. The bulk of these arms
that were plundered by the Pakistani Army are still in
Quetta. The Security Council should take appropriate steps
for the early return of these arms, which belong to
Afghanistan.
I would mention that, in my letter of 14 September,
the Islamic State of Afghanistan reserved its right to take,
in due time, appropriate legal action on the international
level against Pakistan in order to secure the return of these
armaments.

I shall conclude with the saying that the difference
between a saint and a sinner is that the saint has a past and
the sinner has a future. In terms of their attitude towards
the Afghan nation, the Pakistani authorities should try to
use the future to restore the trust and confidence of the
Afghan people.

