Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We congratulate Viet Nam and express our appreciation for its able leadership of the Security Council. We also congratulate the othernewly elected members - Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Tunisia - and express our hope for their success, together with the rest of the Council, in upholding their responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security. Such responsibilities are ever-more critical during these troubled times for our world. I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, and the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller, for their important briefings on the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Any impartial assessment of the situation reflects the dire political, socioeconomic, humanitarian and security conditions as Israel, the occupying Power, continues exploiting the Security Council's paralysis and the blind support of its main ally, further entrenching its illegal occupation of Palestinian land and destroying prospects for a peaceful solution. The past year ended with disturbing figures, underscoring the severity of violations and the protection crisis being suffered by Palestinian children, women and men under Israeli occupation. In 2019, Israeli occupying forces killed 134 Palestinians and injured over 15,000 people, the majority by air strikes and live fire. The casualty toll from the Great March of Return in the Gaza Strip has reached over 300 Palestinians killed, including children, and over 35,000 injured by the occupying forces since the protests began in 2018. That includes 50 persons blinded by bullets to the eyes, 150 limb amputations and another 200 expected, according to the World Health Organization. The scope and scale of injuries has pushed Gaza's already strained health system to the breaking point. The year brought Gaza closer to the United Nations country team's Gaza in 2020 report projection that the impact of Israel's illegal blockade, now nearing its fourteenth year, and military aggressions would leave Gaza uninhabitable by 2020 if not reversed. The humanitarian situation remains dire; we have an extensive report to that effect. World Bank estimates indicate 53 per cent unemployment and a shocking 67 per cent for youth in Gaza, where poverty, food insecurity and despair are also rampant and nearly 97 per cent of the water is unfit for human consumption. Were it not for the assistance provided by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and _ other international aid, the situation would have collapsed long ago. We are grateful for the General Assembly's resounding renewal of the UNRWA mandate and for the generous donor support. We urge the redoubling of support in the light of the financial crisis and immense pressures being endured by the Agency, including ongoing attempts by Israel to obstruct the presence and services of UNRWA in occupied East Jerusalem. Israel must be reminded that it is not the sovereign in the city. I repeat - Israel must be reminded that it is not the sovereign in the occupied city of East Jerusalem. It remains the occupying Power and is obligated to respect the United Nations immunity, international law and all relevant resolutions. The year 2019 also witnessed daily arrests by the occupying forces. Over 5,500 Palestinians were detained, including 889 children and 128 women; some were released after interrogation and others imprisoned. Currently, more than 5,000 Palestinians, including 50 women and 200 children, are being held captive in Israeli jails, including 450 under administrative detention. Approximately 700 of these are suffering illnesses, including 10 cancer patients, all subjected to inhumane treatment and conditions. Israel's illegal settlement activities also reached unprecedented rates in 2019, as confirmed in the Secretary-General's reports on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) and countless other reports. Settlement construction and expansion, land confiscation, property demolitions, excavations and natural resource exploitation all escalated. Over 10,000 new settlement units were advanced, which will result in the illegal transfer of thousands upon thousands more Israeli settlers if not stopped. The start of 2020 began similarly, with Israel brazenly announcing plans for 2,000 more settlement units. Israeli settler violence and terror against Palestinian civilians, including children, also continued unabated. Some 256 attacks were recorded in 2019, 50 carried out by terrorist price-tag militias and gangs, causing death, injury, damage to homes, churches, mosques, orchards and vehicles. Annexation threats also grew louder in 2019. While Israeli officials continue to brag about Israel's illegal annexation of East Jerusalem and openly pursuemeasures to alter the city's demographic composition, character and legal status unchallenged, their expansionist appetite has grown. It is clear that Israeli officials believe that they have secured United States support for such an illegal scheme, notably after the December 2017 decision on Jerusalem and the November 2019 announcement on settlements, and have zero regard for the law - in this case, international law. Recent statements by the United States Ambassador to Israel, promising to deliver everything to Israel, have only furthered that belief, as heard in Prime Minister Netanyahu's constant vows of annexation, including his recent statement that: "We are going to bring United States recognition for our sovereignty in the Jordan Valley, in all the settlements, those in the blocs and those that are beyond it." In 2019, demolitions escalated as well. Israel destroyed or seized 617 Palestinian homes and properties in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, forcibly displacing 898 Palestinians. In addition to homes, donor-funded humanitarian projects, water wells, agricultural structures and solar panels were destroyed, the majority in the so-called Area C of the West Bank, which is openly targeted for Israeli annexation. In the past decade, over 10,000 Palestinians have been displaced by Israeli demolitions and the threat of displacement looms over thousands more, many refugees and the majority living in occupied East Jerusalem and surrounding areas. Ongoing threats to demolish Khan Al-Ahmar and forcibly transfer its inhabitants reflect that stark reality. "Destroy Khan Al-Ahmar tomorrow morning, every day a different illegal outpost of Arabs and Europeans. In war as in war - took a heavy toll on all sides. In the coming year you will have American backing and that is definitely enough." Those are the words of Israel's Transport Minister. Similarly, a Knesset member has declared: "The future of Judea and Samaria will be decided in actions, not words. Khan Al-Ahmar must be removed immediately." Both statements were made following the decision of the International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor to open an investigation into war crimes committed in Palestine as Israeli politicians join Prime Minister and other officials in mocking the Court, flaunting their intentions to commit more crimes and competing in criminality. Such open provocation and incitement intensified throughout the year, including provocations against the holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem. Israeli officials continue to recklessly violate the historic status quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, disrespect Jordan's custodianship and call for Israeli takeover of that holy site, fuelling the radicalism of Jewish extremists and fanning the flames of religious war. All of that has compounded the hardships and suffering of the Palestinian civilian population, devastating millions of lives. At the same time, they are severely undermining the prospects of peace, making the two-State solution, based on the pre-1967 borders, more remote than ever and a one-State apartheid reality more probable, to the detriment of all living on that land for the foreseeable future. Barring immediate, tangible action, based on accountability under international law, first and foremost, the prognosis for the new year will be equally bleak, if not worse. Just weeks ago in this Chamber (see S/PV.8699), we heard lofty statements about the Charter of the United Nations. The consensus was clear in every pledge. Respect for the Charter and international law is key to ensuring global peace and security and the viability of the international rules-based order. Yet there are those who continue to recklessly trample the law without regard for the consequences. For decades, Israel, the occupying Power, has trampled the Charter, United Nations resolutions and all relevant provisions of international law. As with common war criminals, even the spectre of an ICC investigation has not deterred Israeli Government officials and military commanders, who continue to blatantly challenge the Security Council and the international community as a whole. We must therefore once again call for actions to uphold the rule of law. This is an urgent, shared responsibility and obligation for the Security Council, the General Assembly, the ICC and all States. It is past time to end to the double standard that has allowed such sheer impunity by Israel. It is past time to say "Enough". It does not make sense to speak eloquently about international law, principles and commitments, while allowing them to be shredded and ridiculed so systematically and without consequence. Upholding the Charter requires defending it in all circumstances andinsisting on compliance with zero exceptions. In cases of its breach, accountability is paramount. All Israeli colonization in occupied Palestine, including East Jerusalem, must be condemned and neither threats nor attempts at annexation should go unchallenged. They must be immediately halted. The Charter must be upheld. The prohibition on the acquisition of territory by force must stand. Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), must be respected. This must mean the complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, as well as all measures of annexation and all other unlawful policies and practices, including collective punishment, an end to its illegal blockade of Gaza and all acts of provocation, incitement and violence. Should Israel continue to defy the international community, there should be no hesitation to pursue the prosecution of the perpetrators and sanctions - I repeat, sanctions. For, absent accountability, it is clear that Israel will persist with its crimes, causing more human suffering, irreversibly dismantling the two- State solution and compounding the conflict with grave consequences. This worst-case scenario must be averted, and all must uphold their duties and pledges to seek peace, security and justice. This is not Israel-bashing; it is a call for respect for the law and our shared values - the foundations of a safe, peaceful and prosperous world - and for safeguarding human rights and salvaging the just solution that can finally end this tragic conflict. The urgent need to stop Israeli annexation schemes cannot be underestimated. Immediate action is needed before it is too late - prevention, prevention, prevention. We need to stop annexation before it takes place. It is our collective responsibility to do so. Any talk of peace plans, which might be coming soon, should be about actualizing Palestinian independence and sovereignty, not advancing Israeli annexation. I repeat, not advancing Israeli annexation. Initiatives endorsing such illegal schemes and departing from the global consensus enshrined in the Council's resolutions are rejected and doomed to fail, as all here, with the exception of one delegation, have repeated in the Council so many times. Any initiative not rooted in global consensus, international law and United Nations resolutions will fail. All here have said that. The representative of the United Kingdom, the representative of France, the representative of Germany and the rest of the Council repeat this message all the time. Any initiative not rooted in global consensus to end the occupation to preserve the two-State solution, based on the 1967 borders, without any changes unless agreed upon by the two parties through negotiations, will fail - I repeat, will fail. In this year of the United Nations seventy-fifth anniversary, we appeal for a renewed commitment to the Charter. Should the Security Council continue to be obstructed from fulfilling its Charter duties, we call on all States, individually and collectively, to act in respect of their political, legal and moral obligations and the long-standing international consensus to justly resolve the Palestine question. Only such action can bring us back from the brink and make a just solution not only possible but inevitable. Such a solution must end the Israeli occupation and achieve the independence of the State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on international law, the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as a just solution for the plight of the Palestine refugees on the basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (II). While the start of this year gives little cause for hope, we are by no means hopeless. Despite adversity and setbacks, we are steadfast in the pursuit of our rights, including to self-determination, and firm in our conviction with regard to the inevitability of justice. The Palestinian people are not going anywhere. Millions of them are rooted in our national homeland, and no one can remove them from our national homeland. To those who believe that the destruction of the two-State solution will end the Palestinian struggle for freedom, we say that they are wrong - they are absolutely wrong. Despite all the challenges, we will never give up on our legitimate national aspirations for the Palestinian people to live freely and equally in their homeland, side by side with all of their neighbours, including the Israeli people, in peace and security.
