Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
initiative to hold this open debate on the
interdependence between security and development.
This debate indeed offers an opportunity to advance the
already intense international dialogue on the issue,
taking into consideration the conclusions reached by
relevant recent discussions in the Security Council.

A number of key issues in conflict and post-
conflict situations need to be dealt with from the
perspectives of both security and development.
Acknowledging the interdependence between security
and development, we are determined to contribute to
the realization of the development goals and objectives
agreed within the United Nations. The Government of
Azerbaijan is committed to fostering global
cooperation in all spheres, paying particular attention
to addressing the special needs of those suffering
protracted conflicts and recovering from natural
disasters.

Despite the scourge of war and the devastating
consequences of military aggression, Azerbaijan is
fully committed to, and making sustained efforts for,
maintaining international peace, security, stability and
development. My Government has successfully
launched and is implementing a number of important
regional development and infrastructure projects,
which regional stakeholders benefit from and lay the
foundation for long-term peace, stability and
prosperity.

As the concept paper on the subject (see S/2011/50) points out, not all peoples facing
development challenges and suffering from poverty
resort to violence. Indeed, certain political and
ideological concepts, as well as historical stereotypes,
can contribute to the eruption or protraction of, or
relapse into, conflict, thus inevitably affecting in the
first place development interests and imposing
unnecessary burdens. We need to work on addressing
all the root causes of conflict, taking into account that
development, peace, security, human rights and the rule
of law are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.

The major aggravating factor and the main source
of instability in the South Caucasus are obviously
protracted armed conflicts, which represent a
permanent and direct threat to the security,
independence and development of the States of the
region. It is obvious that ensuring security, stability
and development in the region will be possible once we
are able to achieve a resolution of the conflicts in a
committed manner.

As the joint declaration of the Republic of
Armenia, the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Russian
Federation signed on 2 November 2008 clearly states, a
political settlement will create favourable conditions
for economic development and comprehensive
cooperation in the region. Indeed, the resolution of the
conflict, resulting in putting an end to the occupation
of the territories of Azerbaijan and ensuring the return
of the forcibly displaced population to its places of
origin, is an essential precondition to mutually
beneficial cooperation and the implementation of
development agendas. It is obvious that there can be no
development without peace, which, at the same time, is
unrealistic without justice and respect for sovereignty,
human rights and the rule of law.

The Government of Azerbaijan has repeatedly
stated, in the context of the conflict settlement process,
that it is ready to assist with the rebuilding of
infrastructure and economic development in all
possible ways, including the attraction of investment at
the local level. The earlier wisdom prevails over
illusion, the sooner the peoples of the region will be
able to benefit from peace, stability and development.

