Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate and for
coming to New York to chair it personally. I also want to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General and Ambassador
Antonio Patriota for their important and insightful
comments this morning.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-
General's report on peacebuilding (S/2014/694) and his
update on progress made on the key themes ofinclusivity,
institution-building and mutual accountability. In
particular, we fully support the report's emphasis on
the vital role of women in all peacebuilding efforts.

In August last year, the Council had the opportunity
to visit Somalia and South Sudan. We saw first-
hand the contrasting peacebuilding fortunes of those
two countries. In Somalia, we witnessed a country
slowly getting back on its feet; in South Sudan, we
saw a country tearing itself apart. The experiences
of South Sudan and Somalia allow us to draw some
important lessons on the effectiveness of United
Nations peacebuilding. There is no doubt that the
United Nations has significantly improved its support
to countries emerging from conflict over the past 20
years. Countries like Cote D'Ivoire and Timor-Leste are
rightly celebrated as success stories. However, we must
also acknowledge that there have been too many tragic
examples of countries relapsing into violence, with the
Central African Republic being the most prominent
recent example.

The United Kingdom believes that there are three
overarching lessons that we can draw from recent
United Nations peacebuilding experiences.

First, the context in which the United Nations is
trying to deliver peacebuilding support is changing.
Although peacebuilding was first conceptualized as
a post-conflict endeavour, we are now increasingly
asking the United Nations to support political processes
and build institutions in the midst of ongoing violence
and conflict. Almost 90 per cent of United Nations
personnel in special political missions are working in
peace operations in countries that are still experiencing
high-intensity conflict.

There are also several new drivers of conflict. Civil
wars are becoming internationalized, with regional
actors fuelling and sometimes actively participating
in intra-State conflicts. The growth of transnational
organized crime and illicit trafficking as a lucrative
funding stream for armed groups acts as a disincentive
to reaching durable political settlements. The increasing
number of violent extremist groups making maximalist
demands, and that view United Nations personnel as
legitimate targets, makes it harder to bring conflicts to
an end. When wars even appear to end, often they do so
without a clear resolution or with violence persisting.

These contexts are likely to become the new normal
for peacebuilding. We therefore need to develop a more
sophisticated approach to core peacebuilding tasks
in countries affected by conflict. To achieve that, the
United Nations must improve its capacity to undertake
rigorous and objective analysis of the conflict drivers in
each context, and to use that improved understanding
to present the Council with sequenced, prioritized and
tailored recommendations to deal with the root causes
of violence.

Secondly, we must remember the primacy of
politics in peacebuilding. Too often the international
community takes a technical approach to supporting
countries in conflict, such as building police stations
or improving budgetary processes. While those may
be critical tasks, peacebuilding activities will fail if
they become detached from a broader political strategy.
The United Nations must ensure that its good offices
mandates are used to create the political space required
for key peacebuilding interventions to gain traction.
Missions must seek to align security development and
political activities into a single, coherent, integrated
strategy. And although the principle of national
ownership should, of course, sit at the heart of all
peacebuilding strategies, we need to be realistic about
the limits of national ownership in situations of State
collapse where political legitimacy remains contested.

Thirdly, peacebuilding requires sustained political
attention and financial support. The Ebola crisis in West
Africa has demonstrated the fragility of peacebuilding
gains. But even without an external shock like Ebola,
there are no shortcuts to building durable national
institutions. The World Bank estimates that making
meaningful improvements to institutions takes between
10 and 17 years at the very minimum. International
efforts to build institutions will inevitably extend
beyond the lifetime of a peace operation. Effective,
well-planned transitions are therefore essential. We
must ensure that a missions drawdown does not result
in a huge drop in donor financing. The United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund is an important mechanism to
achieve this, and that is why the United Kingdom
continues to be the Peacebuilding Fund's largest donor,
providing $70 million since 2011, and we encourage
others to contribute generously to this important
peacebuilding tool.

As many colleagues have pointed out, 2015 will
be an important year for peacebuilding. The United
Kingdom hopes thatboth the review of the peacebuilding
architecture and the Secretary-General's review of peace
operations will provide innovative recommendations
to improve the way in which we support countries
recovering from conflict. In particular, we need bold and
meaningful reform of the Peacebuilding Commission
if it is to adapt to the changing context and remain
relevant in the future. We also hope that these reviews
will emphasize the importance of conflict prevention
as a core peacebuilding task. As the Deputy Secretary-
General so eloquently said this morning, too often the
Security Council focuses solely on the intensive care
phase of the conflict spectrum. We need much more
attention to be focused both on conflict prevention and
on post-conflict peacebuilding, which we one might
call the "convalescence" treatment of the problem.

We live in an age where we have immediate access
to information about potential risks of instability
in countries around the world. The challenge for the
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and the whole
United Nations system is to act early, because early
action can prevent enormous human suffering, fear and
displacement, and it is far more cost-effective than the
high human and financial costs of peacebuilding after
conflict has take root.

