Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretaries-General Zerihoun and Simonovie
for their briefings this morning.

Australia welcomes President Poroshenko's peace
plan as a major opportunity for de-escalating the situation
in Ukraine. We also welcome Ukraine's declaration of
a unilateral ceasefire and the apparent support for it
from separatist leaders. The peace plan, with its call
for dialogue with legally elected authorities in the east,
security guarantees for all parties who participate
in negotiations, the release of hostages and further
efforts to decentralize power, including through local
elections, presents a welcome chance for addressing
grievances and ending the crisis. Those are courageous
initiatives and should have our support.

We urge separatists in eastern Ukraine to adhere
to - and not take advantage of- the ceasefire. Reports
of separatist attacks against Ukrainian border posts
after the ceasefire's declaration must be condemned.
Reports received in the last half an hour of a Ukrainian
helicopter being shot down near Slovyansk, with nine
dead, are a very bad development. Commitments to
adhere to the ceasefire must be upheld. Australia
understands that Ukraine's armed forces will use force
to defend themselves if attacked. They have the right
to do so. Of course, the Ukrainian Government must
continue to ensure that any operations conducted by its
armed forces are in line with international standards.

There are disturbing reports of the continued flow
of illegal fighters, arms and other military equipment,
including heavy weapons such as tanks, across the
Russian border into Ukraine. The Council should not
tolerate those continued and destabilizing violations
of Ukraine's sovereignty. It is essential that Russia
exercise control of its borders. We are also concerned
by reports that Russia has again redeployed thousands
of troops near the Ukrainian border in what appears to
be a further calculated provocation. All those actions
have been destabilizing eastern Ukraine. We again urge
Russia to pull its troops back from the border, prevent
the flow of illegal arms and fighters into Ukraine and
call publicly for separatists in Ukraine to renounce
violence.
More positively, we welcome President Putin's
request to the Russian Duma today to repeal the
resolution that purported to sanction Russia's use of force
in Ukraine. No such use of force is legal or legitimate,
but, if carried out, Putin's move to repeal it constitutes
at least a signal of movement towards de-escalation.
We also welcome the Secretary-General's continued
engagement with the situation and the United Nations
commitment to work with Ukrainian authorities to
assist with internally displaced persons.

The third report of the United Nations human rights
monitoring mission in Ukraine presents a damning
picture of the consequences of violent separatism
in eastern Ukraine. The majority of human rights
abuses are occurring in Donetsk and Luhansk, where
separatist groups are active. In other areas of Ukraine,
under Government control, concerted efforts are being
made to ensure human rights are respected. The report
commends Ukraine's own efforts to address grievances
and build a society that respects the rule of law.

Ukraine has addressed constitutional reform, with
a focus on the decentralization of power; announced
parliamentary elections for later this year; worked
to reform law enforcement bodies and taken steps to
fight corruption. Ukrainian authorities have begun to
investigate the Maidan protests and the 2 May Odesa
incident. Timely accountability is crucial, so it is
important that those investigations progress quickly.

In contrast to those positive steps, the situation
in eastern Ukraine continues to deteriorate. The
aggressive actions of separatist groups are having a
negative impact on the human rights situation in areas of
Ukraine under their control. As the report states, "with
the demise of security, the rule of law and governance,
the protection gap is widening". Civilians have been
killed by armed groups. Abductions and detentions now
affect the broader population in Donetsk and Luhansk,
who live in a climate of fear and intimidation. We are
affronted at the ongoing detention of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe monitors in
eastern Ukraine, and we call again for their immediate
release. Journalists in eastern Ukraine face attacks,
abductions and detentions. Five have been killed during
the crisis. We welcome the Council's press statement
on the killing of journalists in eastern Ukraine. In a
situation where misinformation abounds, it is critical
that journalists be able to report freely and without fear.

Violence in the east, as we know, has disrupted
social services. Schools have closed, hospitals are
overcrowded and understaffed, running water and
electricity are scarce in some areas, and food prices
have increased rapidly. It is clearly increasingly
difficult for civilians in eastern Ukraine to lead normal
lives, but we note also the United Nations assessment
that the situation in eastern Ukraine, unacceptable as
it is, does not constitute a humanitarian crisis. The
risk, of course, is that it could worsen and become a
humanitarian crisis if armed separatists do not desist
and if Russian assistance to them does not stop.

I should note that the human rights situation in
Crimea has deteriorated markedly since Russia's illegal
annexation of the peninsula. Freedom of assembly and
religious belief are under threat. There are reports that
some Crimean residents have been forced to surrender
their Ukrainian citizenship. It is disturbing that only
a small number of Crimeans were able to vote in
Ukraine's presidential elections and had to do so by
travelling to mainland Ukraine.

The report makes useful proposals for the way
ahead, which deserve our support. Crucially, it
emphasizes that all armed groups must immediately
put an end to their violent activities and lay down their
arms. President Poroshenko's peace plan and ceasefire
provide the opportunity to do that - to end separatist
violence - and all parties should seize this opportunity.
A failure to resolve the situation by peaceful means
will destroy the lives and livelihoods of even more
Ukrainians. None of us in the Council should allow that
to happen.

