Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his very informative
briefing on the recent developments in Mali and
welcoming Prime Minister Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga
of Mali. I want to take this opportunity to express our
sincere condolences to the Prime Minister as well as to
the families of the victims of the tragedy in Ogossagou.
I would like to focus today on three issues - the
political process, the security situation and the human
rights and humanitarian situation.

First, on the political process, we commend
the commitment shown by President Keita and his
Government to prioritizing the constitutional review
process. It is an indispensable step towards adopting
the critical political and institutional reforms envisaged
in the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
We therefore call on all Malian political and civil-
society leaders to participate actively in those important
deliberations and contribute constructively to them.
Ensuring an inclusive and transparent constitutional
review process is of the utmost importance. Despite
some positive developments, we regret that some of the
key provisions of the agreement have not yet been fully
implemented. There is no doubt that the implementation
of the agreement requires strong dedication and
commitment from all the relevant stakeholders. Those
who are trying to obstruct the process should be aware
that the Council is ready to impose all the necessary
measures against them, pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017).

Secondly, we remain grievously concerned about
the continuing deterioration of the security situation in
central Mali and the alarming increase in the number
of civilians killed. Saturday's horrific massacre in
Ogossagou, in the Mopti region, is the latest sign
that violence in Mali is spiralling out of control. We
therefore call on the Government to intensify efforts to
address the situation in the centre of the country with
the support of the international community, including
through implementing its Plan de securisation integre
des regions du centre. We strongly condemn attacks
against civilians in the village of Koulogon-Peul
and call for the perpetrators to be held accountable.
For the situation in Mali to improve, the effective
implementation of the peace agreement is crucial.
We express our deep condolences to the families of
the victims.

It goes without saying that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) plays a critical role in preventing
extremist armed groups from taking control of areas in
northern Mali where there is little or no State authority.
However, the recent Security Council visit to the region
shows clearly that the current situation is extremely
difficult and that there is a need to create a broader
security architecture, which includes MINUSMA,
the Malian armed forces, the Group of Five for the
Sahel Joint Force and Operation Barkhane deployed to
the region.

Thirdly, the human rights situation remains
worrisome, particularly in the centre of the country,
as well as in the Menaka region and the Gourma area,
where serious human rights violations and abuses
continue to be reported. No effort should be spared
to bring the perpetrators of those heinous acts to
justice. At the same time, all national and international
military forces operating in Mali must ensure that their
operations comply with international human rights
law and international humanitarian law. We remain
deeply concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. Access to basic services and assistance, such
as food, water and sanitation, as well as education and
health care, remain limited and challenging. As the
number of displaced persons in Mali grows, it is of the
utmost importance to step up efforts to address that
difficult situation.

In conclusion, there is no doubt that peace and
stability in Mali remains key for the peace and security
of the whole Sahel region. But Malians alone cannot
achieve those ambitious goals. Poland therefore applauds
Special Representative Mahamet Saleh Annadif for his
excellent leadership, and all United Nations civilian
and uniformed personnel for their continued hard work
in a challenging environment. Last but not least, we
commend the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the European Union and other
bilateral and multilateral partners for their commitment
and valuable support for the peace process in Mali.

