Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow
me to offer our sincere congratulations to Malaysia on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I express our appreciation for the convening
of this high-level open debate on the critical issue of
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Mr. Roux, Mr. Koblentz and Mr. Kim Won-soc.

I should like to convey Arab disappointment
and displeasure vis-a-vis the failure of the 2015
Review Confererence of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) - a failure sought to maintain the interests of
one State non-party to the Treaty, although it alone in
the Middle East possesses nuclear weapons. The real
problem is the lack of political will to implement a
resolution adopted more than 20 years ago, on which
we have seen no genuine progress.

The League is deeply concerned that nuclear
weapon-States are developing and updating their
nuclear weapons, and continue to rely on them in their
military defence doctrines, counter to the provisions of
article VI of the NPT. It has been repeatedly stressed in
the international demands set forth in various forums
that the role of such weapons in State security policies
must be reduced. The latest such demand was made in
the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference,
although the nuclear-weapon States have not committed
to its implementation. The technologies to develop these
weapons have become increasingly sophisticated. In
that regard, Ijoin previous speakers in recalling that the
NPT is the cornerstone of the nuclear non-proliferation
architecture. All Arab States are party to the Treaty and
call on the international community to rid the world of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs).

The 1995 resolution on the Middle East was adopted
through compromise and consensus. It has been
partially implemented through the permanent extension
of the NPT, although the critical element that led to the
agreement - the elimination of all nuclear weapons in
the Middle East - has been ignored. Nuclear weapons
are more lethal than any other WMDs. In the absence
of measures to prevent their use, while it remains very
easy to obtain lethal weapons of all sorts, the objective
is not merely non-proliferation but indeed to rid the
entire world of weapons that threaten its very existence.
The 1995 resolution was merely one practical step to

that end.

Whereas the Middle East is today ravaged by
conflicts in which hundreds of lives are lost every day,
the non-proliferation ofWMDs is essential to containing
and resolving such conflicts peacefully. Developments
on the ground must not be used as a pretext for double
standards or allowing the only nuclear State of the
region to remain outside the NPT regime, which
prevents the Treaty from attaining universality and
ridding the region of nuclear weapons. These fears were
heightened when Israel attained the chairmanship of
the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly - given
its record of numerous violations of international law
and relevant resolutions of the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) 4 and led Arab States to abstain in
the voting on the resolution concerning Israeli nuclear
capabilities at the IAEA General Conference. In that
regard, the League calls on the depositaries of the NPT
to discharge their responsibility for implementing the
resolution on the Middle East by pressuring Israel to
accede to the Treaty and subject all its facilities to
international control.

The League of Arab States calls on all States to
agree as soon as possible, and before the 2020 NPT
Review Conference, to rid the Middle East of all nuclear
weapons. We call on States that have resorted to double
standards to review their current position in order to
reach a regional balance in the Middle East, which in no
circumstances can be struck in the presence of WMDs.
In that regard, until an agreement can be reached to rid
the Middle East of WMDs, including nuclear weapons,
the Arab States must review the policies and positions
they have maintained for four decades in support of
non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. We must
reconsider all means necessary to ensure regional
security in a region that cannot endure any further
destabilization.

In that respect, I refer to the declaration issued
by the League at its Summit in Nouakchott on 25 and
26 July, in which it renewed its appeal for Israel to
be compelled to accede to the NPT and subject its
programmes and facilities to international control, and
in which Arab Foreign Ministers called for a review of
the various issues related to the elimination of nuclear
weapons and other WMDs.

In conclusion, I pay tribute to the Open-ended
Working Group on Taking Forward Multilateral Nuclear
Disarmament Negotiations for its recommendations
concerning nuclear disarmament upon the conclusion
of its activities in Geneva on 19 August, where
participating States adopted clear proposals for the
launching negotiations on a legally binding treaty to
prohibit nuclear weapons in 2017.
