Mr. Martin: Libya is approaching a key moment
in its democratic transition. On I May, the registration
of voters opened for the election of a national
congress - the first election since those that took
place, under considerable limitations, more than
45 years ago. The High National Elections Commission
reported that, by last night, some 1,024,000 voters had
registered at over 1,500 registration centres throughout
Libya. I will later indicate the difficulties facing the
electoral process, but that is no small achievement.

There continue to be other positive signs that
Libya is moving towards democracy. Following the
local election in Misrata in February, a number of other
cities have planned to elect local councils, some in the
coming weeks. Libyans are increasingly exercising
their freedom of speech; free media is developing at a
rapid pace; and civil society organizations, many of
them led by young people and women, are being
2

established across the country. There is a strong desire
on the part of the public to be active and involved and
to be consulted on matters of local and national
interest - a right of which they have been deprived for
the past 42 years - as well as a determination to hold
their leaders accountable. One can clearly sense that,
for the first time in a generation, people are unafraid to
speak out.

In the context of that newly found freedom, local
conflicts and tensions that existed before the
revolution, but were repressed, are surfacing more
clearly. Some of those tensions have escalated into
armed conflict, testing the reach and authority of the
Government's security apparatus and its ability to
impose the rule of law.

On 26 March, fighting erupted between Tabu and
Arab brigades in Sabha, the major city of south-west
Libya. The situation rapidly deteriorated over a five-
day period of fighting, resulting in 147 dead and
approximately 500 wounded. At the outbreak of the
fighting, a joint delegation of the Government and the
National Transitional Council (NTC) was dispatched to
Sabha to lead negotiations for a ceasefire, with the
support of local tribal and security leaders. The
Ministry of Defence deployed troops from the national
army, supported by revolutionary brigades from
outside the area, to help secure and enforce the
ceasefire. United Nations agencies and the
International Organization for Migration provided
humanitarian assistance to the displaced families in the
area.

Soon after, on 1 April, fighting broke out between
the western Libyan towns of Zuwara, on one side, and
AI-Jumail and Regdalin, on the other. Clashes,
reportedly involving heavy weapons, continued for
three days, until a 48-hour ceasefire was agreed.
Unconfirmed reports indicate that 48 people lost their
lives. The Government responded rapidly by
dispatching a force to the area to enforce the
ceasefire - a mix of national army and Ministry of
Interior units and revolutionary brigades from various
cities. There has been a history of conflict between the
two sides, usually ascribed to ethnic differences,
attitudes toward the previous regime and rivalry for
control of smuggling routes. I visited the area in late
April and met in all three cities with local officials and
civil society, who voiced their support for the
reconciliation efforts under way by the Government
and the NTC.
12-33510
On 21 April, fighting erupted for the second time
this year in the south-east town of Kufra, between the
Tabu community and elements from the national army
which had been deployed to the area in February to
enforce the ceasefire. The NTC dispatched a
delegation, together with the Ministry of Defence, to
negotiate a 48-hour ceasefire. The ceasefire was broken
24 hours after it began with increased clashes,
including the reported use of heavy weapons. In an
effort to halt the clashes, the Minister of Defence
visited the communities on 25 April, and, though the
situation continues to be tense, the fighting has
subsided. Unconfirmed reports indicate that several
persons were killed and dozens wounded.

In each case, the Government took swift action in
deploying forces and mediation capacities immediately
after the conflicts started, and with each case the
Government's reaction improved and lessons learned
were taken into consideration. Each case has further
highlighted the fact that rapid action is necessary to
defuse local tensions and prevent their entrenchment.
But, in addition to the immediate response, in these
cases as well as in other cities such as Bani Walid and
Sirte, the provision of long-term security, the delivery
of services and the pursuit of reconciliation are then
required to fully address these conflicts. Unfortunately,
these conflicts have compounded an already complex
and ambitious workload for the NTC and the
Government, forcing them to divert attention from
other key priorities.

Meanwhile, the Government has also faced
disturbances resulting from discontent among some of
the armed brigades. The most contentious issues are
perceived inequities in the treatment of war wounded
and the decision to suspend payments to former
revolutionary fighters while procedures are put in place
to properly regulate the disbursement of funds. The
latest incident at the Prime Minister's Office on
Tuesday, in which one person was killed and others
injured, indicates the seriousness of that discontent, but
it also displays a growing Government determination
and capacity to confront those taking to violence in
pursuit of their demands.

There is progress in the area of economic
recovery. Currently, some 1.4 million barrels a day of
oil are being produced. Individuals, for the most part,
now have access to their bank deposits. There are
visible signs of new commercial activity. With the
approval of the budget, smaller construction projects
12-33510

are able to be resumed. The overall reconstruction
process will not be fully operational until the return of
foreign companies and investors, currently inhibited by
security concerns, though Libyan private-sector
companies are resuming activities. Two international
trade conferences took place in Tripoli during the
month of April, offering the Government the
opportunity to present its investment and management
plans for the country's reconstruction and future
development. On 29 March, the Ministry of Planning
hosted a meeting with the international community to
present the Government's strategic plan, which builds
on the 10 transitional goals outlined by the interim
Government in November and articulates sectoral plans
and targets that will serve as a foundation for the
Government's activities, as well as the coordinated
support of international partners.

However, the scale of the challenges, coupled
with the high expectations of the Libyan people for
tangible and quick progress, has strained the interim
political system. Five months have passed since the
appointment of the Government, and, though all parties
understood that the tasks set forth for the transitional
authorities were ambitious, both the executive and
legislative branches have become increasingly
frustrated by the lack of progress in a number of
sectors. The NTC has been requesting explanations in
that regard, and there have been debates within the
NTC about a possible no-confidence vote in the
Government. Such debates show a commitment to
democratic accountability, but have created a sense of
instability in an already fragile system. It is important
that the executive and legislative branches work
together to ensure that tangible progress, especially on
security and the decentralization of Government
services, can be seen by the citizens of Libya in the
short time that remains prior to the elections and a new
Government.

The transitional authorities at the national and
local levels deserve credit for returning the country to
relative normalcy and maintaining an environment in
which people are living and working freely, children
are going to school and basic services are available.
But the Libyans' expectations of concrete progress in
the post-revolution period are strongest in relation to
security, where ordinary Libyans would like to see a
coherent process of rebuilding institutions, establishing
the rule of law and integrating the revolutionary forces.
Major challenges and gaps remain, and the United
3
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
continues to support the Government's efforts in these
areas.

UNSMIL's police advisers, embedded within the
Ministry of the Interior, continue to provide support in
the areas of training, border security, logistics, election
security and media outreach. UNSMIL continues to co-
chair the international coordination mechanism, with a
View to assisting the Ministry in the development of its
priorities and plans and coordinating the international
community's bilateral offers of assistance, so as to
ensure that they best address the needs of the Libyan
police.

A long-term plan is under way for the
comprehensive reform and restructuring of the
Ministry of Interior, including the police, and will
require significant enhancement of capacities in the
areas of effective decision-making, management and
strategic planning. At the same time, recent crises have
led to the call for an acceleration of efforts to
rehabilitate the Libyan armed forces, and the Minister
of Defence and Chief of Army Staff have asked
bilateral and international partners to coordinate their
efforts in that respect.

A key issue related to public security is the
integration or demobilization of the revolutionary
fighters and the control of weapons. The Libyan public
regards advances in this respect as a key measure of
overall post-revolutionary progress and Government
performance. So far, results in this area have been
mixed. Given the weak capacity of the State security
apparatus to absorb immediately the revolutionary
fighters, the Government has developed an interim
mechanism in the form of a Supreme Security
Committee (SSC), operating under the authority of the
Ministry of Interior, with branches across the country.
It is positive that the SSC goes some way towards
providing a unified command and control of the
brigades and limits their fragmentation. It has also
provided the State with a pool of auxiliary forces for
quick dispatch alongside the national army to crisis
areas. Thus far, according to the Ministry of Interior,
approximately 60,000 to 70,000 fighters have
registered to take part in the SSC. But as the SSC was
designed as a temporary body, the challenge is now to
plan for their eventual integration into the Ministry, as
it undergoes its own reform processes. It is essential
that the transition take place as a matter of priority, so
that the SSC does not become a parallel security
structure.

Meanwhile, the Warriors Affairs Commission
continues to register fighters and some weapons, and is
working with the Ministry of Labour to determine the
civilian job opportunities available. Stronger
coordination of plans for integration, demobilization
and reintegration is needed to avoid confusion and
duplication of effort, and planning needs to go on to
address further the control of weapons and
disarmament.

A key concern for Libya, and equally for its
neighbours, the wider region and international partners,
continues to be border security. The Libyan authorities
currently face severe capacity and capability
limitations. A new border security and strategic
installations protection force is being established; the
Libyan armed forces need to be rehabilitated; the
Libyan customs service has been depleted of most of
its resources; and police and immigration services
require strengthening and training in almost all areas of
their responsibilities. Establishing effective border
security and management mechanisms will take years
and is a complex task. It requires a whole-of-
Government approach, across several key ministries,
and coordination and collaboration between the
different security organs of the State, at all levels.
Sustained international focus and assistance will be
essential.

The United Nations will continue to support those
efforts by providing advice, expertise and coordination,
in close cooperation with the Libyan authorities and
their bilateral partners. A key priority remains
developing an urgent action plan for improved security
and integrated control of the southern border, under
joint command and control structures. The United
Nations and bilateral partners stand ready to work with
the Libyan authorities on such a plan, which would
facilitate the provision of international assistance to the
various agencies involved.

While I continue to believe that the Libyan
Government is committed to ensuring its citizens'
access to justice and the rule of law, serious obstacles
are hampering the process. Thousands of prisoners
remain in conflict-related detention. The transfer of
prisons and detainees to the custody of the Ministry of
Justice is progressing only slowly. The Ministry has
stated that 31 facilities - holding some 3,000
12-33510
detainees - are now under its control. Control over
those facilities is often shared with other parties,
including the brigades that had been running them. An
additional number of detainees - perhaps around
4,000 - are still in the custody of brigades, either at
formal or secret detention facilities.

Cases of mistreatment and torture of detainees
continue. Recently, UNSMIL expressed deep concern
regarding the deaths of three individuals at a detention
centre in Misrata controlled by the Supreme Security
Committee, and therefore under the authority of the
Ministry of the Interior. The deaths all occurred on
13 April, and we have credible information that they
were a direct result of torture, as well as information
that at least seven other persons were tortured at the
same facility.

I have pressed both the Prime Minister and the
Minister of the Interior about the need to investigate
those cases and to prevent further abuse through a
robust inspection regime. The Supreme Security
Committee of Misrata publicly condemned those acts
and committed its support to investigations and
appropriate legal action. We will work with the Libyan
authorities to ensure that there is follow-up on those
cases, as well as with regard to allegations of torture
that we have received from elsewhere in Libya,
including detention facilities in Tripoli, Zawiya and
Zintan.

Addressing those practices should be a top
Government priority in pursuit of a new culture of
human rights and the rule of law in post-revolution
Libya. In that respect, new Government bodies were
established in the past two months to investigate
human rights complaints. Those incidents also
underline the importance of accelerating the transfer of
detainees into the custody of the Ministry of Justice,
where they will be guarded by judicial police.

UNSMIL is engaging closely with the Libyan
prison administration to address its capacity gaps, and
is urging the adoption of an overall prosecutorial
strategy in relation to the legacy of the former regime
and the conflict. Such a strategy could significantly
contribute to building trust in the legal system.

Progress is also needed on the implementation of
other aspects of transitional justice, including the
formal appointment of members of the fact-finding and
reconciliation commission established by the
12-33510
transitional justice law and the search for and
identification of missing persons.

On 2 May, the NTC adopted several new laws,
including a law granting amnesty for some crimes, a
law on criminalizing the glorification of the dictator
and a law on some procedures for the transitional
period. The last of those stipulates that the Ministries
of the Interior and Defence shall take measures
concerning conflict-related detainees by referring them
for prosecution or release within a two-month period.
If implemented with proper respect for human rights
standards, that could constitute a step forward in
resolving cases of conflict-related detention in Libya.

Other aspects of the laws are of concern and have
been criticized by Libyan lawyers, including by the
National Council for Civil Liberties and Human
Rights, which was created by the NTC itself. The
language used with respect to amnesty is ambiguous,
and therefore open to different interpretations, as it
depends upon whether acts are deemed as having been
"to promote or protect the revolution". We are seeking
clarification that those laws will be applied in a manner
that respects international human rights standards,
including the prohibition of amnesties for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and serious violations of
human rights. The criminalization of speech against the
new authorities is an infringement on the freedom of
expression, not compatible with the principles of
Libya's Constitutional Declaration or with international
standards.

The mounting challenges that Libya's transition
has to overcome, especially with regard to security,
make it urgent that issues of legitimacy be settled
through early electoral processes. The Libyan people
need to feel that their Government is chosen by and
accountable to them. I am therefore pleased to report
the progress in the preparations for the National
Congress elections.

As requested by the Libyan authorities, the
United Nations has expanded its support to the High
National Elections Commission by reinforcing its
advisory role, supporting voter education, procuring
registration and polling material and coordinating
electoral assistance efforts from other international
organizations. The United Nations integrated electoral
team of personnel from UNSMIL, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the United
Nations Office for Project Services is now co-located
with the Elections Commission Administration in
Tripoli and deployed to three field locations - Tripoli,
Benghazi and Sabha.

The Elections Commission had to establish
sub-offices, identify warehouses and recruit and train
staff, at the same time as adopting numerous
regulations and by-laws, including those related to
voter registration, candidate and entity nomination and
the observation process. As I reported at the beginning
of my statement, between 1 and 9 May, just over
1 million people had registered as voters. So far, the
registration of women has been relatively low -
accounting for about 36 per cent of those registered.

Because of the lack of reliable population figures
and the very specific demographics of Libya, it is
extremely difficult to establish a reliable estimate of
the eligible voter population; educated guesses put the
figure between 3 and 3.5 million. The initial
registration figures, while encouraging, show that the
pace of registration will need to increase during the
second week of registration, and indeed, daily
registration figures have accelerated over the past few
days.

The registration of candidates and political
entities presenting lists for the proportional races also
started on 1 May, and was scheduled to be conducted
over an eight-day period. In response to strong
representations by political entities, on 7 May the
Commission decided to extend the period for an
additional week, to end on 15 May. The overall number
of registered candidates and political entities is very
encouraging, with 1,100 individual candidates and
47 political entities registered thus far.

While the initial pace of candidate and political
entity registration was slow, the pace has consistently
gained momentum and has continued to do so
following the extension of the nomination period.
Among individual candidates, however, the number of
women coming forward has been extremely low -
only 29 so far. That is disappointing, but perhaps
unsurprising, as most women who want to run prefer to
be included in the lists of political entities, which, by
law, must include alternating male and female
candidates.

Voter education has been a serious challenge in
the process. The Elections Commission has produced
in-house, nationwide voter education materials that
include a poster campaign, newspaper inserts, text

messages and public service announcements on
television. Regrettably, the process started late, and a
major increase in such activities is urgently needed.

Voter registration has proceeded with few
security problems. A full election security plan is still
being developed, with high-level Government attention
and the strong involvement of UNSMIL's police
advisers. The Ministry of the Interior has established
an election security committee to coordinate all
activities among the police directorates and districts, as
well as among other security elements. The Ministry
has designed and started to implement, under the
guidance and assistance of UNSMIL police experts,
extensive training programmes for all police officers
who will be involved in election security.

Logistical, communication and vehicle shortages
may impede the implementation of the election
security plan, and local arrangements will be crucial. It
is essential that all security agencies come together
effectively to implement the plan.

The outcome of the voter registration process, the
registration of political entities, the complaints and
management process, and - perhaps most important -
the vetting of the candidates by the Integrity and
Patriotism Commission, will be key factors affecting
the timeline.

Political entities have publicly voiced concerns
with regard to the short time allotted to voter
registration and candidate nomination processes,
especially in the light of the weak state of civic
education and political entity development.
Nevertheless, a number of political parties and entities
are emerging - holding congresses, developing
manifestos and electing their leadership bodies. That is
a healthy and concrete sign of the development of the
democratic process.

I want to take this opportunity to commend the
High National Elections Commission - a body that
began its work less than four months ago with zero
electoral experience - for its commitment and
continued efforts to carry forward the electoral
operations, in difficult conditions and an extremely
limited time frame.

Elections are part of the transition; they are not
the beginning and not the end. Elections will help to
address some of the issues that plague the transitional
authorities, but following the elections Libyans must
recommit themselves to serious long-term State-
building. While the Constitutional Declaration
stipulates that the national congress will be a
transitional body and that elections for a long-term
legislative structure will take place one year from this
election, the incoming national congress will have
several important tasks. They include the formation of
a new Government, the appointment of the
constitutional commission and reviewing and adopting
important legislation, including the next electoral law.
Given that it will be the first elected legislative body in
Libya in the past half century, UNSMIL and UNDP are
consulting with various stakeholders to prepare to
provide both procedural and substantive support both
to the national congress and the constitutional
commission. While the democratic transition will move
on to a new phase, UNSMIL's support to public
security, human rights, transitional justice, the rule of
law and arms proliferation and border security will also
remain priorities for assistance to the new authorities.

As I have repeatedly said in the Chamber, we
must constantly remind ourselves of the terrible legacy
and tremendous difficulties that the Libyan authorities
are facing in establishing a functioning State based on
the rule of law and democracy. They should be credited
with the degree of stability and the achievements thus
far. At the same time, the international community
should be frank with them and with ourselves in
continuing to identify the challenges and gaps, while
remaining committed to supporting Libyans in their
quest for democracy and stability with technical advice
and practical support. A stable democratic Libya is in
everyone's interest.

