Mr. Al-Khasawneh (Jordan): At the outset, Mr.
President, I would like to express my delegation's
gratitude to you for calling for and convening this open
debate. I would also like to extend my delegation's
appreciation to the sponsors of the draft resolution for
the consultations that they have conducted with the
broader membership of the United Nations. My
delegation wishes to associate itself with the position
taken by the Non-Aligned Movement as expressed in
the statement delivered earlier by the Permanent
Representative of Malaysia on behalf of the Movement.

My country acknowledges the fact that the
potential and possibility of the acquisition of weapons
of mass destruction (WMD) and their related materials
by non-State actors is a clear and present danger and an
imminent threat to international peace and security. We
realize that there is a gap in the existing treaty regime
regulating the issue of non-proliferation that needs to
be addressed and attended to. It is imperative to devise
effective means and measures that would bring non-
State actors within the ambit of the multilateral non-
proliferation regime and ensure that the multilateral
effort aimed at achieving non-proliferation is
effectively extended to guarantee that weapons of mass
destruction and related materials does not end up in the
possession of non-State actors and possibly terrorists.

In spite of our belief that the best approach we
can adopt to address this matter is to exert efforts to
engage in an intensive multilateral negotiation process
aimed at developing an international instrument that
regulates and addresses this problem, we still feel that,
owing to the urgency of the threat that the current gap
poses, a measured intervention by the Security Council
would be both necessary and appropriate.

My country believes, however, that such a
measured intervention by the Council should take into
consideration the fact that the most effective and
watertight measure to completely preclude the
possibility of placing weapons of mass destruction and
related materials into the hands of non-State actors is to
achieve the long-awaited objective of total chemical,
biological and nuclear disarmament.

We feel that any action taken by the Council should
take that reality into consideration. Additionally, we
believe that the anticipated Council action should
ensure that the existing treaty regime is not in any way
undermined, amended or altered by such an action. We
also believe that the value, validity and binding effect
of any anticipated draft resolution to be adopted by the
Council on this matter will not be compromised if such
a draft is not adopted under Chapter VII, since all
Council resolutions are binding, in accordance with
Article 25 of the United Nations Charter.

We urge the Council to make every possible
effort to further clarify in the anticipated draft
resolution the working dynamics for the envisaged
follow-up mechanism in a manner that is realistic and
effective and that takes into consideration the reality
that, for States to effectively comply with the
resolution's requirements, they will need significant
assistance and sufficient time to do so. We also call on
Council members to provide more clarity with regard
to certain terms and definitions contained in the draft
resolution to facilitate the task of States.

