Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
important and timely open debate, which reresents
a valuable contribution to the common efforts of the
international community to address violent extremism,
religious and ethnic hatred, and intolerance in the
Middle East.

Ukraine fully supports the position of the
Security Council that terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security and that
all acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of their motivations, or of where or by whom
committed. Ukraine supports the provisions of the
latest Security Council resolutions concerning threats
to international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts, in particular resolution 2199 (2015), adopted on
12 February and devoted to the activities of terrorist
organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL).

Ukraine remains committed to achieving lasting
peace, stability and security in Syria, Iraq and the
broader region, as well as to countering the ISIL threat.
We share the idea that an inclusive political transition
in Syria and inclusive political governance in Iraq are
crucial to sustainable peace and stability in the region.
In that respect, Ukraine is deeply concerned about ISIL
and other associated terrorist entities and the negative
impact of their presence, violent extremist ideology
and actions on the stability of Iraq, Syria and the
entire region, including the devastating humanitarian
impact on the civilian populations, which has led to the
displacement of millions ofpeople. The acts of violence
being committed by ISIL foment sectarian tensions and
are extremely alarming.

We strongly condemn the widespread and
systematic persecution of minorities in the Middle East
on ethnic or religious ground and the indiscriminate
attacks, atrocities, killings and human-rights abuses
being perpetrated by ISIL and other terrorist groups,
in particular against Christians and other religious and
ethnic groups.Ukraine also expresses its deep concern
regarding the destruction of the cultural heritage in
Iraq and Syria, in particular by ISIL, including the
targeted destruction of religious sites and objects. We
support the Security Council decision that all Member
States shall take appropriate steps to prevent the trade
in Iraqi and Syrian cultural property and other items of
archaeological, historical, cultural, and rare scientific
and religious importance.

Ukraine supports the Security Council in
condemning the abduction of women and children, their
exploitation and abuse, which have been committed
by ISIL and other associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities. All such activities must be
stopped by all possible measures. This issue should
remain on the Security Council agenda and receive the
Council's due attention.

In its Foreign Ministry statement of 16 September
2014, Ukraine welcomed the outcome of the
International Conference on Peace and Security in
Iraq, held on 15 September 2014 in Paris. We expressed
our support concerning the efforts of the new Iraqi
Government aimed at strengthening the rule of law, at
ensuring inclusiveness for all political forces within the
federal institutions of power, and at fighting without
compromise manifestations of terror.

Ukraine, which is involved in a decisive fight of
its own against foreign-backed terrorists on its territory
and faces direct external aggression, shares the View
that the terrorist group ISIL is a threat not only to
Iraq and Syria, but also to the entire international
community. Ukraine supports all efforts aimed at
combating terrorism, unconditionally, regardless of
where or in what form it occurs.

