Mr. Konishi (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting on the subject of post-conflict
peace-building, the importance of which was stressed by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/1998/318) on Africa.

There is a common recognition throughout the
international community today that durable peace and
sustainable development are two sides of the same coin.
One cannot be achieved without the other. The achievement
of those two goals will require a coherent and
comprehensive approach.

Such an approach is particularly necessary in the
context of post-conflict peace-building. Indeed, it is
precisely in a situation where a conflict has been settled and
the roles of political, humanitarian and development actors
are intertwined, that the coordination of their respective
efforts becomes crucial. Japan thus subscribes fully to the
point made by the Secretary-General concerning the need
for a strategic framework for their activities during this
phase.

Let me address the three major categories of actors
that need to be engaged during the phase of post-conflict
peace-building one by one.

In the first category are those who play a political and
security role in the country concerned. The Security
Council certainly falls into this category, whether or not its
activities are in the form of peacekeeping operations. Other
notable actors in this category are regional organizations,
like the Organization for African Unity (OAU).

The second category of actors playing an important
role in post-conflict peace-building comprises of
humanitarian agencies, such as the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). In
the third category are development agencies, such as the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
World Bank.

The humanitarian and development agencies, in
collaboration with the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, have already done much to
improve coordination among the actors in all three
categories. For example, there is in place the practice of
deploying representatives of development agencies at an
early stage of peacekeeping activities. In addition, UNDP,
in collaboration with OCHA, is working out a set of
guidelines for efforts to be made by the Special
Representatives and Special Envoys of the Secretary-
General and by the Resident Coordinators. We believe
that such coordination efforts must also be made by the
Security Council within its own competence.

In the post-conflict phase there is a range of political
and security tasks which require the support of the
international community. First, there is the challenge of
national reconciliation. In this respect, the international
community, and particularly the Security Council, must
monitor the implementation of the peace accord and call
upon the parties concerned to make necessary efforts in
that regard. Efforts to foster an environment in which free
and fair elections can be held are also necessary. There
may also be a need to establish an international criminal
tribunal. These issues must be successfully addressed in
order to lay the foundation for effective humanitarian and
development assistance activities.

The Security Council may also be required to
provide support for humanitarian agencies in times of
political and social instability during the post-conflict
peace-building phase. Such support might range from
protecting humanitarian assistance operations to assistance
for the repatriation of refugees and the resettlement of
displaced persons.

The Security Council might also assist in the
collection of weapons and in mine-clearing actions,
thereby facilitating the return to normal daily life
throughout the society.

I would like to suggest that, in order to strengthen
the basis for coordination among various bodies and
agencies on the ground, the Security Council take into
consideration each of these roles as it formulates its
response to any conflict, and particularly as it decides on
the mandate of a peacekeeping operation.

As I mentioned earlier, the importance of efforts by
the international community in post-conflict peace-
building was stressed in the report of the Secretary-
General on Africa. Among the several ongoing conflicts
in Africa, I would like to touch on the conflict in the

 

Democratic Republic of the Congo, since it is the conflict
in that country which now poses the greatest threat to the
security of the region as a whole.

At this stage, I believe the international community
should make an effort to bring home to the parties
participating in the negotiations for a ceasefire in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that a cessation of
hostilities is just the beginning of a long peace process and
that they should pay due consideration to the basic elements
of post-conflict peace-building in negotiating the ceasefire
agreement. It would be most desirable for the ceasefire
agreement to include a political plan, such as a timetable,
for achieving a peace accord, an affirmation of their
commitment to ensuring free and unhindered access by
international humanitarian agencies to the people in need
and a demand that all parties refrain from laying additional
landmines, and that the locations of the landmines that have
already been laid be identified. If these elements are clearly
stated in the ceasefire agreement and subsequently observed
by all the parties concerned, the security environment and
social stability will be strengthened, thus paving the way
for more smooth post-conflict peace-building activities.

I wish to remind the Council that on 7 December the
General Assembly, in its resolution on the report of the
Secretary-General on Africa, stressed the importance of
improved coordination among the various bodies and
agencies of the United Nations system in assisting post-
conflict peace-building, reconciliation, reconstruction and
development in Africa. The Economic and Social Council
decided that in the coming year it would follow up on the
recommendations put forward in that report. There is a
clear need for these three major bodies of the United
Nations, including this Council, to pay due attention to each
other's actions and coordinate among themselves. It is
Japan's hope that the Security Council, for its part, will
take the necessary steps - such as establishing a channel
or a mechanism to ensure proper communication and
exchange of views with other bodies and agencies in the
United Nations system - so that it will be better prepared
to respond to future post-conflict situations that may require
action.

