Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Sir, for
personally presiding over this very important debate of
the Security Council. We acknowledge your presence,
Mr. President, and we thank the Secretary General for
his briefing.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Islamic Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

My country's statement will focus on the issue of
Palestine, for we believe it crucial to resolve that matter
in order to ensure peace and stability in the Middle
East.

As the Security Council once again takes up the
Palestinian question, we take note of and condemn the
ongoing acts of aggression by the occupying Power
against the inhabitants of the occupied Palestinian
territories. Unfortunately, everything seems to
indicate that the calls of the Security Council to end
the illegal occupation and the violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law by the Israeli
Government, as well as to bring the parties back to the
negotiating table, are not going to be translated into
concrete actions to reverse this complex situation. The
lack of political will in the Security Council to resolve
the Palestinian question is clear.

The occupying Power is openly and without fear
of consequences ignoring the continued calls of the
international community to end its illegal actions.
It is taking advantage of the inaction of the Security
Council and its reluctance to take up its responsibility
to identify Israel as a State that has committed war
crimes and occupied territories of the State of Palestine,
in violation of the resolutions of the Security Council
and of the General Assembly.

Against that backdrop, the suffering of the
Palestinian people is only increasing. Since October
2015, more than 160 Palestinians, including 29 children
and 7 women, have been killed by the occupation
forces and Israeli settlers living illegally on Palestinian
land. Overall in 2015, regretably, there were more than
15,000 Palestinians injured in various incidents and
attacks provoked by Israel.

At the same time, the number of the Palestinian men
and women who are humiliated, attacked, persecuted
and unjustly arrested by way of administrative
detentions continues to increase. They are attacked by
Israel's police and military forces, whose repressive
attitude is a manifestation of the prolonged military
occupation and the policy to colonize the territory.
We join the demand that Israel immediately release
imprisoned Palestinian children.

Venezuela condemns violence wherever it comes
from and in all its manifestations. Similarly, we condemn
attacks against Israeli civilians, who have been victims
of stabbings and other forms of violence. Since 2015,
that number totals approximately 18 people, according
to information from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

The world contiues to be shocked by the devastating
effects of the military operation Protective Shield, an
act of aggression against the civilian population that
killed more than 550 children and left behind thousands
of other children handicapped and still hospitalized.
Many have seen their futures cut short, as well as any
immediate hope of being able to resume their lives
in order to build a promising tomorrow. Even today,
humanitarian organizations continue to report cases
of children in Gaza with severe psychological trauma,
despite the attention and care they receive in treatment
centres. My country vigorously rejects the blockade
of Gaza, which since 2007 has kept the population in
a sort of ghetto that impacts the lives of millions of
Palestinians, in clear violation of international law.
We demand the end of that illegal policy against the
civialian population in Gaza.

Nothing seems to deter the systematic colonial
actions of the occupying Power, with its construction
of illegal settlements and destruction of Palestinian
property. The illegal land confiscation, the punitive
invasion and demolition of homes and the expulsion
of Palestinians from their land are part of the list of
grievances against the Palestinian people, particularly
displaced persons and refugees. Such is the case
with Israel's recent annexation of 370 acres of land
near Jericho, in the West Bank, which were declared
State-owned - act that has been condemned by the
Secretary-General and on which the Council has not
acted.

Faced with that situation, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela joins its voice to that of so many around
the world demanding that the Security Council
play a proactive role on this issue, in line with the
responsibilities conferred upon it by the Charter of
the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Such a role should make it possible
to address the Palestinian issue with determination and
a sense ofjustice. It is therefore a matter of Israel once
and for all ceasing its acts of aggression, ending the
occupation and sitting down to negotiate in good faith
with the Palestinians for an inclusive and definitive
politial solution to end the conflict in the framework
of the two-State solution, including accepting the
right of the Palestinians to live under internationally
recognized borders, in accordance with the Charter and
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and of
the Security Council.

Similarly, an equal footing for the parties is a
crucial prerequisite for any fair negotiations. To that
end, it is imperative that the State of Palestine be
incorporated as a fully fledged Member of the United
Nations. A decision in that regard would be a step in
the right direction towards achieving a firm and lasting
peace in the region.

Moreover, we must address as soon as possible the
repeated calls of the Palestinian National Authority
that the population of the occupied territories be placed
under international protection in accordance with the
Fourth Geneva Convention and resolution 904 (1994),
thus ensuring the integrity of the men and women of
Palestine in the face of the continuous and systematic
aggression of the occupying Power.

Let us act without double standards to judge
severely the Israeli policy of systematic violations of
human rights of the Palestinian people as well as of
international humanitarian law, in the same way that the
Council is ready to quickly condemn and punish other
countries. Let us be consistent with our ongoing calls
from the Council for accountability. The illegal actions
of the occupying Power against the Palestinian people
paint a picture of war crimes that must be put before
international criminal justice in order to determine
responsibility.

The stalemate in the negotiations undermines
the prospects for peace and creates frustration and
hopelessness among the Palestinian population, which
can be exploited by extremist groups to fuel hatred and
promote their terrorist agendas. With each failure in
the peace talks, the patience of Palestinian men and
women is eroded - after having endured more than
50 years of an illegal and brutal occupation that has
denied them their human rights and their right to self-
determination - in addition to eroding the expectations
of Palestinians in the international community and
multilateral organizations for addressing their just
cause.

Let us not disappoint that trust. Let us not wait for
the Palestinian people to rise up indignantly in a new
intifada. Let us not wait for its youth to be ensnared
by the violent extremism that plagues the region. There
will be no peace or stability in the Middle East until
the Palestinian question is resolved peaceably. Israel
must respect international law, halt its violence and
end its occupation of Palestine. We must act now. The
Council must assume its responsibility, and certain of
its members must show more political will, in order to
resolve this question. We ought to contribute effectively
to making the existence of the State of Palestine a
reality i a free and sovereign nation in a zone ofpeace.

