Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to associate the United Kingdom with the
statement on behalf of the European Union to be
delivered later by the Ambassador ofItaly.

May I congratulate Jan Egeland on his
appointment and thank him for an excellent briefing.
His words were a sobering account, which underline
the imperative for the international community to work
collectively and decisively in moving from rhetoric to
effective action in promoting the culture of protection.

There have been some recent positive
developments: the updated aide-memoire, a road map,
Security Council missions that allow the Council to
emphasize the need to protect civilians actually in the
field, a continued focus by the Council on protection
issues - and there the United Kingdom believes that
the Security Council has an essential role in
complementing the work done by other organs of the
United Nations - and lastly, the adoption by the
Council of resolution of 1502 (2003) on the protection
of humanitarian personnel in armed conflict.

But the recent and horrific attacks on the United
Nations and the International Committee of the Red
Cross headquarters in Baghdad demonstrate an
increasingly fragile environment to which humanitarian
personnel are more and more exposed. We all deplore
such attacks and acts of violence. We pay tribute to
those humanitarian workers who have lost their lives
while providing assistance to those in need, and we
remember those who today remain in captivity against
their will. And in that regard, we urge all captors to
release humanitarian personnel as a matter of urgency.

The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the lack or denial of access in many humanitarian
situations throughout the world. People without food,
water, shelter or medical supplies cannot wait for a
conflict to end in order to receive life-saving
assistance. We therefore take this opportunity to urge
all parties to armed conflict to comply with their
obligations to allow safe and unimpeded access by
humanitarian personnel to civilians in need of
assistance and to do that in accordance with
international humanitarian law. The other side of that
coin is that, collectively, the international community
must better address humanitarian crises where that
access is being denied.

We must all be deeply concerned about the
protection of women and children in situations of
armed conflict. Women, for example, are often
subjected to sexual violence, trafficking and mutilation.
These traumatic experiences are often compounded
further, even well after the end of conflict, in
circumstances where female victims of violence face
social exclusion and stigmatization.

The protection of children in armed conflict also
remains a key concern, especially when they are
recruited by force as soldiers, as we have heard in the
briefing. Situations where children are educated to
regard a gun as a protection tool, as a means of
obtaining food and security, are deeply disturbing.
Children are also tragically exposed to malnutrition,
disease and violence, as well as sexual, physical and
psychological abuse. So we urge all Member States to
sign and ratify and implement the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
Justice and reconciliation efforts also form an
integral part of the protection agenda and play a key
role in addressing violations of international
humanitarian law and in ending impunity. Central to
these efforts, of course, are national judicial systems.
That is why the Council's discussion in September of
transition justice and the rule of law was so relevant
and follow-up so important. In fact as we speak, the
United Kingdom, together with the Governments of
Finland and Jordan, is hosting in New York a seminar
on developing holistic and integrated responses to
widespread human rights abuse.

Like Mr. Egeland, I would like to focus on next
steps. Our starting point should be his excellent
proposal for a ten-point platform for future action, and
we look forward to working with Council members, the
United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the United Nations
agencies, the other organs of the United Nations, and
others in taking this forward.

The United Kingdom would identify three
interconnected themes that collectively the United
Nations system should address as it carries those action
points forward. First, establishing robust frameworks
of application, including indicators for progress and
defining action to be taken in the event that these are
not met - that is what we mean by compliance.

Secondly, building solid field-based information
allied to rigorous analysis for robust frameworks of
application - that is what we mean by effective
monitoring and evaluation.

And thirdly, delivering outcomes from these first
two elements through an effective United Nations
system-wide institutional response - the right people
in the right place with the right skills at the right time -
that is what we mean by mainstreaming, because
institutional mainstreaming should cover who does
what, where and when. I am being very clear about co-
responsibilities. Changing the way we do things can
sometimes pose tough questions, but we cannot afford
to duck them. And that is why we strongly support and
welcome the Secretary-General's forthcoming
assessment of the entire United Nations system's
response to the problem of children and armed conflict,
and we hope that the Secretary-General will be able to
update the Council next month when we consider
children affected by armed conflict, but in particular,
we hope he will provide detailed proposals of how we
go forward.

We should be open ourselves to more reviews of
this type. But it is not just the United Nations system
that actually needs to respond. This actually requires
the wholehearted support of Member States and the
international community as a whole, and in that regard,
the United Kingdom would single out parallel
contributions that individual Member States should
make.

First, we must make every effort to implement the
resolutions contained in the aide-memoire, and the
Secretary-General's 54 recommendations on protection
set out in the road map. In this regard, we would
request the Secretary-General to provide us with an
update on the implementation of these commitments
when he next reports to the Council on this issue in
June 2004.

Secondly, we need to receive reports on how the
aide-memoire is performing as an operational tool in
the field, for example, what is working well and what
needs to be improved. This will help encourage an
integrated approach to promote connectivity between
New York and the field and identify potential gaps,
strengths and weaknesses. We should then consider
how we need to strengthen the existing framework.

Thirdly, we must work better at mainstreaming
protection issues into the Council's country-specific
considerations. That was reflected in what has been
done on Liberia, but we need to ensure that, in general,
these elements are reflected in the Secretary-General's
reports and included in peacekeeping mandates and
operations when necessary. In order to achieve that, we
need to improve inter-office work within our own
delegations and among our ministries back in our
capitals. But we also need to ensure that protection
measures transcend the work of this Council alone.
They need to feature in our own national policies and
make a real difference at the country level.

Fourthly, we should encourage all Member States
to sign and ratify the legal instruments that exist in the
broad protection agenda. The United Nations has an
important advocacy role in that regard.

Finally, we should not forget the merit of having
guiding principles of corporate social responsibility, in
order to ensure that the private sector and its practices
contribute towards the prevention and resolution of
violent conflict.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the
importance of coordination across the protection
agenda. This remains a key challenge for the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and one for
which it will require sustained support. Its work to
protect the vulnerable lies at the very heart of the
United Nations Charter and promotes a culture of
protection, an ideal that we all endorsed in the
Millennium Declaration of September 2000.

