Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I will be brief. I
see that Mr. Sevan has a lot to do before he can finalize
his mammoth work by 21 November and be ready to
hand over authority.

I should like to begin by joining other colleagues
in expressing our most strong condemnation of the acts
of terrorism that we have seen, the latest of which was
perpetrated yesterday against the International
Committee of the Red Cross. Such acts definitely
render even more difficult the work that needs to be
done.

Handing over a programme as complex as the oil-
for-food programme within six months, as mandated by
resolution 1483 (2003), must be extremely difficult. It
is clear that the challenges facing the Office of the Iraq
Programme are multifaceted and that the time leading
up to the termination of the programme will be one of
truly intensive work. It will involve the acceleration of
efforts not only to complete projects, but also to
undertake other essential activities, such as the
provision of essential humanitarian goods and services
to the population, while carrying out the phase-down
and termination activities of the programme, including
the necessary arrangements for the transfer of projects
and assets up to 21 November. It is essential that no
void should be created. To that end, we would welcome
a smooth transition in the delivery of the humanitarian
programme.

The deterioration of security conditions, and
particularly the reduction of United Nations staff in
Iraq from 769 to a core number and the redeployment
of the United Nations independent inspection agents,
will badly affect the prioritization of contracts, as well
as the negotiation and amendment of contracts,
especially those oriented to central and southern Iraq.

There is indeed a mammoth job to be done until
21 November. We commend Mr. Sevan and his team in
the Office of the Iraq Programme for the admirable
efforts they have made. I am sure that the Coalition
Provisional Authority and the relevant authorities in
Iraq will assume full responsibility and, in particular,
provide the Council with briefings, in compliance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. My
delegation takes note of the assurances that have been
given to us this afternoon by Mr. Thomson on behalf of
the Coalition Provisional Authority.

Of the countries listed in the Arab Human
Development Report 2002, Iraq ranks 110 out of 111.
That gives us a clear indication of the challenge we
face. The ravages of war and the constant insecurity we
have witnessed certainly serve to greatly exacerbate the
situation and to aggravate the challenges we need to
face. We think that the determination that has been
shown by Mr. Sevan's team - which I think will be
taken over by the authorities now in charge - provide
us with more confidence that that situation will be
transformed, despite the war situation. Sometimes war
not only prevents things from being done, but also
challenges us. The targets that have been presented
with regard to delivery by the Office for the Iraq
Programme provide good benchmarks for the post-
Madrid period. I look forward to seeing the situation
improve through the efforts and watchful presence of
the Council.

