Mr. Nabarro: I am delighted to have this
opportunity to speak to the Security Council today.
Two months ago, the Council adopted resolution 2177
(2014). It was a memorable day, for two reasons. At that
time, we were aware that the outbreak was advancing
very rapidly. We were also clear that a major and
intense response was needed. On that day, a resolution
was adopted with enormous support. Today for me is
also memorable. The reasons today are a combination
of hope and fear. There is hope, because the signs are
good, particularly in Liberia. But there is also fear,
because the virus is unforgiving. Any complacency and
it will punish us. I wish to thank the Security Council
for its continued attention to the current Ebola outbreak
and its consequences.

Much has happened since we last met. The response
capacities available to national and local authorities
have expanded substantially. The United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response is coordinating
support for what national Governments are doing, and
it is strengthening capacity in districts, counties and
prefectures. The degree to which societies are engaged
in the response has deepened. When societies take
responsibility for responding and partners align their
support, the authorities are able to react rapidly and
effectively. We are seeing that where the response
strategy is being implemented fully, transmission is
decreasing. While the total number of cases continues
to rise, the overall rate of increase really has begun to
slow. That is a good sign.

But the results are uneven among and within the
affected countries, and we are seeing quite a lot of
variation. The curve is bending in enough places to
give us the hope I described at the beginning. Because
transmission is still intense and rapid in many locations
and because the outbreak has spread geographically, we
realize that we still have a lot more to do. We see hot
spots in northern Guinea and western Sierra Leone, and
new transmissions in Mali. We must remain vigilant and
persevere with a flexible and well-adapted response. If
we take our eye off the ball, case numbers will climb
again, and we will all count the cost. The outbreak and
the threat that it poses to the region and the world will
not be over until the last case is identified, isolated and
under treatment.

The primary credit for progress in the fight against
Ebola goes to the communities that have made difficult
decisions to abandon generations of traditional practices.
Social mobilization has been the key to success - from
the safe burial of those who have died and caring for
the sick to limiting physical contact and improving
hygiene. Good medical care is also critical. That means
Ebola treatment units and community care centres
that are staffed by health personnel who know how to
treat Ebola. It means quicker identification of cases
as well as rapid contact-tracing and follow-up. Where
those ingredients are present, the rate of transmission
slows. But where they are absent, communities remain
vulnerable. And the fact is that too many communities
remain vulnerable.

As the Council has emphasized, Ebola is not
simply an urgent public health crisis, it is a complex
emergency. Ebola and the fear and stigma that it creates
have affected health-care provision, education, food
security, trade and economic well-being. We encourage
all engaged in the response to align their support so
that authorities can promote resilience, repair damage
and hasten recovery. That recovery starts now, even
during the outbreak, beginning particularly with the
restoration of essential services. In the longer term,
we must all work with the countries concerned so that
they can build back better and be able to prevent future
health crises of this kind.

The members of the Council and United Nations
States Members have already shown solidarity
and generosity by providing material and financial
assistance to the affected countries. But winning the
battle is going to require considerably more resources
and effort. We have met our initial short-term target
for the Secretary-General's Ebola Multi-Partner Trust
Fund of $100 million dollars. We thank all who have
so generously contributed. The money committed is
being disbursed quickly to fund critical programmes.
But by the end of the year, we would like to see much
more in the Fund in order to cover the cost of unfunded
priorities. Looking at it more broadly, we estimate
that the United Nations system will need $1.5 billion
through to March 2015 in order to play its part in ending
the outbreak. Much has been committed, but there is a
shortfall of over $600 million dollars. I am sure that we
will meet that shortfall. The affected countries will also
need support in order to enable the recovery of their
economic, social and health-care systems.

Another immediate priority is for self-sufficient,
staffed and equipped international responders. Again,
Governments from Africa, the Americas, Asia
and Europe have been generous, but more skilled
health personnel are needed to provide assistance
wherever it is most required - especially in remote
districts - because there is a need to chase this virus
down and root it out from its last hiding place. That
will require breaking the chains of transmission by
identifying and treating all cases and tracing their
contacts so that everyone in West Africa and beyond
is safe.

The longer the Ebola outbreak continues, the
greater the impact will be on the affected countries
and the greater will be the chance of its spreading to
other countries. That will require a continued, urgent
response from the international community. First,
we must mitigate the risk Ebola presents to health,
development, peace and security by ending the outbreak
as soon as possible. Secondly, we must ensure that
essential services can be maintained and that stability
can be preserved. Thirdly, we must start to look at
recovery and consider what it will involve.

As the Council knows well, strong systems and
institutions are the foundation of peace and prosperity.
Let us do our utmost to ensure that there are no more
outbreaks like this one ever again.

