Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I have the honour
to address the Security Council on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation group in New
York.

Our meeting today is taking place amid serious
concerns about this critical time and the intricate
situation in the Middle East. The intransigence of
Israel, the occupying Power, and its persistence in
its unilateral policies definitely undermine the two-
State solution and increase regional instability. It has
therefore become imperative that the international
community play a constructive and effective role to
reverse this deteriorating situation. We must also
enhance opportunities for a just, comprehensive and
lasting settlement to the conflict, based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions.

The situation in the region has been exacerbated
and tensions increased due to the illegal policies
of Israel, the occupying Power, in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, such
as the expulsion of Palestinians, the expansion of
settlements and the construction of the apartheid wall.
That state of affairs is being further aggravated by the
detention of thousands of Palestinians and the illegal
blockade of the Gaza Strip. Israel's practices thus not
only represent a flagrant violation of international law
and the Geneva Conventions, but also undermine the
stability, prosperity and security of the countries of the
region.

With the assistance of the international community,
the Palestinian Authority has achieved tangible success
in building the institutions of a potentially independent
Palestinian State. It has also developed a strategic plan
for achieving reform, economic development, social
justice, transparency, good governance and efficient
financial management. We acknowledge its remarkable
progress and considerable improvements in building
government institutions, as has been confirmed by
reports from the World Bank.

Nonetheless, the Israeli occupation remains the
main challenge to sustainable development, progress
and prosperity in Palestine. Israel's full control of Area
C, which makes up 60 per cent ofthe West Bank, imposes
an enormous price on Palestine. Israel holds most of the
agricultural land, natural resources - including water
resources - and land reserves, thus damaging the
territorial integrity of, and restricting access to, Area
C, where the settlements are located. That consequently
stifles Palestinian economic development and limits
the Palestinians' capacity to utilize much of their land
and most of their natural resources.

It is worth noting that the economic losses directly
attributable to the ongoing Israeli occupation are
estimated at $7 billion a year. That is a devastating
factor that not only jeopardizes the gains already
achieved, but also inflicts serious damage on the
Palestinian economy and curbs its growth.

Sustainable economic growth and institution-
building require further attention and support on the
part of the international community. The current fiscal
crisis could jeopardize the existence of the Palestinian
Authority's institutions altogether. It is high time for the
international community to take urgent action to lift the
Israeli restrictions and help the Palestinians overcome
the challenges posed by Israeli occupation. This
should be done through parallel investment in both the
political and economic areas. We must therefore work
together to compel Israel to honour its responsibilities
under international law and to facilitate Palestinians'
unimpeded access to their lands and natural resources.
At the same time, the international community is invited
to unite in a sense of urgency to increase financial
and economic support to the Palestinian Authority.
It is also important that the international community
work to help free the Palestinian economy from Israeli
hegemony.

It is self-evident that the building of State
institutions in Palestine will definitely enhance
regional peace, security and stability. Hence, we
emphasize the need to continue international efforts
to end the Israeli occupation and support the national
aspirations of the Palestinian people. It is therefore the
duty of the entire international community to render
all forms of assistance to the Palestinian Authority,
including financial and economic support, so as to lay
the foundations of a modern, democratic and viable
State.

We should keep in mind that assistance is vitally
needed to help the Palestinian Authority address
the needs of its people and protect and maintain the
gains already achieved. We must commit ourselves to
enabling the Palestinian people to realize their right
to freedom, self-determination, independence and the
establishment of the sovereign State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

In conclusion, with regard to the situation in Syria,
I would like to express our unequivocal support for
the efforts of the Joint Special Representative of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States for
Syria, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, in achieving a peaceful
settlement and establishing peace and security in Syria.

