Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to participate in
today's meeting on Sierra Leone in my capacity as
Chair of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. I very
much welcome this opportunity to brief the Council on
the activities of the Peacebuilding Commission in
partnership with the Government of Sierra Leone and
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) in Freetown.

On 15 December, the Commission and the
Government of Sierra Leone undertook a review of the
implementation of the Peacebuilding Cooperation
Framework. Drawing on a comprehensive progress
report prepared with the support of UNIPSIL and the
Peacebuilding Support Office, the review meeting
resulted in concrete recommendations for all relevant
stakeholders, including the Security Council.

As noted in the review meeting, significant
progress has been made in further consolidating peace
in Sierra Leone. However, impressive achievements in
the areas of peace and security have not yet resulted in
concrete peace dividends for the population. The
country continues to face difficult socio-economic
challenges, and the legacies of the decade-long civil
war remain largely unaddressed.

Youth unemployment and marginalization
represent one of the greatest threats to Sierra Leone's
stability. The lack of progress in that area is
particularly worrying in light of the increased use of
Sierra Leone as a transit point for drug trafficking. An
indolent youth population with few opportunities for
advancement and gainful employment is vulnerable to
becoming foot soldiers for and Victims of a drug
culture. Furthermore, the global food and financial
crises risk undermining the Government's efforts to
meet the high expectations of the population and to
provide the much-awaited peace dividends.

The Government of Sierra Leone is aware of
those challenges and emerging threats and is taking
steps to address them. The President's Agenda for
Change, which was welcomed by the Peacebuilding
Commission at its review meeting, represents a
comprehensive policy statement and a road map for
reform. It also establishes key priorities and assistance
modalities for the country.

Having charted a clear path towards reform, the
Government must now show the resolve to act and
deliver on its promises. In order to do so, it will need
sustained support from its national and international
partners. The Peacebuilding Commission has called on
all stakeholders to rally behind the priorities and
objectives of the President's Agenda for Change and to
provide adequate support for its implementation.
5

The United Nations has played and must continue
to play an important role in supporting Sierra Leone's
efforts for peace consolidation. The creation of the first
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone is a groundbreaking innovation for the United
Nations system. Under the leadership of Mr. Michael
von der Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations family in Sierra
Leone is taking critical steps in creating a truly
integrated Vision and approach with regard to
peacebuilding. The Joint Vision for the United Nations
Family in Sierra Leone, which was welcomed by the
Peacebuilding Commission, is a critical achievement in
its own right and must be well resourced and
implemented. In order to do so effectively, UNIPSIL
must be fully staffed and work in close partnership
with other bilateral and multilateral partners. Support
from the United Nations is especially needed in the
areas of youth employment and empowerment,
addressing drug trafficking and organized crime and
further good governance reforms, including support for
the constitutional review process and the work of the
Anti-Corruption Commission.

In the current global financial environment, there
may be pressures to shift limited resources from a
relatively stable country such as Sierra Leone to other
regions in the world where urgent crises occur.
However, we must bear in mind that the peace
consolidation agenda in Sierra Leone is not yet
finished. There is a continuing need to maintain, and
even expand, existing levels of donor support.
Otherwise, we risk reversing the gains made to date
and impacting not only the stability of Sierra Leone but
the whole subregion. As a result, the Peacebuilding
Commission will redouble its efforts to mobilize
additional resources for peacebuilding in Sierra Leone,
especially through broadening the donor base and
strengthening partnerships with the private sector. We
are considering ways to ensure that in the months
ahead, as Mr. von der Schulenburg indicated.

In conclusion, allow me to commend the
Government of Sierra Leone and all the national
stakeholders for their constructive engagement with the
Peacebuilding Commission. Let me also use this
occasion to thank UNIPSIL for assisting the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Government of
Sierra Leone in that regard. The integrated structure of
UNIPSIL and the strategic leadership by the Executive
Representative will continue to be extraordinarily

important for effective United Nations support of
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone.

