Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I very much
appreciate the Argentine presidency's inviation for
Spain to participate in this bi-annual debate on the
situation in Haiti. I see that as an acknowledgment
of my country's commitment to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and to
strengthening institutions and the socioeconomic
development of Haiti.

I welcome the presence among us, for the first time,
of the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Haiti and Head of MINUSTAH, Ms. Sandra
Honore. I wish her every success in her new. important
and difficult role. I would like to welcome the
Ambassador of Haiti, Mr. Denis Regis, and I wish him
all the best in his new and important role.

The Secretary-General has submitted a detailed
report (S/2013/493), which has already been referred
to and which I value and appreciate a great deal.
Spain shares the concern reflected in the report as to
the stagnation in the political situation in Haiti and
the apparent deadlock in the holding of the partial
legislative and municipal elections that are supposed to
take place before the end of the year. Like MINUSTAH
and the rest of the international community in Haiti, we
call on representatives of the executive and legislative
branches of Haiti to reach an agreement on this matter
in the coming weeks. If they manage to do so, it would
be an expression of mutual goodwill and a sense of
statehood as reflected specifically in progress towards
the formation of a transitional Electoral Council.

Spain welcomes the progress in the area of security
made by Haiti throughout 2013. Given that positive
development, Spain reaffirms its commitment to
the current security model in Haiti, which relies on
MINUSTAH staff for the maintenance of a safe and
stable environment throughout the country, as well
as with police forces to meet tasks associated with
prosecuting crime.

However, we agree that MINUSTAH should be
looking to reconfigure gradually, eventually reducing
its number of troops with missions focusing on
assisting civilian populations over the medium-term,
especially during emergencies. We very much look
forward to a report to that effect, due to be submitted
by the Secretary-General to the Security Council in
March 2014. At the same time, the Haitian National
Police should continue to be strengthened so that it can
assume the functions turned over to it by MINUSTAH.

In terms of human rights, we encourage the
Government of Haiti to move forward with its
commitment to ratify various United Nations
Conventions on the matter, and to take measures for
the fulfilment of recommendations made to Haiti in
the context of the latest universal periodic review
carried out in Geneva. In particular, Spain is concerned
about sexual and gender-based violence, with alarming
figures in Haiti made worse by frequent impunity for
such crimes.

In the field of development cooperation, Spain
reiterates its commitment to Haiti. My country is one
of the major donors in Haiti, with our cooperation
especially focused on access to safe drinking water,
the education sector, rural development and the fight
against malnutrition. We believe that the cooperation
of all stakeholders with the coordination mechanism
for external support put in place by the Government
of Haiti in late 2012 is very important to the efficiency
and transparency of aid.

We want to increase the number of Spanish
businesses in Haiti, which are clearly still insufficient.
We forecast that foreign investment will be a key
instrument to promote socioeconomic development in
the country. To that end, it is necessary to ensure legal
certainty for foreign investment, strengthen Haitian
institutions such as the investment facilitation centre,
and implement agreements pertaining to the promotion
and reciprocal protection of investments.

Both from a development cooperation and
investment point of View, it is essential to maintain
political stability, over which some doubts currently
exist. For that, the role and work of MINUSTAH
is indispensable. Therefore, we reiterate our strong
support and commitment to the renewal of the mandate
of MINUSTAH and its presence in Haiti over the
coming years.

Spain of course associates itself with the statement
delivered by the Deputy Head of the delegation of the
European Union.

In conclusion, as Argentina's presidency comes to
an end this month of August, I am pleased to have this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, and your country
for your active and successful role during this period.

