Mr. Herasymenko (Ukraine): I would like to start by
expressing my delegation's condemnation of the recent
terrorist attacks in Afghanistan, and our condolences
to the relatives of the victims and to the Government
of Afghanistan. We hope that those responsible will be
brought to justice.

I, too, join others in expressing our gratitude to
Special Representative Yamamoto and his team for
their efforts in Afghanistan.

While we align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later today by the observer of the European
Union, I would also like to raise several points in my
national capacity.

We take positive note of the Afghan National Unity
Government's recent accomplishments in addressing
the country's challenges. First, we are seeing
encouraging progress on the political front with high-
level merit-based appointments, as well as consistent
efforts to counter corruption and create an environment
conducive to future parliamentary and presidential
elections by strengthening electoral institutions and
improving the relevant legislation.

Secondly, the Government is moving forward
with justice-sector reform, particularly its anticipated
revision of the penal code in order to incorporate State
obligations under the Rome Statute and the United
Nations conventions against corruption and torture,
which will ensure that those who commit war crimes
and crimes against humanity will be held accountable.

Thirdly, the protection of human rights and the
promotion of gender equality have received additional
impetus. The Government continues to work diligently
to draft legislation aimed at combating and ending
the harassment of women and children. Overall, the
country's progress in the area of human rights has
been impressive.

Fourthly, efforts to counter the production of illicit
drugs used for financing terrorism have been resumed,
resulting in the successful conduct of several counter-

narcotics operations, while the eradication of opium
poppy fields has almost doubled.

Lastly, the Kabul process conference held on 6 June
at President Ghani's initiative should help to foster
regional cooperation on peace and security.

At the same time, those achievements have
been accompanied by complex internal political
developments and increased tensions between political
parties in anticipation of the upcoming election season.
I should emphasize that it is absolutely imperative to
preserve what has been achieved with such enormous
effort and sacrifice. It is up to the Afghan stakeholders to
demonstrate maturity and put aside their differences for
the sake of achieving a sustainable and comprehensive
peace and national accord.

Meanwhile, terrorism remains a major threat to
Afghanistan and directly affects peace and stability
in the region, with the Taliban announcing its annual
offensive and affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) raising their heads. The attempts
by several regional players to cooperate with certain
factions and the Taliban, ostensibly with the goal
of preventing ISIL from expanding its presence in
Afghanistan, are alarming. We express concern at
those endeavours. Tactics based on the notion that the
enemy of my enemy is my friend are questionable in
general and should in no way be applied to contacts with
terrorists. We are of the view that such collaboration
can only exacerbate the already difficult situation in
the country. Let us not forget the lessons of the not-so-
distant past.

It is also disturbing that, despite extensive military
pressure and the attempts to eradicate the ISIL
presence in Afghanistan, the group launched a series of
high-profile attacks in Kabul, including on a military
hospital in March and, more recently, in the heart of
the diplomatic district in May. All of that creates an
atmosphere of fear and terror, thereby contributing
to instability and prolonged conflict, and provokes
social frustration and protest, as we saw recently in the
capital. In that light, we call on the Afghan authorities
to conduct a thorough investigation into those attacks
so as to prevent their recurrence in future, as well as
to improve the protection of diplomatic missions and
their personnel.

Let me also take this opportunity to echo and support
the call of the Afghan Ambassador on the Council to
strictly enforce and strengthen the sanctions regime.

We are also concerned by the continued suffering
of civilians, especially the high number of losses
among women and children as a result of the fighting,
as well as from landmines and explosive remnants of
war. We note the Government's commitment to the
prevention and the mitigation of civilian casualties,
as well as its intention to ratify Protocol V to the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. In that
regard, we call on international humanitarian demining
actors, in particular the United Nations Mine Action

Service, to work together with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) with a
view to promoting mine-risk education programmes
and assisting the Government in conducting
mine-clearance operations.

The growing number of internally displaced
persons, as well as of refugees repatriated to
Afghanistan, is another point of concern. The
International Organization for Migration estimates that
at least 600,000 refugees could return this year. Yet the
reports by UNAMA about the sharp increase in civilian
casualties during clashes between the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces and the Taliban show
how unsafe this situation is for the affected population.
In that regard, we also regret that the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees had
to significantly cut cash grants, from $400 to $200, to
Afghan returnees while they continue to struggle with
severe food insecurity.

Regional cooperation is crucial for stabilizing the
situation in Afghanistan. In order to bring sustainable
peace and prosperity to the country, key stakeholders
have to spare no effort in confronting the major regional
threat posed by terrorism. We agree with the Secretary-
General's findings that this goal can be achieved
with the improvement of bilateral relations between
Afghanistan and Pakistan through a constructive
dialogue. We commend the readiness of the Afghan
leadership to extend the hand of friendship and to seek
ways of improving bilateral relations with neighbours
by developing mutual security cooperation. In this
vein, it is imperative to strengthen border controls to
cut terrorist flows and to deprive Taliban fighters of
shelter or any kind of assistance.

We also hope that the arrangements made at the
Kabul process conference on 6 June will help to reboot
peace talks and enlist neighbours in a regional fight
against terrorism. In that regard, we urge the guarantors
in the Quadrilateral Coordination Group to assist in
accomplishing these endeavours.

In conclusion, Ukraine would like to reiterate
its strong support for UNAMA activities in assisting
Afghanistan to cope with security, economic and
development challenges, as well as to enact national
reforms aimed at creating a sound foundation for peace,
security and prosperity, both in the country and in the
wider region. We expect that the strategic review of
UNAMA's mandate, priorities and related resources,
as requested by resolution 2344 (2017) and to be
completed by this July, will result in enhanced Mission
efficiency. Our common goal is to make irreversible the
process of transformation of Afghanistan into a steady
and prosperous nation that lives in peace and harmony
with all of its neighbours.

