Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank you very much, Sir, for convening today's
thematic debate and for reminding us very explicitly of
the four-minute rule. I shall try to do my best on that.

I of course express appreciation to the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie
Amos, and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, for their
briefings. We also welcome the eighth report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/20lO/579).

India firmly believes that it is the solemn
responsibility of the international community to protect
civilians and safeguard their human rights. Naturally,
this also entails that the peacekeeping missions that we
mandate should be adequately resourced.
Notwithstanding the development of International
humanitarian law, United Nations human rights law and
Security Council resolutions and mandates, civilians
continue to suffer. Even more unfortunate is the fact that
civilians suffer a disproportionate share of casualties as
compared to belligerents. It is they who bear the brunt
of violence in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Efforts to protect civilians may be hampered by a
variety of reasons, such as the unwillingness of parties
to a conflict to abide by international humanitarian law,

the lack of resources, information gaps, or the lack of
understanding about what peacekeepers should and can
do to protect civilians. In such a situation, new and
innovative approaches are required that are
comprehensive in nature. The essential elements of
such an approach include, inter alia, strict compliance
with and respect for international humanitarian law,
human rights law and international law; no impunity;
the prosecution of those responsible for committing
serious crimes; the development of country context-
specific United Nations mandates; the development of
requisite benchmarks to assess progress; the
predeployment training of troops; and a well-charted
mandate, along with appropriate guidelines to guide
the mission in its work.

India believes that the primary gap is that of
resources. First of all, the number of troops sanctioned
for a peacekeeping mission should be such that it is in
a position to provide meaningful support to national
authorities. Similarly, those responsible for the
development of normative frameworks and guidelines
for the mission should invariably include the protection
of civilians as necessary component.

The roots of peacebuilding go deep into Security
Council mandates on peacekeeping. In providing
mandates, the Security Council needs to get a clearer
idea of operational realities. No achievable mandate
can be finalized without the meaningful involvement
and substantive consultations with troop- and police-
contributing countries. In this context, it is absolutely
necessary that unachievable mandates not be generated
for the sake of achieving political expediency.
Mandates must be driven by national requirements and
not by the priorities of others. In working on mandates,
emphasis should be on understanding and providing
what host Governments require, not an exercise in
collating can be given to them.

Another important aspect of the protection of
civilians in the armed conflict is the strengthening of
national capacities. The protection of civilians is a
national responsibility and requires institutions and
conditions that are conducive to their functioning.
Peacekeepers must be there to aid in the development
of these national capacities.

In the view of my delegation, more serious
consideration and thought need to go into the manner
in which these capacities may be developed. Such
capacities and institutions must be relevant to the
realities of the area in which United Nations operations
are deployed. In this regard, the experiences and
capabilities of developing countries, particularly those
that have gone through successful nation-building
exercises, would be of immense value. The Security
Council must find ways and means to harness these
capacities.

The Security Council must also be in a position to
give clear policy guidance to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). The independent
study commissioned by DPKO last year succinctly
stated that the confusion over the Council's intent is
evident in the lack of policy, guidance, planning and
preparedness. We stand ready and willing to engage in
the development of this process.

India is committed to contributing, through its
peacekeepers and its national capacities, to the
promotion of peace and security and to the role of the
United Nations in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Before I conclude, I must state that the
references made to the Indian state of Jammu and
Kashmir by the representative of Pakistan were not
only untenable, but also had no place in today's debate.

