First, I would like to commend Germany for considering the links between climate change and security as one of the main priorities of its term on the Security Council. I would also like to commend Mr. Jenea and the speakers who followed him for their briefings. At a time when the response to the global health crisis caused by coronavirus disease is mobilizing the attention of all, it is important not to forget the threats to international security linked to environmental risk, in particular to climate change and the destruction of natural biotopes, and to strengthen our collective action on this matter. A world in a state of climate emergency, such as ours, is an endangered world exposed to increased security risks and new threats. It is to anticipate, prevent and limit those effects that the international community must act. In that context, I would like to share with the Council three beliefs. The first is that the repercussions of climate change and the collapse of biodiversity on international security must imperatively become a key element of the conflict prevention agenda. The second is that a rigorous and regular analysis of these risks is necessary and in the international public interest; the United Nations must play a central role in this regard. The third is that this risk analysis must be accompanied by preventive measures to be implemented by national Governments, regional organizations, development partners and United Nations agencies. On the basis of these beliefs, France wishes to work with all Member States on the several proposals we have already shared, including the following main two. The first proposal aims to adopt a collective tool that would analyse and give early warning of the impacts of climate change on international peace and security. Some data and analytical tools already exist, but they are dispersed among States and even within the United Nations, between its various agencies, and in think tanks. It is about bringing them together in a single document and giving them significant visibility. What is missing is a whistle-blower, such as what the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change does for climate change. France would like the Secretary- General to play that role by presenting to the General Assembly and to the Security Council a report every two years that takes stock of the risks to peace and security posed by the impacts of climate change, in all regions of the world and with different projections in time. This is the only way to put in place truly appropriate responses to the current threats in the Sahel, parts of Asia and island States. It is also the only way to foresee future threats and to help the most vulnerable countries cope with the pressures they will face in the decades to come. The second proposal concerns the role of the United Nations in developing recommendations for concrete actions. Faced with these security risks, we must mobilize a wide range of tools and strengthen the capacities of the Secretariat in terms of climate expertise and coordination. In some cases, such as after an extreme weather event, emergency humanitarian measures will be required in order to save lives and ensure security, but also to provide the means for reconstruction. In other cases, it will be necessary to help communities adapt to the inevitable rise in sea levels and soil degradation. Sometimes it will be necessary to pre-empt threats by providing small producers with insurance mechanisms that will allow them to restart economic activity quickly after a climate disaster, rather than have to migrate to other areas. In that framework, the work of the Climate Security Mechanism is invaluable, but it must be strengthened, in particular with the appointment of a Special Envoy for climate security. In any case, the United Nations must play an important role in developing these recommendations and then in coordinating the efforts that must be implemented as a matter of priority by national Governments, regional organizations and international partners. Faced with these certain risks, we cannot take refuge in denial or disinformation. We can anticipate and respond to them and prevent conflicts. We must act now - that is the role of the United Nations and the Council, as well as France's commitment. That is why we support the idea of submitting a draft resolution to the General Assembly aimed at implementing the proposals made today.
