Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the presence here of the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacic'. We share his comments. We
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for
his briefing on the work of the United Nations mission
in Kosovo. We also listened very carefully to statement
made by Ms. Vlora Citaku.

Given the trajectory of the discussion, I would like
to make a number of comments. First of all, resolution
1244 (1999) was and remains the only platform for
resolving the situation in Kosovo. No one has the
right unilaterally to revise the resolution. Security
Council resolutions may be altered only by the Council
itself. Secondly, a lot has been said about the need for
recognition and the need for truth. I agree with that.
It is true that, to resolve the very complex issues of
Kosovo, they need to be acknowledged and we need to
speak of them truthfully.

We should not remain silent about the real challenges
in the province. Unfortunately, the main part of today's
discussion has been devoted not to these problems
and the issue of stability in the Balkans, but rather to
technical and organizational matters. Nevertheless,
the situation in the province is one of constant crisis
and legal scepticism. The political situation remains
unstable. Conflict with the Kosovo opposition, which
demands a rejection of the agreement on the association/
community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo
and a revision of the border with Montenegro, is
becoming increasingly brutal. Instead of defending its
position through dialogue, the opposition has decided
to use violence.

The European Union-facilitated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina is a mechanism for normalizing
the situation in the province and yet, since August
2015, there has not been any progress. They key
pending issue is the establishment of an association/
community of Serb majority municipalities. The
reason for this is neglect by the Kosovar Albanian side
of their obligations and their attempts to revise them
unilaterally and, unfortunately, with the silent consent
of the European Union mediators. We hope that the
specialist court established to investigate the crimes
committed by the fighters of the Kosovo Liberation
Army will begin its work as soon as possible and will
not resume the unsuccessful methods of the work
of the former International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

We are convinced that criminals, no matter what
positions they currently occupy, must be punished. Time
is passing. It seems that there are already problems with
potential witnesses. In April, for example, a former
fighter of the Kosovo Liberation Army, Bedri Curri,
was killed. The only plausible reason for this crime
is that apparently he might have been able to testify
for the prosecution. We note the continuing gaps and
problems with regard to the rule of law in the province.
We have very serious doubts about the impartiality
of justice, the effectiveness of the work of judges and
prosecutors and are concerned about the high level of
corruption, the violations of the freedom of the press
and organized crime, including human trafficking and
drug trafficking. These problems need to be addressed.

The situation of the Kosovar Serbs remains very
difficult. There are still cases of physical violence
against them. In January, the participants of an
anti-governmental demonstration in Pristina desecrated
the unfinished Church of Christ the Saviour in that
city. The Kosovar police did nothing to intervene. I
also point to the graffiti on the cathedral in Pristina
praising the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
What is the meaning of that? There are other problems
as well. Serbian monasteries, churches and cemeteries
have once again become targets of violations and
desecration. The international presence must step
up it efforts to protect Serbian cultural and religious
heritage. A great deal has been said about international
requirements and the international presence. They are
exactly the international requirements we need to fulfil,
not just abstract slogans.

There are other problems as well. There have been
clear attempts by the Kosovar authorities to acquire
the Trepca mining complex, the main interest owner
of which is the Foundation for Serbia's Development,
a major employer of Kosovar Serbs in the north.
They are also major problems with Serb properties in
Kosovo. Some 30,000 units of Serb real estate have
been encroached upon. This is an old problem that has
not been resolved. A good example of this is the Visoki
Decani monastery, whose ownership is being contested.
We have demanded that these problems be resolved for
a long time in this Chamber. Those are international
demands and requirements.

The rate of return of refugees and internally
displaced persons is very slow. Furthermore, as we
see it, Kosovar Albanians are very interested in going
to Western Europe due to the extremely difficult
socioeconomic situation in the province. We would
like to point out that, owing to the weakness of law
enforcement and the security situation in general, the
province as a whole risks becoming a grey area in the
middle ofEurope, used as a refuge and a transit hub, not
only by representatives of organized crime, but also by
radical Islamists. All of this obviously is conducive to
the use ofthe territory of the province by extremists for
recruitment and training purposes.

As far as the graffiti about ISIL on the churches
that I mentioned, it is a clear sign very dangerous
attitudes among the locals. Kosovo is a leader in
Europe in terms of the number of combatants fighting
for ISIL per capita, while the population ofthe province
is less than 2 million. This is a problem that affects
not only the security of the Balkans, but Europe
as a whole. It requires far more attention. We will
see how the expected visa-free travel to Europe will
impact migration flows into Europe. We believe that
the solution to the situation is not to try to sweep the
problems under the carpet, but rather to urge Pristina
to immediately implement its obligations, including
first and foremost the establishment of the association/
community of Serb majority municipalities. That will
be a real litmus test for their readiness to respect the
independence of minorities and ensure their security.

It is not simply about shouting slogans, but about
undertaking concrete steps and ensuring security
and living up to the commitments undertaken in the
framework of the dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade. Further delays will lead to a continued
deterioration of the situation in and around Kosovo. We
think that it is also counterproductive to try to promote
Kosovo's membership in international organizations,
which we have been seeing more and more recently.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains valid. Given the current
unstable conditions, it is obviously very important
to maintain the United Nations presence in Kosovo,
through the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, and the Mission must have all the
necessary financial and human resources to carry out
its mandate.

Today's discussion has demonstrated the timeliness
of this issue. It is also very important to continue to
follow the situation closely. Statements that run
counter to this need also run counter to reality. In that
connection, we say that the appeals that have been made
today to radically reduce and drawdown the Mission
or even to reformat its mandate have no grounds. The
report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/407) clearly
states that a huge amount of work remains to be done
to build a democratic, multiethnic society in Kosovo.

