Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire is grateful to the United States
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
briefing on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery. The topic of
today's debate is all the more relevant as it comes in a
context marked by recurrent violations of international
treaties and Security Council resolutions that aim to
ban the production, stockpiling, transfer and use of
weapons of mass destruction.

As a State party to all treaties prohibiting nuclear,
chemical and bacteriological weapons, Cote d'Ivoire
shares the concerns of the international community in
the face of the worrying erosion of the non-proliferation
regime and the serious threats posed to international
peace and security. Persistent security tensions on the
Korean peninsula, fuelled by North Korea's nuclear
ambitions, as well as reports of violations of the
Security Council's sanctions regime, are representative
of the threats posed by the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction .

In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire asks that North Korea
respect its obligations, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We encourage the North
Korean authorities to take all the necessary measures
for the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
C6te d'Ivoire commends the recent measures taken by
Pyongyang to that effect, the most significant of which
remains the dismantling of its main nuclear test site at
Punggye-ri. We urge North Korea to do even more in
order to create an environment of mutual trust with all
States in the region, as well as all stakeholders to the
North Korean nuclear issue.

My country welcomes the calming of the situation
that resulted in the return of the remains of American
soldiers who died during the 1950-1953 Korean War,
and the historic summit of 12 June between President
Donald Trump and President Kim Jong Un. Lasting
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula will be
possible only through the commitment of all States
in the region to favour dialogue and the peaceful
settlement of their differences.

My country believes that stakeholders need to
build trust between each other. In that regard, we are
happy to note the improving relations between North
and South Korea, as manifested by the third summit
in one year between their respective Presidents, which
was held in Pyongyang in September. The summit was
another step towards the much-desired reconciliation
of the two Korean States and the realization of a
common ambition for a zone of permanent peace. The
summit also consolidated the Panmunjom Declaration
on Peace, Prosperity and Reunification of the Korean
Peninsula, which was signed on 27 April, as well as the
achievements of the two previous summits, particularly
the reduction of political and military tensions,
inter-Korean cooperation and denuclearization.

Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes the willingness of
the Korean leaders to engage in mutually beneficial
economic and humanitarian cooperation. We pay
tribute to the sponsors of that progress, notably the
United States of America and China, and we hope that
the ongoing dynamic of collaboration will lead to the
signing of a peace treaty and the total denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.

The Security Council has a duty to support and
accompany the ongoing normalization process. Its
firmness will also be decisive in the implementation
of the sanctions regime and its unity of action in
promoting respect for international treaties against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its conviction that only
a collective commitment by the Council to support
dialogue among all parties will result in the resolution
of the current crisis on the Korean peninsula. We
also reaffirm our commitment to the Virtues of
multilateralism and call for the strengthening of
international frameworks, within which consensual
solutions to contemporary challenges are developed.

