Ms. Bihamba (Spoke in French): I would like to
thank the Swedish delegation, which invited me here to
speak on behalf of Congolese women, who are too often
the victims of sexual violence and excluded from public
affairs management and peace negotiations.

I am a woman human rights defender and the
President of the Board of Directors of the Synergy of
Women for Victims of Sexual Violence, a platform of
35 organizations working to improve, promote, defend,
respect and protect the rights of women, especially
women victims of sexual violence. We are also involved
in governance, advocacy, human rights protection and
sustainable peacebuilding in North Kivu in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Today I would like to address three themes: the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO);
the increase in sexual violence against women and girls;
and the tense political climate following the failure to
hold elections within the constitutional deadlines.

The decision to close some of MONUSCO's
bases once again exposes the civilian population in
sensitive areas. Despite rapid deployment, help often
arrives too late, when the damage is already done. Due
to diminished financial resources, the Joint Human
Rights Office is no longer present on the ground, and
as a result is no longer able to effectively document
cases of serious human rights violations, which are
now reported by telephone. The population also fears
disorder and spillover on election day and hopes that
MONUSCO will train Congolese police officers with a
view to maintaining order and securing polling stations.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
situation of women, particularly victims of sexual
violence, is deteriorating day by day due to the
proliferation of armed groups. These groups are at
the root of recurring wars leading to mass rape and
displacement, mostly of women and their children.
Cases of rape and violence have increased this year by
more than 60 per cent in North Kivu province.

The political climate in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is tense due to the failure to hold
elections within the constitutional deadlines. Various
demonstrations have been repressed by the security
forces, resulting in civilian deaths, much material
damage - especially to Catholic convents and
churches - and the arbitrary arrests of leaders of the
citizen movement, opposition politicians and human
rights defenders. With five months to go before the
planned elections, an improvement in the political
atmosphere is far from being a reality for the activists
still in prison.

In addition to this political instability and the brutal
repression of dissenting voices, several legal reform
projects initiated by the Congolese Government tend to
further reduce freedom of expression and the Congolese
civic space. Among them, one is aimed at modifying
the operating regime of national and international
non-governmental organizations and another is aimed
at combating terrorism. If these reforms are adopted in
their current terms, the key principles of the rule of law
will be undermined.

The electoral law promulgated on 24 December 2017
constitutes a serious obstacle to the rights and freedoms
of Congolese. Among other constraints, it requires
candidates to reach a threshold of representativeness of
at least 1 per cent of votes at the national level. As a
result, in some electoral districts, no candidacy papers
for provincial elections had been filed by the deadline.
Moreover, this law particularly discriminates against
women in electoral races by not taking into account their
socioeconomic situation. The law requires candidates
to pay a $1,000 deposit, which is an astronomical
amount for women and young people, most of whom
live on less than $1 a day. The Congolese Women's
Forum on Resolution 1325, representing women from
all provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
have urged the authorities of the Republic to abandon
this provision.

The use of the voting machine proposed by the
Government and the Independent National Electoral
Commission has also been challenged by political
actors and the majority of the population for fear of
electoral fraud. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
currently has a population in which over 65 per cent of
the people are illiterate, most of them women and young
people, who will have enormous difficulty in using the
machine, which has been programmed in French.

Finally, in my capacity as a woman human rights
defender and Chair of the Board of Directors of
Synergy of Women for Victims of Sexual Violence,
and on behalf of all women victims of abuse, we
recommend the following to the Security Council and
to States Members of the United Nations: to pressure
the Congolese Government to implement a policy
that genuinely promotes women's participation in
decision-making bodies and women's candidacies for
appointments; to call on the Government to respect
freedom of expression, the right to demonstrate and the
civic space of the Congolese population; to demand that
the Government respect the New Year's Eve agreement
and the Constitution, that is, to respect the rule of law;
to have MONUSCO restore bases in sensitive areas to
ensure the effective protection of civilians and support
the ongoing electoral process; to direct the Human
Rights Office to effectively document human rights
violations by going into the field; and to materially
support civil society organizations for the promotion
and defence of women's rights so that they can provide
leadership training for women leaders with a view to
their gaining access to decision-making positions.

I thank you once again, Mr. President, for honouring
me, as a woman human rights defender, with this
opportunity to make the voices of the voiceless heard.

