Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have read the twenty-fifth report of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
on the situation in Darfur and wish to comment
on its assessment of some of the developments
mentioned therein.

The report quite rightly notes that progress has
been made in normalizing the situation in Darfur,
including the Jebel Marra area. We welcome the
announcement made by the Sudanese authorities
concerning the extension of the unilateral ceasefire
regime. It is important that the regime be more than
mere paper - since early this year, we have had no
report of armed clashes between the Sudanese army
and the rebels. Thanks to the efforts of the authorities,
the number of intercommunity clashes and the level
of crime have declined. We are witnessing progress
in the implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, including in the demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants. We are also seeing
ongoing inter-Darfurian dialogue and consultations.

We also note the steps taken by the Sudanese
Government to ensure humanitarian access to Darfur, in
particular the development by the Sudanese authorities

of guidelines to streamline the process. We also see
very positive developments in the resolution of issues
faced by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, such as the issuance of visas and
customs clearance of assets for contingents. Against
that background, however, the behaviour of some
opposition groups in setting additional requirements
to continue the negotiations offer a stark contrast. We
believe that the external sponsors of the rebels should
encourage them to be more constructive.

With regard to the investigation on Darfur, the
nature and content of the report of the Office of the
Prosecutor has been the same year after year. Once
again, the Council is being asked to provide so-called
follow-up on the situation in Darfur that we believe to
be inappropriate. We do not understand why appeals to
compel States parties to the Rome Statute to shoulder
their responsibilities are made in the Council Chamber.
In our view, if there is no unity among those States
about how they should execute arrest warrants issued
with respect to Darfur, that should be discussed within
the system that governs the Rome Statute, that is, the
Assembly of States Parties and its subsidiary bodies.
Attempts to exert pressure through the Security Council
on those who disagree are counterproductive.

On more than one occasion, we have called
attention to the fact that the obligation to cooperate, as
set forth in resolution 1593 (2005), does not mean that
the norms of international law governing the immunity
of the Government officials of those States not party
the Rome Statute can be repealed, and presuming the
contrary is unacceptable. However, once again, the
Office of the Prosecutor does not wish to consider that.

As occurred recently with respect to the situation
in Libya, the issue of drawing on resources from the
United Nations budget has been raised. Everyone is
well aware of our position on that subject so we will
not repeat it.

In conclusion, we note that the activities of the
Court are not conducive to attaining the goals ofjustice
and sustainable peace held by the Security Council and
the international community as a whole.

