Mr. Mohd. Radzi (Malaysia): It was not long
ago that Timor-Leste gained its independence, with the
assistance of the United Nations. With the continuing
active involvement of the United Nations and the
determination of its leaders and people, that young
nation was acclaimed as a success story in United
Nations peacebuilding and nation-building efforts.
However, the recent eruption of violence and civil
unrest has threatened to undo the painstaking efforts
and sacrifices to bring progress and development to the
people of that sovereign nation. We firmly believe that,
through this body, the international community has an
obligation to ensure that peace and stability continue to

prevail in Timor-Leste. Only then will that young
nation be able to proceed with the implementation of
its national development programmes to attain its
development goals.

It was also with a similar sense of obligation that
Malaysia, with its limited capacity, responded
positively and promptly to the emergency request by
the Government of Timor-Leste to assist in restoring
law and order in that country. Currently, a complement
of Malaysian police forces and 333 military personnel
are being deployed. They are operating closely with the
defence and security forces from Australia, New
Zealand and Portugal.

It is quite heartening to hear from Mr. Martin and
the Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste that the
situation has improved and that signs of a return to
normalcy are beginning to emerge. But let us not forget
that the unexpected disturbances and civil disorder
were actually a wake-up call that Timor-Leste is still in
its fragile stages of nation-building and that the United
Nations should stand ready to come to its assistance
when needed.

Malaysia welcomes the decision of the Secretary-
General to send Mr. Martin as a Special Envoy to
Timor-Leste to assess the current situation and
facilitate political dialogue. We call on the Security
Council, in close consultation with Timor-Leste, to
continue to conduct a thorough assessment of the
underlying problems faced by Timor-Leste, including
social and economic factors, in order to find long-
lasting solutions. Let us not overlook such factors as
poverty, unemployment and the lack or slow pace of
economic development, among others. In essence, we
feel that the Council, working closely with Timor-
Leste, should examine all possible elements that could
serve as impediments to peace and development and
address them with the emplacement of a broad-based
United Nations presence and engagement in sectors
requiring United Nations assistance, including the
security sector.

Given the fragility of the security situation in
Timor-Leste and the need to rebuild the confidence of
the people, especially in this period leading to their
presidential and parliamentary elections, we strongly
feel that it will be necessary for the Security Council to
consider the placement of a full-fledged peacekeeping
operation, as appropriate. The deployment of a
peacekeeping operation, besides the immediate need of

S/l'V.5457

 

a police force under the United Nations umbrella to
sustain law and order, would be essential until the
United Nations is confident that cohesive national
police and defence forces have been fully re-
established.

On the proposal for a rollover of the mandate of
UNOTIL to allow for sufficient time to carefully and
comprehensively assess the situation in Timor-Leste,
my delegation agrees that a serious evaluation would
be necessary on any proposal for extension. In that
connection, we support the suggestion of Timor-Leste
that a robust United Nations police, military and
civilian mission is indispensable to assist the people of
Timor-Leste to consolidate their hard-won peace and
freedom. We stand ready to provide additional police
contingents when the United Nations makes a decision
in that direction.

My delegation is also concerned that more than
133,000 internally displaced persons are living at
various locations in Dili and other areas throughout the
country. Priority must be assigned to providing
protection, food, water, sanitation, health care and
shelter to those internally displaced persons before
encouraging their return. We would like to commend
the contributions that have been made and we call on
the United Nations system to continue providing for
the needs of those people.

Finally, we would also like to call on all parties in
Timor-Leste to continue their political dialogue and
engagement involving all relevant stakeholders, to
settle their differences peacefully and to work towards
national unity and reconciliation.

