Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
the Secretary General, as well as The Most Reverend
and Right Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem, for their
valuable briefings. I would also like to express our
appreciation to the presidency for choosing the topic of
today's debate, as the last formal debate on mediation
in the Security Council took place in April 2009 (see S/PV.6108). It is high time for the Council to take stock
of recent developments in this arena.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
Mediation Support Unit for their efforts in promoting
mediation as the most costeffective method of conflict
resolution. Conflict prevention and crisis management
through mediation are one of the founding principles
of the United Nations, and we cannot underemphasize
its significance to our work in the Council. We need to
take all possible steps to further enhance the mediation
capacity of the Organization.

We live in a world of multifaceted challenges to
peace and stability that involve a countless number of
actors. The United Nations cannot always be expected
to fulfil its role in safeguarding international peace and
security by itself. Regional organizations, individual
Member States and even non-governmental entities
have important and, at times, essential contributions to
make, depending on the specific features ofthe conflict
in question.

Mediation is based on the concept of restorative
justice. It is worth mentioning that one of precursors
and pioneers of that concept was Polish lawyer and
sociologist Leon Petrazycki, whose work dates back to
the 1930s. The founding fathers of the United Nations
had high hopes for mediation as a method for resolving
conflicts - they resonate in Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard, we would like to
highlight once again the great job that the Department
of Political Affairs (DPA) is doing by, among other
things, holding annual conflict prevention dialogues
with the European Union.

We recognize that the United Nations has the right
tools to advance mediation, such as the Mediation
Support Unit, the Standby Team of Senior Mediation
Advisers and the recently established High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation. We have already seen
the first results of successfully conducted negotiations
by a member of the Advisory Board in the case of
Liberia's presidential election.

The Security Council in its configuration has
already adopted numerous documents mentioning
mediation. Let me draw the Council's attention to one
particular presidential statement on conflict prevention,
adopted in January (S/PRST/2018/1), where we recalled
that a comprehensive conflict prevention strategy
should include early warning, preventive deployment
and mediation, and recognized that those components
are interdependent and complementary.

During the most recent Security Council debate
on mediation (see S/PV.6108), Council members
mentioned, among others, the successful examples of
Togo and Somalia. Today we are pleased to refer also to
the case of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and its efforts to peacefully resolve the name issue
with the Republic of Greece. Agreements signed by the
leaders from both sides would not have been possible
without vast mediation efforts.

One excellent example of civil society mediation
efforts are the activities of the Community of
Sant'Egidio, a highly regarded Christian membership
organization based in Rome, which has been focusing
on conflict prevention and resolution, primarily in
Africa, for the past 30 years. DPA has been working
with Sant'Egidio since its first success - brokering
peace in the Mozambique civil war in 1992. Its
work is the definition of model mediation efforts:
independent, neutral, confidential and focused mostly
on poor countries.

It is crucial to involve civil society, including
women's groups, in the design, implementation and
monitoring of any peace agreement. The protection
of women leaders at risk of targeted political violence
should also remain high among peace supporters'
priorities. They are ready to support the mediators and
facilitators following standards of inclusive mediation.

Women-led prevention initiatives have helped to
prevent and mitigate the escalation of violence many
times by engaging in constructive dialogue and peace
advocacy. Evidence shows that security efforts are more
successful and sustainable when women contribute to
prevention and early warning, post-conflict resolution
and rebuilding. It is unfortunate that women's
representation in mediation and conflict-prevention
efforts has grown only marginally in the 18 years since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

Women's central roles in many families and
communities afford them a unique vantage point for
recognizing unusual patterns of behaviour and signs
of impending conflict, such as arms mobilization and
weapons caching. Women are often best positioned
to detect early signs of radicalization because their
rights and physical integrity are often the first targets
of fundamentalists. Evidence shows that women make
unique and substantive contributions that improve the
effectiveness of peace operations.

We should also respond to the calls to establish
a system to enhance the financing of mediation and
prevention efforts. Poland supports those efforts with
donations to DPA's multi-year appeal, and we would
encourage others to do so as well. Those resources
are vital for the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, for example, which helps to monitor the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace.

Today, we need more effective mediation that gives
the parties to the conflict a sense of satisfaction. What
makes mediation effective? An essential condition for
successful mediation is the establishment of relations
with the parties to the conflict. To gain their trust and
confidence, the rapport must be genuine and partners
must feel that their interests are fully understood.
No party should ever expect to walk away from a
mediation process with everything they wanted. By
making sure partners understand the pros and cons of
the mediation process, sides can often gain a greater
sense of satisfaction and both sides can win.

