Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We join others who have expressed
their condolences for the victims of the natural disasters
that have taken place in the past few weeks.

We also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for her briefing.

Bolivia categorically reaffirms its commitment
to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and to
their elimination and prevention in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and the
Security Council. In that context, we call upon all so-
called nuclear-weapon States to take immediate action to
eliminate their nuclear and ballistic missile programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner in
compliance with Security Council resolutions.

With regard to the situation on the Korean peninsula,
we reaffirm our commitment to the full implementation
of resolution 1718 (2006) and subsequent resolutions.
In that context, we have been strengthening national
inter-institutional coordination mechanisms so that
their implementation is effective and fully in line with
their mandates. We also underscore the summit to be
held in Pyongyang tomorrow, and we hope that it will
be a step forward with respect to the commitments that
must be fulfilled within a framework of consensus.

We reiterate that, for Bolivia, sanctions should
not be an end in themselves, but rather should serve to
bring the parties closer to the negotiating table and to
a transparent dialogue where primacy is given only to
the will to seek a negotiated solution to the conflict. My
delegation is concerned that the imposition of sanctions
has a direct impact on the people of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, who, as we have heard
on a number of occasions, have suffered from many
shortages, especially with regard to health care and
other aspects.

We reiterate the importance of complying with the

Charter of the United Nations, under which the Security
Council is the sole legal body that can take the necessary
measures to maintain or restore international peace
and security, thereby ruling out any unilateral action.
In that regard, we once again express our full support
for a negotiated settlement between the parties leading
to the full denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
To that end, we are pleased about the progress made in
the inter-Korean dialogue, which began with a bilateral
summit held in the Joint Security Area between South
Korean President Moon J ae-in and North Korean leader
Kim Jong Un and which concluded with the signing of
the Panmunjom Declaration on Peace, Prosperity and
Reunification of the Korean Peninsula on 27 April.

It is also important to note that, since that signing,
significant progress has been made in the process of
rapprochement between the two States, such as with the
family reunions promoted by both States, which took
place on 20 August, during which at least 180 families
saw each other again after more than 60 years of forced
separation following the Korean War.

Finally, we express optimism that, in accordance
with international law and the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, the inter-Korean meetings
and talks, as well as the rapprochement between the
highest authorities of the relevant parties and the high-
level summit held in Singapore on 12 June between
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and
the United States, made it possible for them to join
efforts in building a peaceful and stable regime on the
Korean peninsula. We view this and other signals as
the most important steps towards paving the way for a
peace agreement that could put an end to this conflict.
