Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): There can be no doubt as to the urgency of
today's topic. Civil aviation has been and will remain a
highly attractive target for terrorists. At the outset, we
would like to once again express our condolences to
the families and friends of all those who have lost their
lives as a result of air transport tragedies. We would
also like to thank Ms. Liu Fang, Secretary General of
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
for her detailed briefing on ICAO's role and efforts in
the field of aviation security.

The Russian delegation took an active part in
developing resolution 2309 (2016), which the Council
adopted today, aimed at adding impetus to States'
efforts to implement ICAO standards and the provisions
of the counter-terrorism conventions, as well as the
relevant Security Council resolutions. In considering
the specifics of aviation security, the international
community should be guided primarily by the work of
ICAO, as the specialized international organization in
the field. The ICAO Assembly will meet in Montreal
in a few days' time and is expected to take a number
of important decisions related to aviation security and
terrorist threats. It will present a report on progress
in implementing the ICAO Comprehensive Aviation
Security Strategy, and will address the issue of
developing a global aviation security plan by 2018. We
are pleased that the drafters of the resolution took into
account our proposals designed to ensure that, without
undermining the ICAO mandate, the Security Council's
new initiative is clearly incorporated into its efforts,
decisions and plans for the direction its activities should
take in the future.

Terrorist threats against civil aviation are evolving.
Criminals are constantly taking advantage of new
technologies to seek new ways to circumvent security
systems, including in airports. It is therefore important
to continue to strengthen our capacity to react rapidly
to new challenges as they appear, particularly those
related to cybersecurity, landside security, remotely
piloted aircraft systems and improvised explosive
devices. One of the key objectives of today's decision
is to urge States to join in increasing the widespread
and effective adoption of existing aviation security
standards and recommendations. Ultimately, it is our
job to combine our efforts to achieve an integrated and
sustainable system for protecting international civil
aviation against illegal interference.

We welcome the productive cooperation between
the Security Council's counter-terrorism entities and
ICAO, such as when Ms. Fang Liu briefed the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) in June. ICAO has also
begun cooperating with the Monitoring Group of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. We
note the regular flow of information from ICAO to the
United Nations on efforts to combat terrorism, included
in the relevant reports ofthe Secretary- General. Today's
resolution is aimed at strengthening cooperation
between the Security Council and ICAO, primarily
through the CTC, in order to identify gaps in States'
aviation security. We urge both the Committee and
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to
use that analysis to improve programmes for technical
assistance to States.

We look forward to a planned special meeting of
the CTC in 2017 on the terrorist threats to civil aviation.
Our country will continue to undertake decisive steps
to counter terrorist threats. That applies fully to the
threat to civil aviation. However, that evil will only be
defeated by closing ranks. We are convinced that the
fight against any form of terrorism will require the
further consolidation of efforts with the good-faith
implementation of States' international commitments.

I am forced now to say a few words with regard to
the statement just made by the Ukrainian delegation.
The Ukrainian delegation did not limit itself to the
topic that was planned for our discussion. It attempted
to hold this meeting hostage so that it could advance
unacceptable provocations. We are not going to yield to
such provocations.

We will limit ourselves to noting that, since the
Ukrainian side decided to raise the subject ofthe disaster
concerning Flight MH-17, it would be good to recognize
the guilt of Kyiv in that matter and its responsibility for
the fact that the Ukrainian authorities did not close the
airspace over the eastern part of the country in which
Kyiv had deployed major military operations. We have
again heard no recognition or acknowledgement of that
responsibility.

As far as Russia is concerned, we insisted that
resolution 2166 (2014) adopted by the Council on
the downing of the Malaysia Airlines plane include
provisions on the need to carry out an independent
international investigation in accordance with the
governing principles of international civil aviation and
with ICAO playing a leading role. Our delegation called
for the active use of the provisions of resolution 2166
(2014), which provides for comprehensive assistance by
the United Nations in the investigation. Unfortunately,
the Secretary-General has not submitted a range of
proposals for United Nations assistance to the Security
Council. It would be beneficial, in our view, for ICAO
also to join the investigation.

We call for the rapid adoption of yet another
resolution that would ensure access to the crash site
for the investigation mission. Unfortunately, interested
parties preferred bilateral agreements with Ukraine,
which, regrettably, were overly protracted and did not
allow for the immediate launch of an investigation. We
insisted on the inclusion of a provision in the text of
resolution 2166 (2014) for an immediate cessation of all
military activities in the area immediately bordering
the crash site. Kyiv violated that provision in August
2014, when the Ukrainian authorities unilaterally
declared that they would disengage from the ceasefire,
as a result of which the investigation mission was
forced to cease its work for a lengthy period. A great
deal of time has passed, but the criminal investigation
has not yet been concluded. And it has been carried
out in a closed format. Can one consider it to be an
independent, impartial and unbiased investigation?
That is questionable. Only the future will tell. It is
nevertheless getting harder for us to accept that after
the statements that we have heard here today.

In the course ofthe work on resolution 2309 (2016),
which we just adopted, the Ukrainian delegation
unilaterally attempted to water down proposals that
would confirm the responsibility of States for the
security of civil aviation within their air space. I think
everyone understands why they did so.

Turning to the issue with regard to air traffic control
over Crimea and the Black Sea, Ukraine was also unable
to refrain from politicizing that topic, including within
ICAO, which would have entailed additional costs for
carriers and inconvenienced passengers. Above all, it
would have created flight safety risks. Russia is able to
provide the necessary information in connection with
air security in its airspace above Crimea and the Black
Sea.

