Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, we wish to thank you for
convening this meeting, which shows that the Council
is giving additional importance to its annual report to
the General Assembly. We are pleased that the efforts
by Council members to improve the format of the
report and to make it more valuable will be met by a
favourable response from all United Nations Members
in the General Assembly.

Syria supports the format and substance of this
report. We thank Mr. Kalomoh and all members of his
Secretariat team for their efforts in preparing this
report. The positive spirit in which Council members
have examined the importance of introducing changes
in the format and its analytical introduction reflect the
interest in achieving optimum benefit from the report.
But no one can talk about the report's new format or
the relevant resolutions that the Council has adopted in
this regard without paying tribute to the immense
efforts made by Ambassador Mahbubani and members
of his delegation, especially Ms. Christine Lee. They
assisted with and insisted on a constructive approach
and ideas that were met with favourably by Council
members and reflected accordingly in this new report.

A number of speakers have spoken on the
Council's work in specific areas, such as conflict
resolution in Africa, the Middle East, Asia or other
regions. There were also some remarks about the
Council's missions to a number of conflict areas, and
statements in some detail about the importance and
perspectives of these missions. Speakers have also
referred to the Council's wrap-up sessions over the past
few months. In this regard, my delegation is pleased to
pay tribute to the efforts by Ambassador Levitte, who
introduced an admirable formula under which we
would work and which won everyone's praise. My
delegation stresses that, in the light of the remarks
made by a number of Council members, it is very
necessary and appropriate to maintain these wrap-up
sessions.

Also, during the period under consideration the
Council examined numerous draft resolutions and
operational aspects of matters concerning
peacekeeping, women and children in violent conflicts,
and the question of terrorism. Indeed, the Council has
met with great success in dealing with many of these
issues and has scored considerable points, especially in
the area of fighting terrorism. We join many others in
paying tribute to Ambassador Greenstock for his
leading role in this regard.

However, we have to state that, during the same
period, the Council has failed to follow up and
implement some of its resolutions. Many delegations
with whom we had discussions in the Council,
regarding Africa and other parts of the world,
expressed their regret that those resolutions were not
implemented. Of course, the subject matter becomes
even more sensitive when we reaffirm that the
Council's resolutions relate to international peace and
security. We think that the lack of follow-up in
implementation of these resolutions will have an
impact on nations' perception of the Council and on its
credibility. We have raised this point time and again in
our statements here.

I will not go too far here. I would like to cite one
resolution that was adopted a couple of days ago -
namely, resolution 1435 (2002). A party directly
involved has rejected this resolution and defied it
despite the request of all Council members to
implement it.

Indeed, the Council has made considerable
progress with regard to the implementation of many of
its resolutions, in terms of making its work more
transparent. It held a record number of meetings
compared to past years. More importantly, many of
those meetings were open to all United Nations
Members so they could express their views and give
their own input on the functioning of the Council and
issues presented before it. Syria believes that this
practice should be maintained, so that the Council will
be closer to all issues discussed on the international
agenda and to the views of all of the Organization's
Members.

Ambassador Mahbubani remarked that, in terms
of the Council's work, many aspects have been
discussed here to make it more efficient and
transparent. However, he also cited several negative
points that control our work. We do agree with his
analysis ofthe status of these aspects in the past and of
what they would be in the future.

Syria looks forward to more serious work in order
to improve the Council's operational methods, in
particular the working group on the methods and
procedures of the Council. This exercise should be
ongoing, because the anticipation of better performance
is always in order. The exercise becomes even more
relevant when we realize that it has become a pressing
demand of all Member States every time the report is
discussed in the General Assembly.

Syria looks forward to a serious debate on this
draft report in the General Assembly, and we affirm
that we will take account of all constructive views that
may be made to improve the work of the Council, to
make it more responsive to the provisions of the
Charter and to the expectations and demands of all
United Nations Members.

