Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Today
is the eve of the Chinese new year. First of all, I would
like to convey my best new year greetings to you, Sir.
At the same time, I wish peace and tranquillity to the
people of the world.

I am speaking in my capacity as Special
Representative of His Excellency President Xi Jinping
of China. At the outset, I thank Your Excellency
President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo for attending and
presiding over today's high-level meeting.

China congratulates Equatorial Guinea on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February and will fully support its
work. I also congratulate the Dominican Republic on its
exemplary work as President of the Council in January.
I thank Secretary-General Guterres, Mr. Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
Mr. Sezibera, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Rwanda and current Chair
of the African Union, for their briefings. I also wish
to thank C6te d'Ivoire and Gabon for sending their
Foreign Ministers to today's meeting.

China supports Equatorial Guinea's initiative to
convene today's meeting and appreciates the country's
efforts in fighting mercenaries. We are confident that
today's meeting will serve to galvanize international
consensus on jointly addressing the threats and
challenges posed by mercenaries. Mercenary activities
threaten international peace and security and jeopardize
peace and stability in developing countries, especially
those on the African continent. Such activities exact a
heavy toll on human life and on property and seriously
affect the social stability and economic development of
African countries. This is therefore an issue to which
the international community must pay rapt attention.

Mercenary activities violate the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
interfere in the internal affairs of developing countries,
including in Africa, and encroach on their sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. Such activities
lead to tensions and armed conflict among countries.
Recruiting, using, financing and training mercenaries
are clear violations of international law. China is firmly
opposed to such activities. In that respect, I would like
to address the following three points.

First, it is imperative to abide by the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and the basic
norms governing international relations, implement
General Assembly resolutions on countering mercenary
activities and adhere to the principle of sovereign
equality and non-interference in the internal affairs of
other countries. We must support African countries in
their efforts to maintain their sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, fully respect the leadership of
African countries in regional affairs and support the
approach of African solutions to African problems.

Secondly, we should strengthen international and
regional cooperation. The international community
should coordinate its efforts to assist African countries
in properly responding to and, ultimately, eliminating
the threats posed by mercenary activities. We should
continue to improve cooperation and partnership
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union, and scale up
efforts in conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict reconstruction. Through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation and based on the willingness
of countries, the international community should
assist African countries in enhancing their security
capacity-building in training, equipment and resources.
Countries of the region can cooperate in the areas of
border control, information-sharing and countering the
illicit trafficking of weapons, in particular small arms
and light weapons.

Thirdly, integrated policies should be in place. As a
phenomenon that is closely linked to terrorism, human
trafficking and resource plundering, mercenary activity
has become an important factor that threatens peace
and stability in Central Africa. Therefore, resources in
various fields should be pooled in order to strengthen
coordination and law enforcement so as to generate
strong synergies in combating terrorist activities.
The international community should support African
countries in accelerating development, reducing
poverty, eliminating the root causes of conflict and
turmoil and stepping up socioeconomic development.

China supports African countries and peoples
in their pursuit of peace, tranquillity, prosperity and
development. We successfully convened the Beijing
Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation in
September. It was agreed that China and Africa should
strengthen peace and security cooperation. Cooperation
in the field of nuclear security was identified as one of
the eight priority areas for cooperation between China
and Africa.

In addition, China supports Africa's implementation
of the African Union's Agenda 2063 and its Silencing
the Guns by 2020 initiative. China has also decided to
establish a China-Africa peace and security cooperation
fund with a View to supporting peace, security, stability
and peacekeeping cooperation between China and
Africa. Finally, I wish to emphasize that China will
continue to support Africa in achieving peace, stability
and development, and will work with Africa to build a
stronger Sino-African community with a shared future.

