Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to extend to you, Sir, and to your
brotherly country our congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I extend our thanks to the representative of
Italy, Ambassador Spatafora, for his wise management
of the work of the Council last month. We would also

like to thank all the members of the Council for their
quick response in holding this emergency meeting.

Gaza is currently witnessing a special emergency
humanitarian situation, which requires the international
community to intervene immediately and deal with it
decisively. Any delay will expand the scope of the
crisis, double its impact and leave a lasting mark on the
entire peace process. Jordan is especially concerned
about the dangerous and serious humanitarian situation
in Gaza and about the fact that the Gazans' basic daily
needs are not being met. We completely reject all
policies of collective punishment, which inflict
widespread suffering and use it for political purposes.

In response to this tragic situation, His Majesty
King Abdullah II has instructed the Jordanian
Government to send an immediate contingency relief
convoy, in continuance of the policy responsible for
hundreds of Jordanian convoys aimed at easing the
suffering of the Palestinian people. They are expected
to reach Gaza a few hours from now. What is now
required from the Israeli Government is that they
facilitate the passage of that Jordanian humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people or any other
assistance provided by the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan.

However, this is only an immediate humanitarian
response. The true response to the situation should be
made by the Security Council. We call upon the
Council to immediately intervene in order to put an end
to this humanitarian tragedy, reverse it and create the
necessary conditions to continue the peace process, as
agreed upon in Annapolis and underscored in Paris a
few weeks ago. We call for nothing less than an
immediate end to the military campaign; the lifting of
all forms of siege; an end to the policy of collective
punishment; the opening of crossing points; enabling
all United Nations agencies to do their jobs; access for
emergency relief and humanitarian materials;
resumption of water, electricity, food and fuel supplies
to the Gaza Strip; and the reopening of the power
plants. The real challenge before the Council today is
to try to contain the situation and to provide the
necessary conditions for a return to the negotiation
table.

Our ultimate objective should always be present
before us: to bring about an independent, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State before the end of this year,
in accordance with what was agreed on at the

Annapolis Conference and with the resolutions of
international legitimacy, the Road Map and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

