I would like to offer my thanks to Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for briefing us today on her twentieth report on the situation in Libya. The United Kingdom is clear that civilians must be protected in conflict situations and that those responsible for violations of international law must be held to account. In June, we co-sponsored the Human Rights Council resolution (A/HRC/RES/43/39) establishing a fact-finding mission to investigate violations and abuses in Libya. We continue to support strongly the Court's efforts to hold accountable those responsible for the most serious crimes of international concern in Libya. We welcome the recent agreement to a full nationwide ceasefire in Libya, as well as the ongoing meeting of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, convened by the United Nations. While that progress is welcome, we remain gravely concerned about the continued deterioration in the human rights situation in Libya this year and reports of troubling activities attributed to both sides as the conflict continues, alongside a worsening outbreak of the coronavirus disease. We thank the Prosecutor for her update on the cases against Mr. Al-Qadhafi, Mr. Al-Werfalli and Mr. Al-Tuhamy. It is particularly concerning that Mr. Al-Werfalli remains at large in the Benghazi area more than three years after the first warrant for his arrest was issued. We reiterate our call for all relevant States, including State and non-State parties to the Rome Statute, to cooperate with the ICC in the arrest and surrender of individuals with outstanding warrants. We welcome the cooperation of the Government of National Accord with the Office of the Prosecutor during its visit to Libya. We note with concern the Prosecutor's references to reports that the Libyan National Army (LNA) and associated forces conducted indiscriminate air strikes, abductions, torture, enforced disappearances and extrajudicial killings. We also note reports of mines being used in southern Tripoli. The United Kingdom continues to fund the work of specialized non-governmental organizations to respond to mines and explosive hazards. We condemn all human rights violations and abuses and violations of international humanitarian law, including indiscriminate attacks, unlawful killings and the silencing of journalists, activists and human rights defenders. Noting the recent twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we underscore our condemnation of sexual and gender-based violence in Libya, which the United Kingdom is working to address as part of our national action plan on women and peace and security. The discovery of mass graves in Tarhouna is shocking and may constitute evidence of war crimes or crimes against humanity. We acknowledge the efforts by the Government of National Accord to preserve evidence, as recognized in the Prosecutor's report. We note with concern the report's update about violence towards protesters in Zawiyah and Tripoli, and about the targeting of those criticizing the LNA. It is vital that rights to peaceful assembly, protest and freedom of expression be upheld. We reiterate our call for the case of parliamentarian Siham Sergewa - and all other politically motivated disappearances and intimidation - to be investigated. We also call on the Government of National Accord to take steps to end the exploitation of migrants and refugees in official and unofficial detention centres. Let me reiterate that support for international criminal justice is central to the foreign policy of the United Kingdom. We are pleased to have cooperated closely with the Prosecutor and her team recently and are committed to continuing to provide our full support in their ongoing investigations in Libya, which are all the more important at this crucial time in the peace process.
