Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation wishes at the outset to convey its
appreciation of the efforts made by the sponsors of today's
draft resolution on Kosovo. We would have preferred the
concerns we expressed during consultations to have been
taken into account. Yet, in a spirit of cooperation, my
delegation did not wish to obstruct the work of the Council
or to stand in the way of unanimity, even though we
believe that those concerns are legitimate.

Recently the Kosovo region has been the scene of
bloody violence against the Albanian community, which
constitutes more than 90 per cent of the population there.
This violence has resulted in the death of many innocent
people, including children and women. We feel great
sadness and sorrow for these victims and condemn the
savagery with which this matter has been handled. We also
condemn the practices of the Serbian authorities against
unarmed civilian inhabitants of the Kosovo region, the
arbitrary measures and the discriminatory practices
employed against them, including imprisonment.

There have been substantial international and regional
attempts to urge the Serbian Government to act with
restraint and to begin a serious, unconditional political
dialogue with the Kosovar Albanians. In this regard, the
Contact Group on the former Yugoslavia have exerted
strenuous efforts to resolve this crisis. Some of the Contact
Group Foreign Ministers visited Belgrade seeking to
convince the Government there to settle the crisis
peacefully. But the Belgrade Government has persisted in
rejecting all these attempts and has persevered in its
intransigence.

With a view to preventing another massacre, like
that which took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Security Council acted swiftly; several consultation
meetings and other contacts took place, resulting in the
draft resolution before us today, which we hope will send
a clear message from the international community to the
authorities in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

In the context of attempts to settle the problem, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, at the twenty-
fifth meeting of Foreign Ministers that took place at
Doha, Qatar, from 15 to 17 March 1998, expressed its
concern at the grave violations of the human and political
rights of the inhabitants of the Kosovo region. The
Organization of the Islamic Conference emphasized its
rejection of the arbitrary use of armed force against
civilians in Kosovo. It also called for an immediate halt
to such actions and for an immediate withdrawal from
civilian areas. The Organization of the Islamic Conference
also adopted a resolution calling upon its Secretary-
General to hold consultations with other relevant
international organizations with a View to managing the
Kosovo crisis. It also called for the establishment of
genuine institutions in Kosovo, as the best way of
protecting the human, political and national rights of the
population of the region, and of preventing the escalation
of violence there. It further called for the reopening of all
educational, cultural and scientific institutions, and for
internationally protected dialogue with the Kosovo
population.

The draft resolution before the Council today is but
an initial message to the Belgrade Government. We hope
that that Government will reconsider all its actions and
past policies with respect to the Kosovo region. We hope
that that Government will respond positively to the call of
the international community, which in paragraph 3 of the
draft resolution before us would clearly call for offering
the Kosovar Albanian community a genuine political
process; we hope that this will lead to a settlement
acceptable to both sides.

The Government of Bahrain supports draft resolution
S/1998/284 and will vote in favour of it.

