Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Mr. Mark Lowcock, Mr. David Beasley and Ms. Rasha
Jarhum for their briefings.

We first want to note the reduction of violence
around the Yemeni port of Al-Hudaydah. We believe
it is essential to work to establish a full, countrywide
cessation of hostilities, which is important not only
to ensure the reliable delivery of humanitarian and
commercial goods to the northern areas of Yemen where
the majority of the country's population lives, but also
to achieve the successful implementation of the Special
Envoy's plans to hold a round of negotiations in Sweden.
We welcome the progress that Mr. Griffiths has made
in getting the parties to resume a dialogue and show
flexibility on confidence-building measures, including
the exchange of prisoners and other steps. We hope
the planned talks will be substantive and help to make
the political process sustainable. We do not expect the
disagreements to end quickly. Years of confrontation
have created a gulf that will not be easy to bridge. We
will continue to assist Mr. Griffiths through bilateral
channels, in our capacity as a permanent member of the
Security Council and also a member of the group of 19
States supporting international efforts for a settlement
in Yemen.

Our position remains the same. We continue
to call for a plan for a negotiated solution to the
conflict in Yemen. The parties must show restraint
and refrain from resorting to force. The history of the
Yemeni conflict shows that the military efforts are
not working. Every day of war cranks up the cost of
Yemen's post-conflict reconstruction. We condemn
the indiscriminate strikes on civilian targets and
ballistic-missile attacks on Yemen's neighbours. We
support ensuring unconditional compliance with the
relevant provisions of international humanitarian law
and unfettered humanitarian access to all parts of the
country. The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
critical. A majority of the population is in need of
assistance of one sort or another. Millions of Yemenis
are starving and have no way of obtaining the medical
services and medicines they need. We must make
humanitarian assistance to Yemen a priority in our joint
work and it must be provided on a non-discriminatory
basis, regardless of who controls the territories where
Yemenis live.

The international community is actively assisting
the people of Yemen. While Russia is contributing to
that effort, like many other Member States, we realize
that it is impossible to improve the situation in Yemen
through humanitarian measures alone. The solution
must be a political one. We now need to unite around
the Special Envoy and help him work proactively
with all of the actors involved in the Yemeni conflict.
The war is only playing into the hands of the various
terrorists who have been taking advantage of the chaos
to strengthen their positions in central and southern
Yemen. The fight against terrorism is our shared task
and we must take every possible measure to end its
threat.

In conclusion, we want to express the hope
that policies of confrontation, threats and pressure
through sanctions will give way to collective efforts
to create regional dialogue mechanisms, as well as a
comprehensive and indivisible security architecture in
the Middle East, both for the Arab States of the Persian
Gulf and their neighbours. Russia's vision in that regard
remains relevant and much needed.

