Mr. Mendonca e Moura (Portugal): Let me start
by thanking today's briefers for their presentations. I
should also like to seize this opportunity to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for
her briefing, and take this occasion to commend her
work and efforts to ensure the protection of children in
situations of ongoing armed conflict.

Portugal aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, but let me underline
some aspects of particular significance to my country.

For the past 20 years, since Graca Machel presented
her study on the impact of armed conflict on children
(see A/51/306), much has been done by the Council to
protect children in situations of armed conflict and
for the promotion and protection of human rights and
international humanitarian law. Portugal is deeply
committed to the promotion and protection of human
rights and to international humanitarian law. In fact, the
first debate held in the Council on the issue of children
in armed conflict was promoted by Portugal in 1998
(see S/PV.3896). We were then already convinced, as
we remain today, that this issue has serious implications
for international peace and security.

Despite the significant progress achieved and the
establishment of a strong normative framework and a
mechanism for monitoring, reporting and responding
to grave violations against children, we note that huge
challenges remain, due in particular to the changing
nature of conflicts, protracted conflicts, the prevalence
of violent extremism and forced displacement, as
the latest Secretary-General's report (S/20l6/360)
highlights.

The harmful and widespread impact of armed
conflict on children and its long-term consequences
for durable peace, security and development are
undeniable. Because of their vulnerability, children not
only suffer directly the consequences of armed conflict
and of the collapse of the social fabric, but are being
deliberately targeted and subject to forced recruitment,
displacement, killing, sexual violence, maiming
and abduction, among other appalling brutalities.
This situation has been exacerbated by the action of
extremist non-State armed groups and by massive
forced displacements.

Portugal believes that the Council must continue
to strive to find the best way to promote the protection
of children affected by armed conflict and better
respond to the magnitude of the challenges posed by the
tremendous brutality of the acts of violence committed
against them. In so doing, we need to take a certain
number of points into account.
First, action plans are an important tool for
engaging with armed forces and non-State armed
groups and can play a positive role in ending violations
against children.

Secondly, we note with growing concern the
prevalence of attacks on and the use of schools and
hospitals for military purposes. Governments and
all other actors must protect schools and hospitals by
upholding the provisions of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.

Thirdly, we must address the issue of impunity.
While Member States have the primary responsibility
in fulfilling their international commitments to ensure
the promotion and protection of human rights and of
international humanitarian law, the Security Council
has the political and ethical role of sending a clear
message that abuse against children is unacceptable and
of combating, though its action, the sense of impunity
among belligerents responsible for atrocities and abuses
committed against children. Where national authorities
fail to take the necessary steps to ensure accountability,
the Security Council can, as appropriate, play a more
proactive role. Portugal reiterates that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) can play a fundamental deterrent
role, complementary to the roles of tribunals at national
and international levels, and that further institutional
dialogue between the ICC and the Security Council is
fundamental in that regard.

On peacekeeping operations, Portugal strongly
supports the inclusion of child-protection advisers in the
mandates, as well as mandatory pre-eployment training
on the protection of children to ensure that the situation
of children affected by armed conflict is adequately
addressed in peace missions by promoting advocacy,
mainstreaming, training, monitoring and reporting.
We also support effective screening of peacekeepers
to ensure that individuals who have committed grave
violations against children no longer serve with the
United Nations.

We cannot remain indifferent to these gross
violations of children's rights. We thank Malaysia for its
leadership in the efforts to consolidate the mechanisms
at the disposal of the Council to deal with one of
the most appalling scourges of our time. Protecting
children from the ravages of war is a moral imperative
and an issue of international peace and security.

I would like to conclude by recalling the words of
Graca Machel:

"We needto embrace anewmoralitythatputs children
where they belong - at the heart of all agendas.
Protectingchildrenfromtheimpactofarmedconflict
is everyone's responsibility - Governments,
international organizations and every element of
civil society."

