Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of the Senegalese presidency
to convene today's meeting. China attentively listened
to the statements of Assistant Secretary-General
Jenca; the Assistant Secretary General for Economic
Affairs of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), Mr. Opeloyeru; and professor Diagne of
Columbia University.

OIC is a major organization of Islamic States
designed to promote unity, cooperation and self-
improvement. By making use of its religious, historical
and cultural advantages, it has played a positive role
in promoting the settlement of regional hotspot issues
and in facilitating post-conflict reconstruction. Since
it attained United Nations observer status, OIC has
strengthened cooperation with the United Nations
in such areas as dispute prevention and mediation,
intercultural dialogue and humanitarian assistance.
It has also actively pushed for political settlements in
Somalia, Afghanistan, Mali, Libya and the Central
African Republic, which has earned it international
recognition and appreciation.

China supports the strengthening of cooperation
between OIC and the United Nations, consolidating
collective security mechanisms in a joint effort to
maintain international peace and security. Terrorism
is posing a grave threat to international peace and
security and is therefore a common challenge for all of
humankind. Terrorists and extremist forces propagate
terrorist ideology and violent extremism. In certain
countries, some people, especially young people, have
been hoodwinked into violent extremist and terrorist
activities, causing serious harm.

Counter-terrorism is an important area where the
United Nations and OIC have conducted significant
cooperation. China supports the United Nations and the
Security Council in pushing forward their cooperation
with OIC in fighting terrorist ideology. Accordingly,
China would now like to offer the following comments.

First, we must stick to a unified criteria and
forge a sophisticated counter-terrorism network. Acts
of terrorism - whenever, wherever, by whomever
committed and in whatever forms and manifestations
they arise - need to be fought resolutely. Counter-
terrorism should not be linked to any specific nationality
or religion. The United Nations and the Security
Council need to play a leading and coordinating
role in international counter-terrorism cooperation.
Parties need to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions in a comprehensive manner, strengthen
exchange of information, border-control and law-
enforcement cooperation, combat cross-border training
by terrorist organizations, and cut off the transborder
flow of terrorists, all of which will serve to put strong
international pressure on terrorists.

Secondly, we must give priority to cyber counter-
terrorism and cut off the channels for spreading
terrorist ideology. The Internet and social media
and other high-tech applications have become major
platforms for terrorists to spread their ideology and
violent extremist ideas. The international community
should adopt vigorous measures to strengthen the
monitoring of the Internet and crack down on terrorist
organizations that are using the Internet to publish
incendiary violent videos to spread terrorist ideologies
and extremist ideas, recruit operatives, raise funds and
plan or implement acts of terrorism.

Thirdly, dialogue among different civilizations to
achieve peaceful coexistence and harmony needs to be
supported. Dialogue and exchanges are effective tools
for enhancing mutual understanding among different
civilizations, different religions and different cultures
and facilitating inclusion. The international community
needs to vigorously promote mutual respect, openness
and inclusiveness in a spirit of civilized dialogue
and facilitate mutual learning about the diversity of
civilizations, in order to foster a social atmosphere
where different nationalities, cultures and religions
can treat each other as equals and coexist in harmony
and promote civil exchanges aimed at peace while
respecting differences and achieving harmony through
openness and inclusiveness.

China enjoys deep, friendly and cooperative
relations with Islamic States. China attaches great
importance to the unique role of OIC, appreciates the
significant contribution OIC has made in promoting
cooperation among Islamic States, supports OIC in its
ongoing efforts to maintain international peace and
security and regional peace and security, engage in
counter-terrorism and promote common development.

Over the past four decades, China has conducted
friendly exchanges with Islamic States and identified
the ways for different civilizations, religions and
social systems to live together. China is ready to
deepen integration of interests under the framework
of the One Belt, One Road initiative, strengthen ties,
expand dialogue between the Chinese civilization and
the Islamic civilization and commit iteself to forging
a new type of international relations predicated upon
win-win cooperation, all with a View to building a
shared community of destiny and creating a safer and
better future for humankind.

