Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate Ambassador Heller on his
work in the presidency of the Security Council and on
the excellent work that the delegation of Mexico has
done at the helm of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, established pursuant to resolution
1612 (2005). We also thank him for convening today's
discussion on the important topic of children and
armed conflict.

Chile aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the Human
Security Network and the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Canada in his capacity as
chair of the Group of Friends for children in armed
conflict.

The international community recognizes that
children have rights, yet their rights are ignored every
day in situations of armed conflict. We therefore
reiterate our firm support for the work of the Working
Group and for efforts to implement, among other
measures, Security Council resolutions 1612 (2005)
and 1882 (2009), co-sponsored by Chile. We also
reiterate our support for UNICEF and the various
non-governmental organizations and civil society
bodies that work together to contribute to the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism.

Similarly, we acknowledge the significant and
selfless work carried out by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
and her team. We are following with particular interest
their activities in the field, which have made Member
States aware of the serious situations facing child
victims of armed conflicts.

As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocols and to
Convention 182 of the International Labour
Organization concerning the Prohibition and
Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst
Forms of Child Labour, Chile reiterates its
commitment to initiatives to eliminate all forms of
violence against children and to the Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups, known as the Paris Principles.
Accordingly, we support multilateral actions to
reduce and eradicate this scourge by focusing on
greater programmatic coherence, ensuring reintegration
is sustainable, punishing those responsible and

promoting prevention activities designed to protect
childhood and the special needs of girl children in
armed conflicts. Ten years after the adoption of the
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, we therefore call on those States that have
not yet acceded to these instruments to consider
ratifying them promptly.

We have read with interest the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2010/181), in particular
that encouraging the Security Council to streamline the
sharing of information between its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and its sanctions
committees and to invite the Special Representative to
brief those bodies on a more regular basis on specific
information that comes under her remit. In this
connection, in accordance with paragraph 194 of that
report, we urge the continued inclusion of specific
child protection provisions in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and relevant political
missions, the permanent deployment of child
protection advisers and the training of contingents in
child protection.

The prevention and eradication of violence
against children in armed conflicts will be possible
only if the Council uses the full weight of its authority
to identify and punish those responsible for the worst
violations of human rights - those who violate the
rights of the most fragile and defenceless. We therefore
call on the Security Council to consider more forceful
action against those who commit serious and persistent
violations against children and to consider measures
that could be applied in cases where there are no
sanctions committees.

Finally, in the framework of resolution 1882
(2009), we underscore the importance of ensuring that
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict has the administrative support
necessary to carrying out its work effectively, given
that it is the only subsidiary body of the Council that
does not receive such assistance. We also urge the
Group to use the tools at its disposal, particularly
on-site visits and emergency meetings.

Almost 14 years after the publication of the
historic report of Graca Machel on children and armed
conflict, and 10 years after the adoption of the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
Chile renews its commitment to contributing actively
to the elimination of all forms of violence affecting the
children of the world, ranging from armed conflicts to
urban violence. Inspired by the phrase penned by the
Chilean Nobel Laureate Gabriela Mistral, "the future of
children is always today; tomorrow will be too late",
we will steadfastly support all initiatives seeking to
implement the international commitments in this area.

