Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I congratulate Malaysia on its accession to
the Council presidency and wish it every success in its
endeavours. We also thank the Malaysian presidency
for inviting us to participate in this debate and welcome
Malaysia' leadership role in the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

I also thank the Secretary-General, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict Leila Zerrougui and UNICEF
Executive Director Anthony Lake for their briefings.

It has been 20 years since the publication of the
Graca Machel report on the impact of armed conflict
on children (see A/51/306). Despite ongoing efforts
to protect children since the question of children and
armed conflict has been inscribed on the agenda of the
Security Council, and despite the limited progress that
has been made - such as the Children, Not Soldiers
initiative and others - children are still the primary
victims of armed conflict.

My delegation is very concerned about the increase
in the number of serious violations of children's
rights. We strongly condemn the atrocities described
in the report (S/2016/360) of the Secretary-General
committed by such groups as Da'esh, Boko Haram
and Al-Shabaab, as well as other religious movements.
Such groups exploit children, maim them, deprive them
of freedom, abduct them and sexually exploit them.

The deterioration with regard to the situation of
persons displaced by conflict has had a serious impact
on chidren, including in South Sudan and Syria. My
delegation emphasizes that the best way to provide the
protection children need is to ensure sustainable peace
and prevent or contain conflict. That must also include
ending occupation of all kinds and complying with
international law and international humanitarian law.

Palestinian children are the first victims of Israel,
which is continuing its military occupation and
pursuing its terrorist and aggressive policies. It is also
continuing its siege and its violations of international
law without fear of sanction or being brought to
justice. Israel continues to use excessive force against
children, including executions. Israel holds children in
its prisons, where it mistreats them, tortures them and
exploits them. Children are tried by military courts,
even if they are not of age to stand trial. Their homes
are destroyed. They are forcibly displaced. Hospitals
and schools are attacked. And that is to say nothing of
the crimes committed by the terrorist settlers.
Once again, we call on the Security Council to
make Israel bear the legal and criminal responsibility
for the serious violations it commits. We call on the
Council to compel Israel to release child prisoners
and to stop exploiting and abusing them. We call for
an immediate end to the occupation, in line with the
Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant international
instruments. We also call for a return to the 1967
borders. And we call for support to a Palestinian State
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is very concerned
about the suffering of children in Syria. We condemn
the daily attacks by Syrian forces in which children
are killed or disfigured and their homes are destroyed.
The air raids continue. In fact, they are intensifying.
We see the continued use of barrel bombs and the
deliberate targeting of schools, hospitals and medical
personnel. My delegation resolutely condemns the
practices by Iranian Basiji forces, which are organizing
campaigns to conscript children to fight in Syria.
We also condemn the strengthening of the Iranian
Revolutionary Guards in Syria, as well as activities by
Hizbullah and other religious militias. They all commit
crimes against children in Syria.

We also condemn the detention of children by
security forces. Often children are tortured, resulting
in their death.

Syrian authorities are using siege as a weapon of
war. Aleppo today is being threatened with massacre
and ethnic cleansing. Children are imprisoned under
the rubble of their homes because the international
community is ignoring them and failing to protect
them - in fact, it is exposing them to death. Children,
women and the elderly in Aleppo are calling out for
help. Aleppo has experienced many massacres. If this is
not addressed, it will be a stain on the Security Council
and on the conscience of the international community.

We encourage the Council to immediately provide
protection for the children in Aleppo and in all Syrian
cities. We call on the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to play its role to ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches the people who need
it in Syria.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has responded to
the call for help from the President and the people of
Yemen following the coup d'etat by the militia against
former president Saleh. In line with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, a coalition was
established in Yemen, with all the necessary resources
deployed to ensure that we achieve the coalition's goals,
including protecting children, women and the elderly.
There is also a provision for a transition, in accordance
with the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative.

We have also supported the mediation efforts of
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen. While the mediation
has led to results, the opposition continues to dig in its
heels. The Security Council should condemn that stance
by the rebels, including ensuring that they comply with
the provisions of resolution 2216 (2015), as well as the
provisions of the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative
and the outcome of the National Dialogue.

When we talk about civilian victims in Yemen we
must also recall that the Houthi militia has committed
many crimes, including using hospitals and schools
as barracks. They are responsible for the deaths of
thousands of civilians, including children. This militia
has also committed attacks against my country at
its borders, causing almost 500 civilian deaths, the
displacement of thousands of our citizens and the
destruction of buildings and infrastructure - 1,700
houses and 75 Government buildings destroyed,
including hospitals and other medical facilities. Those
attacks led to the closure of schools, disrupting the
education of thousands of children. Since the end of
the fighting on 10 April, the Houthi militias and their
allies have committed nearly 1,700 incursions into
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, including the use of 20
missiles, resulting in many civilian deaths.

My delegation condemns in the strongest term
the conscription of children by the Houthi militia.
Coalition forces have handed over such children to
the Yemeni authorities to be returned to their families
after they are given assistance, including financial aid,
in cooperation and coordination with the International
Committee of the Red Cross and UNICEF. I am here to
say that the coalition forces are holding no children in
Yemen. They have all been released.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the coalition
forces are committed to abiding by international law
and international humanitarian law. The Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia recently endorsed resolution 2286 (2016),
which calls for those who perpetrate crimes against
civilians and children or attack hospitals and other
medical facilities to be brought tojustice. In that regard,
we have adopted clear rules of engagement to protect
civilians, adhering to the principles of proportionately
and discriminate targeting. The use of weapons against
civilians is prohibited, and civilians are protected until
they can be evacuated from conflict zones. Operations
in Yemen are subject to periodic comprehensive review
to prevent harm to civilians.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia makes children its
absolute priority and firmly believes that they should
always come first. There is no reason to target civilians
in conflict, especially children. Children should be in
school and not fighting on the front lines. Children
have the absolute right to life and education and to play
far from flying bombs and bullets. The Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia is unequivocally committed to protecting
children and civilians and attaches the utmost
importance to any allegation concerning violations
of the rights of civilians by the Kingdom or coalition
forces. We have established a task force to investigate
such incidents and allegations of attacks on civilians,
and shall submit our findings to the United Nations as
soon as possible.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was among the first
countries to participate in the reconstruction efforts
in Yemen. Between 2010 and 2015, we contributed
$3.25 billion, of which $1.2 billion went to economic
development and strengthening the health sector.
We have been the principal donors of humanitarian
assistance in Yemen since 2015. Over the past year,
the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre
has distributed more than $440 million throughout
Yemen. We are also providing humanitarian assistance
to Yemeni refugees in Jordan and the Sudan. We have
hosted more than 1 million refugees, and all Yemeni
children are allowed to enrol in our schools and
universities. We have provided medical facilities and
services to those who have been injured in Yemen or
are hosted in other countries, as well as psychosocial
support for the victims of landmines, including children.

In conclusion, I wish to stress the following points.
We welcome the role of the United Nations and its
agencies, and their efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflict, especially children. It is also our view that the
United Nations should be able to complete its missions
successfully without its decisions being subject to undue
influence. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will always be
among the first to offer assistance to the United Nations
system, but we also believe that the Organization must
fulfil its duties neutrally and transparently. It must make
special efforts to secure reliable information and not
depend on unreliable sources when draftings its reports
and other documents, which should seek to improve the
living conditions of children in armed conflict.

We regret the lack of accurate information in the
current report that led to the inclusion of the coalition
on the list of entities violating the rights of civilians,
without valid cause. We were not given an opportunity
to provide any advance feedback, and we welcome the
Secretary-General's courageous decision to remove the
coalition from the list. I recall that we invited the United
Nations to dispatch its officials to Riyadh to discuss the
situation with us. That invitation remains open.

