Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his comprehensive
briefing and Ambassador Tanin for his important
remarks and his leadership here.

Allow me to start by underscoring the full
support of the United States for the critical role of the
United Nations in Afghanistan. We are deeply grateful
to the dedicated men and women of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and of
the many United Nations agencies, who have
demonstrated their deep commitment to helping the
Afghan people achieve stability and develop
democratic institutions in the face of enormous
challenges.

Two months ago in London, the international
community demonstrated its support for the Afghan
Government's agenda, as outlined by President Karzai
in his inaugural address. Underlying our commitment
is the recognition that Afghanistan and the
international community are entering into a new phase
of partnership on the way to full Afghan ownership. To
ensure that the efforts of the international community
are effective, the United Nations will have to continue
to play a key role in promoting coordination and unity
of effort.

The United States very much welcomes the
appointment of Special Representative Staffan de
Mistura and reiterates its strong support for him and
UNAMA as he takes up his important assignment. We
look forward to working closely with the new Special
Representative to achieve our shared goal of assisting
the people of Afghanistan to transform and strengthen
their own society and ensure their own security. Upon
his arrival, Special Representative De Mistura
committed UNAMA to work to

"assist both the stability and socioeconomic
improvement of the Afghan people, remembering
it should be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned, with
total respect for their own sovereignty and
independence".

We agree with that commitment, and we look forward
to supporting UNAMA in its work.

We also look forward to seeing UNAMA take a
re-energized, central role in coordinating humanitarian
assistance among the United Nations agencies and in
coordinating assistance among the donor Governments
through improved mechanisms and increased staffing.
For our part, the United States will continue to work to
improve its coordination with the United Nations and
other donors, and we would welcome steps by others to
do the same. We believe that UNAMA will work
closely with the Government of Afghanistan to ensure
that this assistance supports the Government's agenda
and priorities and builds government capacity at all
levels.

The international community is committed to
strengthening the Afghan Government's capacity and
supporting its goal of taking responsibility for its own
development, governance and security priorities.
United States civilian officials are partnering with
Afghans to develop and implement governance,
economic development, rule of law and agricultural
initiatives. UNAMA has a continued critical role to
play in the process of transitioning towards greater
responsibility for the Afghan Government, including
helping to develop provincial benchmarks on
development, governance and the rule of law as the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the
Afghan Government make provincial transition
decisions.
The Afghan Government has announced plans for
a transition to Afghan-led security responsibility. We
are already making progress together on that front.
Current ISAF operations in Helmand province,
conducted at the request of the Afghan Government
and the province's governor, have been conducted with
an unprecedented degree of Afghan planning and
leadership. Key Afghan security and service-delivery
ministries in Kabul, and their subordinate departments
in Helmand, have worked to ensure that governance
and development efforts immediately follow security
operations. The Afghan Government installed a deputy
district governor for Marjah and his team on 23
February, just 10 days after security operations were
launched. Kabul continues to staff up critical positions
in service-delivery ministries to help roll out essential
services.

But the real test will be the Afghan Government's
ability to meet the expectations of the local population.
We are determined to help the Afghan authorities
succeed. As security improves and the Afghan
Government assumes greater security responsibilities,
the United States stands ready to support Afghan-led
initiatives to stabilize local areas by providing a path
for insurgent commanders and fighters to leave the
battlefield. As President Obama has said, "We will
support efforts by the Afghan Government to open the
door to those Taliban who abandon violence and
respect the human rights of their fellow citizens".

We urge the United Nations to continue to play a
strong role in ensuring the involvement of women in
every stage of that process and in working with the
Afghan Government to ensure that women's rights and
human rights are preserved and promoted.

Finally, the Afghan Government's announcement
of national legislative elections later this year presents
another opportunity to improve governance and
strengthen institutions. However, we remain concerned
about the electoral decree issued by the President in
February. It is vital that the Afghan people be able to
have faith in the credibility and legitimacy of the 2010
legislative elections. Thus, the independence and
credibility of Afghanistan's electoral institutions are of
paramount importance. For example, the Electoral
Complaints Commission will be enhanced if its
members, both Afghan and foreign, are able to conduct
their activities in an impartial and independent manner.

We welcome the Afghan Government's
commitments to ensuring the integrity of the 2010
parliamentary elections and to working closely with the
United Nations to build on the lessons learned from the
2009 elections in order to deliver improvements to the
electoral process in 2010 and beyond. Demonstrable
progress in establishing independent and effective
electoral institutions will be key to sustaining
confidence in the upcoming election and its results.
Our own ability to provide assistance through the
elections cycle will depend significantly on progress in
establishing more effective and honest governance.

The commitment we share with the Government
of Afghanistan, which was expressed most recently in
London, provides renewed direction for our efforts.
The Government's plan to host an international
conference in Kabul later this year will enable us to
hear its detailed action plans and its targets for
implementing its agenda.

This will be a critical year for Afghanistan. We
look forward to strengthening our common efforts.

