Mr. Ybafiez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I want first
to thank France, through Foreign Minister Ayrault, for
organizing this open debate that is also the first after
the publication of the annual report of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians (S/2016/447). The
report confirms once again that civilians are the main
victims of armed conflict in the twenty-first century.

The recent World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul
has allowed us to affirm the importance of complying
with international humanitarian law. Conduct in
hostilities is subject to a number of rules that cannot
and should not be violated with impunity. I refer to the
use of explosives in densely populated areas, barrel
bombs and cluster munitions, among others.

Spain is particularly concerned about the
growing trend of direct attacks on doctors and
hospitals. The recent adoption of resolution 2286
(2016) - sponsored by Egypt, Japan, New Zealand,
Spain and Uruguay - has allowed us to further address
this issue in the Security Council, but it is only a first
step. Reversing this trend will require a coordinated
effort of the Council, the Assembly and the Secretariat,
in coordination with specialized organizations such
as the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Medecins Sans Frontieres.

Ensuring humanitarian access has become,
unfortunately, the new task to be addressed in
various theaters of conflict, most notably in Syria,
where hundreds of thousands of civilians are trapped
in besieged or inaccessible areas. International
humanitarian law is very clear that parties to conflict
have a responsibility to ensure safe, free and ongoing
access to the civilian population. Their failure to do so
may constitute a war crime.

Before turning to the peacekeeping operations,
the main subject of this open debate, I wish to refer
to the protection ofjournalists in armed conflict. We
are currently witnessing a growing threat to freedom of
expression, which plays a key role in conflict prevention
and the denunciation of war crimes. Spain therefore
supports the creation of a post of special representative
for this matter.

As the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) notes, when a
peacekeeping operation is deployed with a mandate to
protect civilians, it must do everything in its power to
protect threatened civilians, and non-military strategies
should be at the forefront of that effort. Peace operations
should be conceived as political instruments, and the
best way they can protect civilians is to help to end
conflicts by supporting peace processes, promoting trust
between the parties, reporting to ensure accountability,
and generally using their political influence.

People are the Victims of conflicts and must be
at the heart of our task in the search for peace. This
requires recognizing the centrality ofpolitical solutions
and ultimately prioritizing prevention and mediation to
the utmost as essential tools in finding such solutions,
without which there can be no peacekeeping in our
time. This is particularly clear in the case of protection
of civilians mandates, because without progress in the
political settlement of conflicts it is very difficult for a
mission to effectively ensure the necessary protection
to civilians, as the reality on the ground shows in too
many instances.

Of course, recognizing the centrality of political
solutions does not mean that we can avoid paying urgent
attention to the operational aspects of the protection
of civilians. I will return to this point, but I want to
emphasize that my country welcomes the general
direction of our efforts in the context of the review
of peace operations, including in such crucial as the
protection of civilians. Not surprisingly, mediation and
conflict prevention are two of the priorities of Spain's
foreign policy, as is the protection of civilians. We are
sincerely convinced that the review of peace operations
is therefore heading in the correct direction.

Conflict prevention is closely linked to women
and peace and security agenda, to which Spain is also
particularly committed. My country led the review
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, and is now working to put it into practice.
Last October, the Security Council held an open debate
(S/PV.7533) with a record number of speakers, at which
it unanimously adopted resolution 2242 (2015). The big
challenge now is to move from rhetoric to fulfilling our
commitments in deed. Spain continues to work in that
direction. Among other measures, alongside the United
Kingdom it has headed the creation of an informal
group of experts of the Security Council on women,
peace and security, which we want to become a key tool
for integrating gender issues into the discussions of the
Council on the situation the countries on its agenda.

Naturally, the women and peace and security agenda
is not relevant solely to the protection of civilians, given
its aspects related to conflict prevention. Unfortunately,
women and children are the primary victims in conflict,
and as such are the first in line in need of protection. In
that sense, I would stress the importance of deploying
protection of women advisers in all United Nations
missions. The same is true of child protection advisers.
Protection mandates should also continue to enjoy
support at the highest level to fulfil their essential task
of ensuring effective and consistent protection.

Spain also wishes to support the proposal, made by
Foreign Minister Ayrault in his statement, to strengthen
protection of civilians mandates, focusing on combating
human trafficking.

(spoke in French)

As a Francophile, if not Francophone country, we
also welcome the organization by France ofa ministerial
meeting on peacekeeping in Franchophone countries,
to be held in Paris in the autumn.

(spoke in Spanish)

As I mentioned earlier, recognizing the centrality
of political solutions does not mean that we can avoid
paying urgent attention to the operational aspects
of the protection of civilians. We must redouble our
efforts to improve the planning and capabilities of
peace operations.
First, if we want the operations to be effective in
the protection of civilians, it is essential to improve
their design, with clear mandates on the content of such
protection. If we wish to create mandates that are clear,
phased and properly adapted to the reality on the ground
we must also improve information. In this sense, Spain
supports the development of the new United Nations
intelligence policy framework.

Secondly, as noted in the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, we must close
the gap between means and ends that is found often in
the mandates of operations - a gap that has especially
severe consequences in the case of the protection of
civilians. It is imperative to equip our Blue Helmets
with the assets and capabilities necessary to fulfil
the missions we assign them, as well as with clear
rules of engagement, and to make efficient use of the
possibilities offered by new technologies.

Thirdly, we must redouble our efforts in training,
both general and specific, on the implementation of
mandates and force generation, and ensure that we have
the best possible mission leadership.

Fourthly, we must ensure that there is effective
dialogue among the Security Council, the troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat. We should
also be able to have better information by developing
strategic communication from the earliest stages
of a mission's establishment and right through its
conclusion.

I cannot fail to mention the absolute need to
eradicate sexual abuse and exploitation. It is intolerable
for those responsible for ensuring the protection of
civilians to also be the same who assault them in the
most humiliating way. We must move from a zero-
tolerance policy to a reality where this scourge no
longer exists.

Finally, I recall that sovereignty not only gives a
State the right to control its own affairs, but also confers
the primary responsibility to protect the population
within its borders. We cannot remain indifferent to the
suffering ofthousands ofthe world's citizens. In the face
of their pain, inaction is not an option. Peacekeeping
operations with a mandate to protect civilians are
the best tool we have to strengthen the necessary
implementation of the responsibility to protect. I refer
specifically to its second pillar, that is, providing States
with the crucial assistance they need to meet their
primary responsibility for protecting their populations.

