Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Thank you, Sir, for your
able stewardship of the Council this month. I also wish
to thank the Mission of the United States for their very
able leadership of the Council last month and Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his customarily
comprehensive briefing.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express to the Secretary-General our great admiration
for his leadership, integrity and compassion in dealing

08-4326]
with the very delicate effort concerning the release our
two boys, Ehud Goldwasser and Eldad Regev. In spite
of the sad closure of that chapter, we are very grateful
to the Secretary-General for his efforts, both personally
and through his mediator, to bring it to a close. We
realize how compassionate he was about it, and we are,
both as a State and personally speaking on behalf of
the families, eternally grateful to him.

I have prepared a speech for this meeting, Sir,
which I will submit to you and ask you to read,
because some very good people have worked very hard
on it, and it is, I think, a very good speech that I think
should be read by everybody. But, as this is most
probably my last appearance before the Council as
Permanent Representative of the State of Israel, I
would like to take the liberty to speak to the Council
from the heart rather than from the written word.

I would like to start by thanking everyone here,
each and every representative - Permanent
Representatives and Deputy Permanent
Representatives, members of the Council and other
Ambassadors - for the time and the energy that
everyone has spent on, among other issues, the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and our problems. Throughout,
many representatives have shown great integrity and
great leadership. Many representatives have spent
much time and energy on a conflict that to so many of
them is so far away. But I would like truly to express
my appreciation for What has been over the years a true
demonstration of care, compassion, intelligence and
integrity by very many.

I would also like to share with the Council what it
is like and what it feels like to represent Israel at the
United Nations and around this table. One of the first
things I would like to point out is that I am afraid that
many of those present have not been to Israel, and I
think that whatever words I use and whatever
descriptions I give will never fully bring to the
awareness of the world, or even of those present, what
an incredible country Israel truly is.

I invite each and every representative here -
some representatives have been invited and have not
yet been able to make the journey - to come to Israel.
Everyone will see a country that is very different from
the perception he sees on the television screens, from
the perception he gets from watching cable networks,
where one sees only a country that seems to be a place
torn by violence and bloodshed. Everyone will
discover a very vibrant country of great excellence and
innovation, where young people go about their lives
enjoying themselves, while contributing to the country
and to the world. Everyone will see a country that has
contributed and is contributing each and every day to
mankind and to humanity, not just to itself and the
Jewish people, by making deserts bloom with its
agriculture, by making limbs move with its medicine,
and by making the world a better place each and every
day with its innovations, patents, creativity and
excellence, and indeed a richer place with its art and its
culture. I would urge everyone here to come and see
for themselves because, as with many other countries,
one can never understand what Israel is really like
unless one touches it and smells it and feels it. We urge
everyone to come and visit.

But I would also like everyone here, for one
moment, to imagine - to imagine what it is like to be
an Israeli. Imagine being a grandfather like me, who
sometimes goes to the kindergarten to pick up his
young grandchild and whose heart breaks when he sees
the armed guard in front of that kindergarten and for a
moment is not sure whether he will live to see the
moment when he will embrace his grandchild alive.
Imagine what it is to embark on a bus and look around
in fear, not knowing whether that bus will reach its
destination or blow up. Imagine what it is like to sit in
a cafe in Jerusalem and to realize that, while a coffee
on the Champs-Elyse'es or in the Pushkin Cafe' in
Moscow or right here in New York may cost $2 or $3,
a coffee in Jerusalem could cost many, many lives.
Imagine being a mother in Sderot whose children wet
their beds every night out of fear and who, when she
comes to collect them from school, is not sure they will
be there.

Imagine. Imagine what it is like this morning to
drive on the main street of Jerusalem and have a
bulldozer turn over cars and crush them. Imagine being
on Fifth Avenue or Oxford Street or the Champs-
Elysees and seeing a bulldozer overturning buses and
crushing cars with their occupants inside. Imagine that
reality. Imagine the terror we face and the fear we live
with each and every day, and try to understand what it
is like to be an Israeli.

Now, I have been here for nearly six years. I have
sat here many, many times, and I have often been
accused by some of my colleagues of overreacting,
overdramatizing and being oversensitive. But if those
present here were to come to Israel, or even just to

imagine being there, they would understand that, while
to many what we are dealing with - including in these
quarterly meetings - is a technicality and something
that is happening far, far away, to us it is everyday life.
To us, it is not just statistics and numbers. To us, it is
indeed human faces, living faces and, unfortunately all
too often, dead bodies.

I will be leaving here with a sense of
achievement, because we and Israel have had some
very memorable achievements at the United Nations
over the years, but also with some sense of frustration.
Represented around this table are many countries that
mean well and are here because they want to make a
difference. I truly believe that each and every
representative around this table is here because he or
she wants to make the world a better place for our
children and for our grandchildren. Most are here
because they care; most are here to make a difference.
In that, I include my Palestinian colleague Riyad
Mansour, who is not here. I truly believe that, when he
speaks and when he is here, he cares very deeply about
his people and wants to see their aspirations and their
dreams realized. We may have had our differences, but
they were always out of caring and doing the right
thing.

I can, unfortunately, not say that about every
single member of the Council, because we do have a
member whose main aim is to block any reasonable
resolution and any mention or any condemnation of
terror. I think that that reality should be considered
very carefully when we next come to elect members to
the Security Council. I think the standards should be
higher and the considerations should be deeper.

We are dealing with terror every day, and we
have seen a new manifestation of terror only a few
hours ago in Jerusalem. A few yards away from where
President Peres was having lunch in his residence with
President Abbas, another terrorist used a bulldozer as a
death machine, trying to kill as many people as he
could. That is the second time this has happened. When
it happened the first time, people thought it was a just a
crazy man doing something crazy. Now, it is becoming
a pattern and we are seeing yet another contribution
from those people whom one member of this Council
totally supports. That member supports terrorism.

When I look around this table, I see people
representing countries that gave the world great Asian
art; that gave the world Emile Zola and Hector Berlioz;

that gave the world alternative medicine; that gave the
world Breughel; that gave the world Benjamin
Franklin, the Declaration of Independence, Albert
Einstein and Leonard Bernstein; that gave the world
Thomas Moore and Benjamin Britten; that gave the
world Dostoyevsky and Tchaikovsky; that gave the
world Verdi; and that have given the world, among
other things, Nelson Mandela.

What are the contributions of those terrorists to
our world? Their biggest inventions and most advanced
exports are airplane hijackings, hostage-takings,
suicide bombings and, indeed now, using bulldozers as
death machines. I would ask those here, when they
next talk about the Middle East, discuss the situation
there and talk about Israel, to think about that and to
think about what we are dealing with each and every
day. I wonder what they will think of next.

But what I would ask and urge those here to do is
to think of the world we live in. We are here to really
deal with the real problems of the world we live in. We
are, each and every one of us, here to make a
difference. We are here to make the world a safer and
better place. But what we are truly witnessing today is
no longer a clash of civilizations. We are indeed
witnessing a clash of civilization, in the singular,
because most of the horror, most of the bloodshed,
most of the killing and most of the violence, sadly and
tragically, is within Islam.

Not only is the vast majority of terrorists Muslim,
but sadly and tragically, the vast majority of victims is
Muslim. Each and every day, Muslims are being killed
by Muslims in Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Algeria,
Morocco, Sharm el-Sheikh and Amman. What is the
most frightening thing to me is the eerie silence of the
Muslim world, the fact that we do not see in this
Council or in the world a Muslim leader - be he
secular, religious, political or academic - getting up
to say "Enough is enough. What are we doing?"

I hope very much that such a leader will emerge,
and I hope very much that the Arab and Muslim world
will realize that it is its duty and responsibility today,
in that very clash, to support the moderates and to
isolate and marginalize the extremists, because that is
indeed what we are witnessing: a horrible clash
between moderates and extremists. Nowhere is that
illustrated more starkly than in Iran, where there is a
President who denies the Holocaust while preparing

08-4326]
the next one and who calls for wiping another Member
State of this Organization off the face of the map.

I think that much of the Arab world and the
Muslim world, as I witnessed first-hand in Annapolis,
realizes where the real threat is. It is up to them to
stand up today for what is right, to support and
legitimize a moderate Palestinian leadership, and to tell
those leaders that if they go for a fair and long-lasting
settlement the Arab and Muslim world will stand by
them, legitimize them and support them. I believe that
this is also the solemn duty of the Security Council: to
support the talks on the ground between the moderate
and democratically elected leadership of the
Palestinians and the Israeli leadership, and to let the
parties reach an agreement which - hopefully very,
very soon - will bring an end to the cycle of violence
and make our two peoples live side by side in peace,
security and prosperity.

I believe it will happen. I am saddened by the fact
that it will not happen during my tenure, but my wish
for my successor is that it may happen on her watch.

In the meantime, I want once again to thank
members for their comradeship, for their collegiality,
for their understanding, for their compassion, for their
leadership and for their integrity. It has been an honour
for me to serve with them, and I want on this very
special occasion to make one more pledge: whatever
happens, whatever the Council discusses, whatever
transpires, Israel will prevail, because a country that
has given the world the Weitzmann Institute, Hebrew
University and the Israel Philharmonic can do no less.
Thank you very much, and goodbye.

