Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset I wish to congratulate you,
Madam, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We also extend our
congratulations and appreciation to our fellow
Ambassador of Lebanon for his able and successful
conduct of the Council's tasks during the past month.

The unprecedented, aggressive language used by
certain ambassadors against my country and against its
political leadership has facilitated my task today, for
their discourse underscored what we and other friendly
ambassadors have said, namely, that my country is
being targeted by its enemies on the basis of principle,
and not on any humanitarian reasons whatsoever. That
aggressive discourse has revealed the prejudice against
my country, Syria, and against its political leadership
that exists in certain Western capitals. The prejudice is
due to our independent political position, which does
not conform to the agendas of those capitals.

On 3 October, an armed terrorist group
assassinated both Saria Hassoun, the son of Grand
Mufti Ahmad Badreddin Hassoun, and Dr. Mohammad
al-Omar, a history professor at the University of
Aleppo. A few days ago, on 29 September, to be exact,
another armed terrorist group assassinated Aws Abdel
Karim Khalil, a nuclear engineer and dean of the
University of Homs. Two days earlier, on
27 September, a third armed terrorist group
assassinated Nael al-Dakhil, dean of the Chemistry
Faculty at the University of Homs, as well as
Dr. Mohammad Ali Akeel, dean of the Faculty of
Architecture of the University of Homs. On
25 September, a fourth armed terrorist group
assassinated Dr. Hassan Eid, Director of Cardiology at
the National Hospital in Horns.

All of those crimes were committed in the same
week. Unfortunately, they were added to the 800 army,
police and security personnel and a similar number of
our civilian citizens who were killed. We are deeply
saddened by that.

The armed terrorist groups inaugurated a new era
of terrorism, targeting Syria's State institutions, the
army and universities, by assassinating our scientific,
medical, academic and spiritual leaders. Despite the
terrible haemorrhaging of the entire homeland of my
country, Syria, of which I am proud, there are certain
States that are leading the international campaign to
intervene in Syria under the pretext of human rights
and the protection of civilians. Those countries
continue to reject the existence of the armed terrorist
groups in Syria, for reasons that are known to all.

Moreover, those States continue to protect and
sponsor the leaders of those terrorist groups, whom
they host in their capitals. They continue to convene
for them one conference after another, where they
refuse to engage in dialogue with my Government.
Notably, those States are infamous for their black
notebook in the field of protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

I do not think anyone would chose to ignore the
massacres and human rights violations that were
committed in Viet Nam, the Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Cambodia, Algeria and many other African
countries and in Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as in
Libya, and in the prisons of Abu Ghraib, Guantanamo
and the secret prisons in Europe, to mention just a few.

We have stated previously that Syria is
beleaguered by a two-pronged problem. The first prong
is that the country truly requires economic, political
and social reforms. Such reforms are necessary and the
masses have called for them. That is what we are
working to achieve. The second prong is the misuse of
the demands and needs of the masses for purposes that
are diametrically opposed to the desires of the Syrian
people. This includes misuse of those rightful demands
as a ladder to facilitate external opposition, provoke
sectarian unrest and insecurity, pave the way for
external intervention and to call for that intervention.

All of those actions are categorically rejected by
the Syrian people, including by the honest domestic
opposition. In that connection, certain parties within
the Security Council continue to promote the Council's
involvement in Syria's domestic affairs and
development, which is a tremendous disservice to the
rule of law. It is also in the interest of the agendas of
certain parties who oppose Syria on the basis of
unfounded pretexts, including the pretext of
maintaining international peace and security. That is
not in the interest of Syria's security and stability. We
are astounded by that irrational non-objective political
trend that strives, in an absurd and frantic manner, to
undermine stability, security and coexistence in the
entire region generally, and in Syria in particular, by
defaming Syria and its important political stature and
role in the Arab region and the world.

Those parties have repeatedly abused the
Council, using it as a cover-up for implementing their
interventions in the domestic affairs of Member States.
And even when those parties were faced with the
desire of the other States on the Council to rise above
those interventionist policies, we noted that the former
resorted to unilateral actions outside the scope of
international law to implement their political and
military schemes. Hence, those parties - in violation
of international law - exported NATO forces to many
Member States of this international Organization, to
undermine their political stability, plunder their riches
and spread so-called creative anarchy in those
countries.

However - and this is a paradox - those parties
made aggressive use of the veto 50 times since 1948
against the Palestinians, in order to deprive them of
their legitimate rights and to prevent the establishment
of their State. A certain State used its veto power 50
times to protect Israel and it continues to threaten to
use its veto power. That could be considered taking
part in genocide, because that action is tantamount to
turning a blind eye to and supporting the Israeli
massacres in occupied Arab lands. That is without even
mentioning the misuse of the events and developments
in Syria to divert international public opinion away
from the legitimate demands of Palestinians to have
full membership in the United Nations.

The Syrian leadership responded quickly and
immediately to the legitimate demands of the Syrian
population. President Bashar Al-Assad announced a
comprehensive package of reforms, which our
Government is implementing by enacting a wide
spectrum of rules and legislation enhancing the
democratic process and expanding the participation of
our citizens in political and economic processes, in
complete independence of the external evaluations and
positions that have no place in our domestic affairs.
Reforms in Syria have become tangible realities on the
ground that can not be ignored. They are ongoing,
despite the attempts by people outside our country to
curtail those reforms by various means.

No State can claim that it is more desirous to
guarantee the safety and security of its citizens than
Syria. Since the unfortunate and painful events in our
country, we have strived to guarantee the security and
safety of each citizen. We have also endeavoured to
continue to provide basic services, food and medicine
Without delay, despite the hasty imposition of
economic sanctions, imposed unilaterally and illegally,
outside of international consensus, against my country.
As we strive to stand against the forces of Israeli and
Western hegemony directed against our country, those
measures were intended to put pressure on the Syrian
population and their livelihoods and to push it to
replace its political regime. Such activities are a
violation of a people's right to self-determination and
to choose its political system without outside pressure.
That is why claiming a motive in the so-called
humanitarian situation is only a pretext to intervene in
our domestic affairs in a way that is harmful to our
leaders and our country, in the interest of external
political agendas that have nothing to do with the
desire to promote humanitarian goals in Syria.

Syria received delegations from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, presided
over by the Chairman of the Committee, who met
personally with our President, Bashar Al-Assad. They
and other international political, religious and media
delegations saw for themselves the provocation,
incitement and propaganda from certain circles aimed
at distorting the facts.

Certain Council members have tried of late to
intervene in our domestic affairs under the pretext of
the protection of civilians. We only wonder here where
they have been and why they have not protected
civilians in Palestine, the occupied Syrian Golan,
Southern Lebanon, Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya, when
the citizens of those countries were beleaguered by
crimes against humanity and war crimes. It is
interesting that the representative of France, on 14 July
of this year, extended thanks to Israel for its military
action against Syria in 2007. Could that not be
considered an encouragement and promotion of
aggression? Is that not against all rules and norms of
the international community and all ethical principles
that reject the use of force as a solution?

The international legal framework governing
international relations is based on the principle of
non-interference in the domestic affairs of States. It has
been enshrined in myriad international instruments,
chief among them the United Nations Charter, Article
2, paragraph 7. Therefore, the calls from certain circles
to topple the legitimate Government of Syria are an
irresponsible incitement aimed at undermining Syrian
stability. It is a glaring violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and is harmful to the interests of
Governments. Encouraging the radical demands of the
opposition in Syria to topple the Government by force
of arms, violence and terrorism amounts to a coup
supported by outside Powers and can certainly not be
considered as reform.

Is not the political declaration by certain leaders
and foreign ministers of countries on the Council that
the Syrian President has lost his legitimacy, and that
therefore he should step down, a blatant breach of
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations? Is that not a blatant interference in the
internal affairs of Syria and is it not subject to
questioning? Is that not tantamount to hindrance of
national reforms by inciting the Syrian people on the
streets against the legitimate Syrian leadership? Those
are questions that we leave to members to answer.

We hope that the United Nations and its Member
States will assist Syria in addressing the terrorist and
extremist acts and attempts to destabilize it. Hastily
defined positions should not be used to disguise
political pressure in order to encourage armed
extremist groups. Here, we wish to affirm that the
intervention of the Security Council in Syrian internal
affairs further aggravates the situation and sends a
message to extremists and terrorists that their acts of
deliberate sabotage and violence - towards which no
country can be lenient - are encouraged and
supported by the Security Council.

Syria, like other States Members of the
Organization, including those represented on the

Council, have problems that require reform. If there is
anyone here who has no problems and does not need
reform, they can cast a stone at us. While the greedy
schemes of our enemies inside and outside the Council
may succeed elsewhere at the expense of the stability,
security and safety of other countries, I can underscore
that Syria will stand resolute against any plot that
targets its sovereignty, national security, independence
and stability, as well as its independent political
decisions.

We therefore reject the manoeuvres of the
sponsors of the draft resolution that has just failed to
be adopted. Such political and media manoeuvres
target my country and its stature in the international
arena. The power of prestige is more important than
power itself. The sponsors have lost the power of
prestige, and now they have resorted to power, since
they have lost the trust of the majority of States
Members of the Organization.

Through such conduct, they undermine
international legitimacy and seek to lead the entire
world into a new colonial era and military adventures
in various places that are bound and doomed to fail.
Those very States led the whole world into two world
wars that claimed millions of lives on our planet. With
their colonial behaviour, their enslavement and their
attitude, they caused the untold suffering of hundreds
of millions in Asia, Africa and Latin America.

In closing, I wish to extend thanks, gratitude and
appreciation to the friendly States that rejected the
misuse and abuse of the Council as a tool to harm my
country's interests, political independence, security and
stability. If we are optimistic about the Council, it is
because we continue to hear the voice of the wise
echoing in the Chamber, calling for a hand to be
extended to Syria to address its difficulties, to
encourage the Syrian Government to push ahead with
the desired reforms, and to call on the external
opposition to enter into a comprehensive national
dialogue in order to build a Syria for all our citizens
without exception.

