Mr. Jallow: First of all, I would like to place on
record my deep appreciation for the decision of the
Security Council to renew my mandate as the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for a further term. I am indeed greatly
indebted to the Council and to His Excellency the
Secretary-General for their continued support to me
and to the ICTR in the discharge of our
responsibilities. I look forward, with their support, to a
timely and proper completion of the ICTR mandate
during this term.

Some 17 years following its establishment -
after 93 indictees, 83 arrests, the conclusion of the
trials of 70 accused persons, with 60 convictions and
10 acquittals, the discontinuation of the trial of five
accused persons and the referral of two accused to
France for trial, and with nine fugitives at large - the
ICTR is today on the verge of concluding an important
phase of its mandate, that is, the completion of all trials
at first instance.

In the past six months, we have concluded trial
proceedings in respect of four accused persons. The
only ongoing trial is Augustin Ngirabatware. As of
now, trial judgements have been rendered in all the
multi-accused cases except Karemera et al., which is
scheduled for December. While proceedings for the
preservation of evidence in terms of Rule 71 bis
against the three top fugitives - Kabuga, Mpiranya
and Bizimana - are still ongoing, I am pleased to
report that much progress has been achieved, as the
prosecution phase of such proceedings has been
concluded in all three cases.

Currently, there are only two detainees at the
ICTR, namely, Uwinkindi and Munyagishari, whose
cases are pending trial. In a landmark decision
delivered in June, the ICTR Referral Chamber granted
the request of the Prosecutor for the Uwinkindi case to
be referred to Rwanda for trial under Rule 11 bis of the
ICTR rules. The Chamber did so on the conviction that
having regard to the legal framework in that
jurisdiction, the capacity-building efforts to improve
the legal system of Rwanda and the arrangements made
for the monitoring of the trial in Rwanda, the accused
would have a fair trial in Rwanda. That is the first case
of an indictee being referred by the ICTR for trial in
Rwanda, or indeed in any African jurisdiction.

The case is now pending in the Appeals Chamber
of the ICTR. The decision of the Appeals Chamber will
either way impact on the ICTR Completion Strategy. If
the referral is confirmed, I expect that it will pave the
way for the transfer of the only other remaining
detainee for trial. We shall also proceed with the
hearing and determination of requests already filed for
referral in respect of two other cases. In addition, I
shall file additional applications for the referral of four
of the remaining fugitives, leaving only the cases of the
three top fugitives.

Litigation over the referral of cases will therefore
be a significant aspect of our workload in the months
ahead. A confirmation by the Appeals Chamber of the
referral may therefore result no new trials being
commenced at the ICTR.
My office will also be focusing on the
prosecution and management of appeals, the tracking
of fugitives, the servicing of foreign requests for
assistance and preparing for a smooth and effective
transition to the Residual Mechanism. Following the
delivery of judgements in two multi-accused trials and
one single-accused trial, involving 15 accused, and
with further judgements anticipated in Karemera and
another case, and in three single-accused trials,
involving five more accused - for a total of 20 - my
Office expects a significant increase in the workload of
our Appeals and Legal Advisory Division during 2012
and part of 2013. The Division is already fully
occupied prosecuting and responding to numerous
appeals in a number of other cases, involving 18
accused persons and 24 separate appeals.

The tracking and arrest of the remaining nine
fugitives remains a major challenge for a timely and
proper completion by the ICTR, and therefore remains
one of the priorities of the Office of the Prosecutor.
The tracking and arrest of the remaining nine fugitives
remains one of the priorities of the Office of the
Prosecutor. We plan to intensify activities in that
regard, in an effort to reduce the workload for the
Residual Mechanism by transferring a smaller number
of fugitives to it when its Arusha branch commences its
work, on 1 July 2012. I have therefore continued
diplomatic engagement with relevant States, with a
View to securing their cooperation in the tracking and
arrest of the remaining fugitives. Those initiatives
complement the continuous efforts of the Tracking Unit
in my Office. I am hopeful that with greater
cooperation, in particular from member States of the
Great Lakes Conference, the many fugitives located in
the territories of the Conference will be arrested and
brought to account, thereby serving the interests of
both global justice and regional peace and stability.

The joint ICTR-Kenya Police Task Force has
been reactivated and operating since November 2010 to
secure the arrest and transfer of F elicien Kabuga to the
ICTR for trial. Kenya must cooperate fully with the
ICTR to bring the matter to a satisfactory conclusion. I
wish to record our appreciation of the involvement of
other Member States that have contributed to the work
of the Task Force.
Difficulties continue with regard to the
apprehension of Protais Mpiranya, another top-level
fugitive earmarked for trial by the Residual
Mechanism. Reliable information received by the
ICTR indicates Mpiranya's presence in Zimbabwe. The
Security Council should request that both Kenya and
Zimbabwe fully discharge their legal obligations in that
respect and cooperate with the ICTR.

In order to further effectively prepare for the
transition to the Residual Mechanism and to reduce its
workload, my Office is currently updating the case
files in respect of six fugitives to ensure their readiness
for trial before the Residual Mechanism or for transfer
to a national jurisdiction, as the case may be. That
exercise is expected to conclude by the end of the first
quarter of 2012.

The steady increase in the number and origin of
foreign requests to my Office in support of national
investigations and prosecutions is a strong indication
of the growing partnership between national systems
and international courts in combating impunity through
legal accountability. In 2010, my Office received and
attended to 143 such requests from 12 countries. In the
period from January to November, we processed 106
such requests from 26 Member States. The continued
growth in the number of such requests, as well as the
number of Member States utilizing the service, are
expected to take up significant time and resources of
the Residual Mechanism. In that respect, we are
committed to ensuring that the Mechanism will be able
to effectively continue providing that important service
to Member States.

