Ms. Tan (Singapore): At the outset, let me thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Frechette,
for introducing the Secretary-General's latest report on
the situation in Afghanistan, which is both informative
and comprehensive.

Singapore is in full agreement with most of the
points made in the report. A recurring motive in the
Secretary-General's report is for Afghan priorities to
lead the international community's efforts, and this
should maximize the use of Afghan capacity. Indeed,
Afghan voices should constantly guide our work here
in the Council. However, it is imperative that all
Afghans also work cohesively together and transcend
ethnic and regional parochialism.

The international community has a unique
opportunity to make good in Afghanistan. Similarly,
Afghanistan has a singular chance to make the most of
the international community's focused attention on it.
Neither should squander the prospect.

It is also timely and appropriate for the
Norwegian presidency to convene today's open debate
to review developments in Afghanistan four months
since the last such debate and three months since the
inauguration of the Afghan Interim Authority and
establishment of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF).

We join others in expressing our condolences to
the Afghan authorities and people for the thousands
feared dead after a series of earthquakes struck
northern Afghanistan last night and earlier today and in
appealing for urgent humanitarian and other assistance
to be extended.

Given the global interest in Afghanistan, it is
especially important for Council members to listen
regularly to the views of non-Council members,
especially members of the "six plus two" group, which
now meets in Kabul and includes Afghanistan and
other key players, as we deliberate on the next steps,
including the draft resolution referred to by France.
The presence of the Norwegian Foreign Minister, Chair
of the Afghan Support Group, will also provide an
important dimension to the Council's work.

The Security Council has been intimately
involved in developments in Afghanistan for many
years. More recently, the Council has closely
monitored and given the added push and support
whenever necessary to affirm the United Nations
central role in supporting the Afghan people's efforts in
reinstating Afghanistan into the community of nations.
The Council stands ready, as it declared in resolution
1383 (2001), to support the interim institutions
established by the Bonn Agreement, as well as to
support the implementation of the Agreement itself.

Singapore therefore looks forward to
participating in the Council's discussion to establish
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan:
a lean, unified and integrated United Nations structure,
designed to support the various processes outlined in
the Bonn Agreement.

It is clear from the participation in this open
debate, and from the various complementary tracks -
including the Tokyo donor's conference, which made
an important contribution to securing the political
process - that the Security Council is but one forum
involved in the development of a global consensus on a
coherent and comprehensive long-term strategy to
bring peace to Afghanistan. Nonetheless, because of its
responsibility under the Charter and its operational
capability, the Security Council is perhaps best
equipped to harness the collective and sustained
political will to address the underlying causes and
dynamics of the conflict in Afghanistan and to help the
country's transition from war to peace. This, of course,
does not preclude the Security Council from
collaborating closely with all relevant partners to
develop complementarity in our common endeavour.

With the help of the United Nations and the rest
of the international community, Afghanistan has made
huge strides in the right direction in many areas. The
first stage of the three-step Bonn process has made
headway in generating both domestic and international
legitimacy for the Afghan Interim Authority. There is a
growing sense of security in Kabul. The worst of the
humanitarian crisis has been averted. There is a steady
stream of Afghan refugees from neighbouring countries
and internally displaced persons returning home.
Nascent institutions have been re-established.
Singapore has pledged, in addition to humanitarian
assistance, a special five-year technical assistance
package to train Afghans to help the most vulnerable
groups in society, in particular women and children.
However, despite progress in all of these areas, there is,
as the Secretary-General noted, no room for
complacency. Simple events that would be taken for
granted in most parts of the world, such as Afghans
celebrating the new year on 21 March and 1.5 million
Afghan children returning to school last Saturday, hit
the headlines and made front-page news precisely
because of the depths to which Afghanistan had sunk.

Tensions bubble beneath the surface and
constantly threaten to reverse the fragile and tentative
progress that has been made. As we have learned from
so many conflicts around the world, in order to be
sustainable, any political or peace process must adopt a
comprehensive and coherent approach. This is
something that Singapore has long advocated, and it is
an issue to which Colombia also referred.

Elements of progress on the political,
humanitarian, reconstruction and security tracks are
mutually reinforcing. While it is not necessary for
progress on all of these tracks to proceed at the same
pace, a critical lag on one of them could seriously
jeopardize the entire process. In this regard, an urgent
and pressing issue, which the Secretary-General has
brought to our attention, is the security situation. We
are grateful to the United Kingdom for its leadership in
establishing the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF), as well as for the contribution of all the troop-
contributing countries, which has brought a degree of
calm to Kabul. ISAF has provided a crucial anchor,
allowing the Afghan Interim Authority to extend its
influence, especially to the provinces and outlying
regions. However, while security and neutrality are
being maintained in Kabul, there have been worrying
reports of instability in other parts of Afghanistan,
especially in the crucial period leading up to the
emergency Loya Jirga.

As the recent activities of the international
coalition demonstrate, Al Qaeda and Taliban fighters
remaining in Afghanistan continue to pose a threat to
the peace process. Important efforts have been made to
establish an Afghan national army and police force.
However, stopgap measures might be needed in the
interim before both are brought to effective capacity.
The Security Council should therefore examine all the
instruments in its toolbox of actions to address this
important question. Calibrating international assistance
could be a powerful incentive for good behaviour.
However, carrots must always be backed up by strong
sticks. The Security Council must carefully examine
how best to avoid any major armed conflict and
provide security for the main transportation and trade
routes.

Even as the international community's attention is
focused on Afghanistan, we should not forget the
interlinkages with the wider region. The generous
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts directed at
Afghanistan should therefore have a regional focus,
and should generate peace dividends for Afghanistan's
neighbours, so that a vested interest in Afghanistan's
stability can be developed. Similarly, it is important to
remember that Afghanistan is but one of the many
trouble spots in the world deserving of the world's
attention and involvement. The big lesson of
Afghanistan is that the fate of a distant country can
have a global and catastrophic impact. The United
Nations and the international community at large must
therefore not repeat the mistakes of the past, but stay
the course in their efforts in Afghanistan and elsewhere
for the long term.

