Mr. Christian (Ghana): Allow me to thank
Ambassadors Jones Parry, Kumalo, Voto-Bernales and
De La Sabliere for leading the mission to the various
countries that it visited. My delegation commends them

for their effective roles, which contributed to a large
extent to the mission's success. We also express our
appreciation for the courtesies and hospitality extended
to our delegation by the authorities in the various
capitals we visited. We are pleased by the positive
comments made by various delegations about the
warmth of the reception that was accorded by President
Kufuor and the Government and the people of Ghana
during our mission to Accra.

The exchange of views in Addis Ababa, among
other things, enabled the Security Council and the
African Union Commission to clarify ways to
strengthen the relationship between them in the
maintenance of peace and security in Africa. It also
afforded the United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council the
opportunity to discuss how to achieve close
cooperation between them to attain the shared
objectives of peace and security in Africa.

My delegation believes that any proposals for
African Union/United Nations cooperation concerning
countries emerging from conflicts should take into
account the African Union framework for post-conflict
reconstruction and development as well as the peace
and security components of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD), both of which
emphasize, among other things, the need to address the
root causes of conflict in order to prevent countries
emerging from conflict from suffering a relapse into
chaos.

We wish to stress the importance of using the
momentum generated by the Council's visit to
Khartoum to accelerate progress on the peace process,
peacekeeping and the humanitarian front. The
agreements by the Government of Sudan to implement
the Addis Ababa framework without conditions provide
the Security Council and the African Union the
opportunity to resolve the conflict in Darfur and bring
an end to the suffering of the people of that region. We
hope that the Security Council will demonstrate its
unity on this issue and soon adopt a resolution
authorizing the hybrid peacekeeping operation, which
will lead to a comprehensive settlement of the crisis.

We acknowledge that the full implementation of
the United Nations heavy support package for the
African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) and the
deployment of two additional AMIS battalions are a
necessary foundation for the establishment of the
hybrid operation.

While the African Union Peace and Security
Council has authorized the deployment of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to support
efforts by the Transitional Federal Government to
stabilize Somalia, facilitate dialogue and reconciliation
and support development, it is apparent that more
resources are required to ensure a more effective
AMISOM. process capable of carrying out effectively
the peacekeeping operation. The United Nations role in
generating such resources cannot be overemphasized.

During the Council's mission to Abidjan, we were
impressed by the assurances given by the Ivorian
leaders with regard to their continued commitment to
the peace process. However, the recent assassination
attempt on the life of Prime Minister Soro, which led to
the deaths of some innocent civilians and which Ghana
strongly condemns, demonstrates that the security
situation is still fragile. We hope that the perpetrators
will be brought to justice as it is important to block
such efforts to derail the peace process.

My delegation is encouraged by the progress
made so far by the parties in implementing the
Ouagadougou agreement. Nonetheless, considering the
list of missed deadlines and the remaining tasks yet to
be accomplished, we should not underestimate the
obstacles and challenges to be overcome in
consolidating the peace process, so as to ensure that
free and fair elections can be organized early next year.

That is why we believe that the resolution
adopted by the Council this morning renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and urging all parties concerned to
redouble their efforts is a step in the right direction and
must be backed by sustained action and commitment
by the international community, in order to ensure that
progress, which has up to now been mixed, becomes
truly irreversible.

To this end, Ghana will continue to lend her
unwavering support to the efforts of the facilitator,
President Blaise Compaore.

