Ms. Mohammed: I would first like to express our
appreciation to your delegation, Madam President,
for convening this open debate on the crucial topic of
the protection of civilians. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and the Director-General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, as
well as the representative of civil society, for their
valuable briefings.

The African Union (AU) is fully committed to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, and continues
to strengthen its normative and legal framework for
enhancing that protection. Over the past decade, the
AU has responded to many situations in which civilians
are caught up in the middle of fighting or directly
targeted by negative forces or terrorist groups.In that
regard, it should be recalled that the African Union's
transition from the Organization of African Unity in
2002 was marked by a paradigm shift from a doctrine
of non-interference to one of non-indifference to
human suffering. As a result, the AU's peace support
operations in Africa have been increasingly tasked with
the protection of civilians. Almost all peace support
operations authorized by the Peace and Security
Council since 2003 have faced protection challenges
to a greater or lesser degree throughout the course of
their deployment and have utilized various strategies to
address those challenges.

In that context, I want to highlight the experience
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
which remains one of the best illustrations of the
African Union's growing commitment to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Over the decade that
has elapsed since its deployment in 2007, AMISOM
has achieved undeniable security and political gains
in Somalia, while using its active military operations
there to ensure that the Somali civilian population has
been protected from the terrorist threat.

Our efforts to ensure the highest standards of
transparency, professional conduct and discipline and
to uphold international law are further reinforced by
the fact that the protection of civilians has become a
central preoccupation of the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the African Union Commission.
In recognition of the importance of the protection of
civilians in the AU's responses to conflict situations,
at its 326th meeting, held on 26 June 2012 in Addis
Ababa, the Peace and Security Council decided that the
protection of civilians must form part of the mandate
of all future AU support operations. Draft guidelines
for this were developed in 2010 and an aide-memoire
on the protection of civilians was adopted in 2015.
In formulating those policy documents, the AUC
has engaged very closely with the United Nations, in
particular the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, in order to ensure that the protection of
civilians in the AU context is aligned with the United
Nations approach as much as possible.

The importance that the protection of civilians
holds for the AU is further demonstrated by its zero-
tolerance stance on sexual exploitation and abuse. In
that regard, we have been working very closely with
the United Nations to enhance our compliance with
international instruments in peace support operations.
That is in line with the joint AU-United Nations
strategic framework documents, including the 19 April
2017 Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, and
is part of the ongoing efforts to secure predictable and
sustainable financing for AU peace support operations.

In conclusion, I want to underscore that the AU's
field experience has highlighted the importance of the
protection of civilians for the overall success of peace

efforts on the ground. The gaps and challenges that
today's multidimensional peace operations have to
deal with go far beyond the protection debate as such.
The protection of civilians is central to the purpose
and legitimacy of any peace support operations. Any
failure in properly implementing the mandate to protect
civilians runs a high risk of turning populations against
any international military presence, which is especially
detrimental in any asymmetrical threat environment.

