Ms. Bella]: First of all, on behalf of the Geneva
Academy of International Humanitarian Law and
Human Rights, I would like to thank the Security
Council for having invited me to share with the Council
some thoughts on this important anniversary - from
the perspective of not only a scholar and practitioner of
international humanitarian law but of one who teaches
it to future generations.

Younger generations use Twitter intensively.
Therefore, before coming here, I tweeted to ask them
what they thought was the key message I should convey
to the Council today. One message was mentioned
repeatedly: the importance of common article 1 to the
four Geneva Conventions and the obligations therein to
respect, and to ensure respect for, the Conventions in all
circumstances. To put it in more prosaic terms - again,
speaking to students - I often say that common article

I, which requires respect for international humanitarian
law, is an everlasting reminder of the central value
underpinning any legal system, that our common
humanity must be the measure of all things and that we
need to ensure respect for international humanitarian
law because, ultimately, we are all in this together.

I will therefore structure my remarks around
common article land develop three specific points to
illustrate the idea that we are all in this together: first, the
protracted nature of contemporary armed conflicts and
the value of mainstreaming international humanitarian
law; secondly, the prevalence of non-international
armed conflicts and the need to increase ownership of
humanitarian norms among armed non-State actors;
and, thirdly, recognizing the benefits of peer pressure.

Let me start with my first point. One unfortunate
feature of contemporary armed conflicts is their
protracted nature. As such, they have long-term
consequences on civilians, who are unable to live their
lives normally, often for decades. It also deeply impacts
the mental and physical health of all those facing
such traumatizing events, hampering their potential
to build a solid future in the aftermath of a conflict.
Under such circumstances, no institution can afford to
work in isolation. Other bodies of law, such as human
rights or refugee law, are obviously relevant, but so
too are the norms pertaining to human, economic and
social development.

Because international humanitarian law may remain
applicable for a long period in a given situation, there
is a need to mainstream international humanitarian
law in all pertinent legal systems and build bridges
between implementing institutions to create efficient,
coordinated and more integrated responses to
prolonged situations of violence. To a certain extent,
that is already being done. For example, on 15 April,
the World Health Organization (WHO) denounced
the violation of international humanitarian law in the
context of the fighting between the different parties
to the armed conflict in Libya, in which 147 people
died and more than 600 were injured, among them
medical personnel, in a single day. That call to respect
international humanitarian law by an institution for
which international humanitarian law is not necessarily
the primary mandate is interesting, even more so when
we know that the words "international humanitarian
law" and "armed conflict" are not mentioned once in
the WHO Constitution. To me, that is a sign that the
global international community feels the need to be
more involved in the implementation of humanitarian
norms, and I believe that is a good thing.

There is no need to reinvent the wheel. Creating
new ways to implement international humanitarian
law using existing mechanisms is possible. It is well
known that the financial and economic rebuilding
of a country coming out of conflict can lead to more
sustainable peace and benefit the reconstruction of
society. The United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, for
example, precisely aims, and I quote from its website,
at providing

"for a more sustained engagement in support of
countries emerging from conflict and [supporting]
peacebuilding activities that directly contribute to
post-conflict stabilization".

The Fund, however, is also available as an immediate
response facility, typically for countries that are within
five years of conflict or have a significant risk of
relapsing into conflict. In those situations, international
humanitarian law often remains applicable. Therefore,
out of the 33 countries that receive funding from the
Peacebuilding Fund, at least II are in a situation of
armed conflict to which international humanitarian
law is applicable. As a way to implement common
article 1, one could imagine some kind of conditionality
between the behaviour of the parties to the conflict and
the financial aid they may receive through the Fund, of
course without prejudicing the civilian population.

Let now continue with my second point. According
to the latest figures, the majority of armed conflicts
have, for several years now, been of a non-international
character - that is, they involve armed non-State
actors. The existence of such actors is often a
symptom of deeper societal issues. But it is not the
object and purpose of international humanitarian law
to evaluate the legality or legitimacy of the resort to
armed violence by any party to an armed conflict,
be it a State or a non-State actor. What matters is the
protection of civilians and those who have laid down
their arms. The Geneva Conventions, their Protocols
Additional and customary international humanitarian
law have evolved to address and regulate the behaviour
of armed non-State actors. It is today uncontroversial
that organized armed groups are bound by international
humanitarian law, including on norms pertaining to the
conduct of hostilities.

It has long been long recognized by humanitarian
actors and international organizations, including the
United Nations, that engaging armed non-State actors
on compliance with international norms is a critical
element in any effort to strengthen the protection of
civilians. According to a recent study, at least five
different United Nations organs and agencies have
drafted policies or guidelines on engagement with
armed non-State actors: the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of Peace
Operations, the Secretary-General, UNICEF and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.

However, how armed non-State actors understand
international humanitarian norms, how they value them
and to what extent they have the necessary capacity
actually to implement those norms are issues that
have been neglected by the international community.
Academic and policy research has shown that, if one
strives for better implementation of international
humanitarian law, humanitarian norms must be
reflected in the local norms and values of armed
groups. In other words, it is important to increase their
ownership of international law.

The Council held a briefing in May on the impact
of counter-terrorism legislation on international
humanitarian law and humanitarian action (see S/PV.8534). I will not repeat the content of that debate
here, except to say that labelling any kind of non-State
actors as "terrorist" groups obviously limits the
possibility of humanitarian engagement with those
actors. But, more generally, experts tend to agree that it
is also important to consider armed non-State actors not
only as perpetrators of violations of international law,
but also as actors who can at times play a positive role
in the implementation of international humanitarian
law, if only because they are often very close to
their constituencies.

I now turn to my third and final point, on recognizing
the benefits of peer pressure. Evaluation among peers is
a well-known process in the scientific community. Any

article will always be peer-reviewed before publication
in a scientific journal. Even fiercer are the evaluations
by one's own students on any possible aspect of one's
teaching skills. It is by no means agreeable to read
about one's limitations or one's weaknesses in the
elaboration of an argument and capacity to convince.
But the beauty of peer reviews is that they always lead
to a better final product, one that is more pertinent and
meaningfully contributes to the general debate.

Since the 32nd International Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement, States have tried
to find ways to strengthen respect for international
humanitarian law. While consensus has not yet been
reached, all States reaffirmed that international
humanitarian law remains the appropriate international
legal framework for regulating the conduct of parties
to armed conflict and reiterated their willingness to
work towards improving its implementation. At the
international level, mechanisms such as the Universal
Periodic Review have proved to be feasible for matters
as sensitive politically as respect for human rights
norms. Recognizing the benefits of peer pressure
remains an interesting way forward to better the overall
system of international humanitarian law protection.

Allow me to conclude my remarks by quoting a
novelist whose words were also of universal reach and
who just left us last week. In her acceptance speech
for the Nobel Prize in Literature, Toni Morrison
emphasized the importance of language

"partly as a system, partly as a living thing, over
which one has control, but mostly as an agency, as
an act with consequences".

In 1949, the language of the Geneva Conventions
laid the foundation for an innovative and courageous
legal system. As a lawyer, I of course believe in the
power of the law. But so do humanitarians, who take
immense risks to alleviate the suffering of others. So
do students and scholars who discuss for hours the
significance of a particular treaty provision. And so
do States and the Security Council when debating and
adopting resolutions on the protection of health care
and the rights of children, women and persons with
disabilities in armed conflict. However, as States and
as members of the Security Council, in a State-centric
system like ours, members are the ones with control.
Members are the ones to be the agents of change.
They have the immense privilege of being able to act
with consequences for ensuring better respect for the
Geneva Conventions and guaranteeing their respect
for the sake of our common humanity. We scholars,
students, humanitarians and, of course, victims count
on the Council because we are all in this together.

