Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and express
how honoured we are to have you preside over the
deliberations of the Security Council for the month of
December. I extend a warm welcome to the friendly
country of Spain, with which the Democratic Republic
of the Congo enjoys an excellent relationship based on
mutual respect.

I would also like to pay tribute to the President of
last month's deliberations, the representative of Senegal,
and thank him for the way he steered the deliberations
of the Council in November.

Finally, Mr. President, I thank you for having
taken the initiative of convening this meeting, thereby
enabling the Council to once again sit and consider the
situation in my country.

After the briefings of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, allow me to speak briefly about the security
situation that the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC) are pursuing in the
east of our country - the fight against armed groups,
particularly the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda (F DLR) and the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF). While the attacks of the FDLR are sporadic, the
clashes with the ADF - as the army has consistently
pointed out - represent an asymmetric war because
the enemy uses guerilla tactics and avoids direct
confrontation, preferring ambushes. These enemies of
peace have perfected their mode of operations. They
infiltrate the civilian population and then attack them,
at times drawing them in by wearing the uniforms of the
FARDC. The international composition of that terrorist
force, which consists of rebels of over six nationalities,
deserves the attention of the international community.

Nevertheless, I must point out that for nearly
a month, Beni has enjoyed a certain calm and the
population has been able to go about its business. In
late September, the military court in Beni, North
Kivu, began to deal with crimes carried out against the
civilian population of that region by holding hearings
against members of the ADF who were captured during
FARDC operations, with the support of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Death sentences
have been handed down.

Allow me to also mention an element from South
Sudan, the Sudanese People's Liberation Army, which
is now on our territory. Indeed, in order to preserve
friendly relations between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Republic of South Sudan; avoid
an atmosphere of suspicion with countries with
which we share a long border; and no longer expose
the long-suffering population of eastern Congo to
the presence of foreign rebels, my Government has
already informed the Council and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of the decision taken by the
Congolese people. We do not want Sudanese or South
Sudanese elements 4 the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement - on our territory. That Government
position was reiterated to Council members by the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo when they visited the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Considering that the situation does not seem to be
moving in the direction the Government would like, the
Permanent Mission of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will once again address that issue through a note
that it will present to the Council.

Allow me to also comment on the situation
following the dialogues and the electoral process.
The Head of State, respectful of the commitments
undertaken by the States parties to the dialogue
through the political agreement of 18 October, have
recently - as many have pointed out - named a new
Prime Minister from the political opposition. The long-
awaited Government of national unity will soon be
made public, with the primary mission of organizing
presidential and legislative elections at the national
and provincial levels, to be held in April 2018. In the
meanwhile, the review of the voting register, which
was launched in July, has been registering voters in
12 of the country's 26 provinces, and we have also
started deploying electoral kits to all provinces. This
process will be completed by 31 January 2017, with the
logistical support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Independent National Electoral
Commission plans to close the operation of revising the
voting registry by 31 July 2017.

Pursuant to paragraph (b) of article V of the
political agreement for the holding of calm, credible
and transparent elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the convening of the electoral body by the
Independent National Electoral Commission will occur
on 30 October 2017. All the details of the electoral
timetable will soon be made public by the Independent
National Electoral Commission. Confidence-building
measures to further ease the political environment and
to foment trust among the political stakeholders are
also part of the tasks of the national unity Government
that will soon come into being.

In this difficult period for my country, my
Government greatly appreciated the visit made by the
members of the Council to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from 11 to 13 November. The Government is
working on the recommendations made by the Council
to maintain peace and security across the country. I
wish to assure the Council that my country remains
committed to respecting human rights. My delegation
can affirm without hesitation that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is one of the countries of the
region that is most respectful of human rights and
whose democracy is among the most advanced and
dynamic. It is true that not everything we do is perfect,
but I assure the Council that efforts are being made to
move forward.

My Government cannot restrict freedom of
expression and assembly in a country of 400 political
parties and 800 press and media organizations. The
protective measure taken by the Governor of the city of
Kinshasa to suspend public demonstrations for a certain
time is not intended to stifle democratic expression. It
has been taken solely for the purpose of protecting the
population, which still bears the trauma caused by the
sad events of 19 and 20 September.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes once again to
express to the Council the gratitude of the Congolese
people and their Government for the efforts of the
United Nations to ensure peace and stability in their
country. We take this opportunity to pay a final tribute
to His Excellency Secretary-General Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
to whom our people will remain indebted for all the
achievements of the universal Organization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo during his tenure.

