Mr. Brown (Liberia): On behalf of my grateful
President and my nation, permit me to thank the
Security Council for its support for Liberia's ongoing
transformation. The assistance in the maintenance of
peace and security provided by the Council through the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has been
pivotal to Liberia's stability and progress, as well as to
the security and stability of the West Africa subregion.
We urge the Council to continue its close attention
and support for Liberia as we strive to consolidate our
cherished peace.

On 1 July, the Liberian Government was proud to
formally resume full security responsibilities for our
country. Scarred by a protracted war and seared by a
long history ofmistrust, it can be understood why some
Liberians have not been as enthusiastic and optimistic as
others about the security transition. However, together
we will continue to work for a future of peace, security
and shared prosperity, which we know will ultimately
rest in our own hands.

We thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing and for his
continued commitment and engagement throughout
this period. Similarly, we thank the representative
of the Peacebuilding Commission for the briefing
delivered on behalf of the Commission. The Liberian
Government appreciates the continued engagement of
the Commission, remains committed to the statement
of mutual commitments on peacebuilding in Liberia
and urges international support for its successful
implementation.

The Liberian Government also wishes to reassure
the Council and the broader international community
of its renewed commitment to taking every measure
necessary to safeguard its peace, security and stability.
We are keenly aware of the invaluable linkages
that we share in that regard with our subregion, and
will therefore continue to act to ensure the security
and stability of our neighbours. We embrace those
responsibilities with unrelenting dedication.

That is why, although the forecasted growth in our
economy has been largely weakened by the devastation
resulting from Ebola and the precipitous decline in
the prices of our main exports, we have continued to
prioritize and provide, within the limits of our means,
support to the relevant security institutions, challenging
them to work together with the various communities
in ensuring the continuing peace and security of
the country.

To that end, the Liberia National Police and
the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization have
continued, among other security measures, to recruit,
train and deploy in many parts of the country. The
judicial system is being reformed so as to improve
access and public confidence and is also being extended
to other parts of the country.

As we move ahead on rebuilding our
nation - grateful, as always, for the support of
our partners - we know that the resolve of the
Government and the resilience of the Liberian people
are indispensable to our ability to continue along our
chosen path of consolidating peace. The Government
has continued to demonstrate its political will, and the
Liberian people continue to be highly motivated in
that regard.

However, the current economic downturn has
had the effect of undermining our ability to fully
implement some of the programmes that could further
advance our efforts towards achieving those objectives.
They include accelerating the pace of the security-
sector reforms as well as advancing programmes of
reconciliation, decentralization, youth employment
and local Government reforms. In response to the dire
economic constraints, we have continued to adopt a
number of austerity measures, while intensifying our
fight against corruption so as to curb waste and abuse,
ensure transparency and accountability and identify and
reallocate our meagre resources so that we can continue
the reforms and implement the needed programmes.

In October 2017, Liberia will conduct legislative
and presidential elections. A successful election - one
that is seen to be free, fair and credible by Liberians
and by the international community - will be critical
to consolidating Liberia's peace and its democratic
transformation. The Liberian Government understands
the significance of those elections and is determined
to deliver a process and an outcome that are inclusive,

participatory, credible, free and fair. We also urge the
Council to support those critical undertakings.

Currently, there are 23 registered political
parties, each of which is a member of the Inter-Party
Consultative Committee, a growing forum of political
parties committed to working with the National
Elections Commission and other relevant stakeholders
to continuously explore avenues of cooperation and
problem-solving in furtherance of maintaining a
conducive and peaceful atmosphere before, during and
after the elections.

Meanwhile, a speedy resolution can be expected
to the ongoing impasse in the Lower House of the
legislature, largely brought about by the indictment of
the Speaker of the House on charges of corruption, so
that much-needed legislative focus and attention can
be returned to the passage of a number of crucially
enabling pieces oflegislation affecting the elections and
our overall peace consolidation efforts. Two of them
include the possibility of a referendum on proposed
changes to the Constitution, as well as a redefinition
of land ownership and its associated rights, which will
ensure, for the first time for indigenous families and
communities, their right to the lands on which they
have always lived * a right that extends beyond those
of squatters.

Today, growing pains notwithstanding, Liberia is
safe and stable. The country is progressively changing.
From a past of war, we are working for peace; from fear,
we are experiencing freedom; and from hopelessness,
we are becoming hopeful. Difficult as it often is, we
are finding the strength to come to terms with, and are
committed to working to avoid, the tragedies of our
dark past. We are determined to embrace the promise
of a brighter future of togetherness.

Let there be no doubt: we are grappling with
numerous anxieties and complexities, so that we can
deepen a culture of democratic governance and change.
That is made even more challenging by strains on
available human and institutional capacities. Yet we are
hopeful, increasingly and reassuringly at peace with
ourselves and with our neighbours, unwavering in our
determination and blessed with a resilient spirit to rise
even when we were predicted to fall.

In obvious recognition of Liberia's rising, for the
first time since the establishment of our subregional
organization, the Economic Community of West
African States recently honoured the Government and
the people of Liberia with the current chairmanship
of its Authority of Heads of States and Governments.
The Mano River Union has also conferred its current
chairmanship upon our nation. We do not take those
responsibilities lightly.

And yes, we stand in need of the Council's
understanding and support, as well as the understanding
and support of our international partners, especially
as we strive to recreate our society into one that is
freer, more just, more equitable, more tolerant, more
accountable and more democratic - an emerging
society that respects differences in gender, religion,
tribe and political association, and yet provides
opportunities to all without discrimination. We have,
no doubt, a long road to travel. But, as a people, we are
determined to get there.

