Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hasegawa, for his
introduction of the progress report of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
and for providing us with the latest information on
developments in the situation in that country. We agree
with the major observations and conclusions of the
Secretary-General.

Over the period under consideration, the
Timorese authorities, with the active participation of
the United Nations Mission, have made further
progress in moving Timor-Leste towards genuine
independence. It is important to ensure the
continuation of the process of strengthening that
country's genuine sovereignty.

However, Timor-Leste continues to face urgent
problems, including a lack of infrastructure; a lack of
resources, especially of qualified staff; and limited
potential as concerns the system of State governance
and in the law-enforcement structures of the country.

The East Timorese, with the support of the United
Nations and of the international community as a whole,
must make substantial efforts so that their country can
become fully self-sufficient before the conclusion next
May of the mandate of the United Nations Mission.

We welcome the fact that the internal political
situation in Timor-Leste has remained, on the whole, a
stable one. In that connection, we welcome the
measures taken by the Timorese authorities to resolve
pressing social issues, including problems related to
veterans of the former independence struggle.

We note the successful preparations for local
elections and call upon all the political authorities of
the country to take a constructive part in them. We also
welcome the ongoing development of relations
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. We call upon both
States to further strengthen their deepening bilateral
cooperation with a view to the earliest possible
resolution of the remaining unsolved issues, including
the important problem of border demarcation.

It is especially important to ensure the
observance of human rights, including by conducting
investigations if they are violated. We support the
Secretary-General's recommendation - on which an
understanding has already been achieved in the
Security Council - on a final extension of the
UNMISET mandate until 20 May 2005, retaining the
current mandate, configuration and size of the Mission.
It is important for the United Nations Mission, in the
final period of its presence in Timor-Leste, to give
maximum attention to preparing an exit strategy so as
not to create any gaps in the functioning of Timor-
Leste State structures after the Mission has left. For its
part, the Russian delegation will continue to give the
activities of the Mission all necessary support. We are
grateful to the delegation of Brazil for preparing a draft
Security Council resolution, which we fully support.

