The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Cesar Mayoral,
Permanent Representative of Argentina to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of March 2006. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Mayoral for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

Letter dated 27 March 2006 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/199)

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/l99, which contains the text of a
letter dated 27 March 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
containing a request from the President of the
International Tribunal that Judge Joaquin Martin
Canivell be able to continue to serve in the trial in case
number IT-OO-39, Prosecutor v. Krajisnik, which is still
ongoing before the International Tribunal, and to see
the case through to its completion.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2006/223, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President (spoke in Chinese): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1668 (2006).

I now call on the representative of the Russian
Federation, who wishes to make a statement following
the voting.


