Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan): I would like to
begin, Mr. President, by expressing my appreciation to
you for convening this important meeting on
Afghanistan. I would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and you, Mr. President, for your
comprehensive briefings on the outcome of the Berlin
conference on Afghanistan that met on 31 March and
1 April 2004.

I am thankful to the delegations that expressed
their satisfaction at the Berlin conference, and I am
particularly grateful to those who appreciated the role
of the Afghan people in preserving their independence.
Moreover, I also extend, on behalf of my Government,
sincere appreciation to the co-Chairs of the Berlin
conference - Germany, Japan and the United
Nations- who provided excellent assistance to the
Afghan Chairman in handling the proceedings of the
conference. The Afghan people are grateful to the
Government of Germany for hosting that historic
meeting.

We were grateful to witness the participation in
the conference of representatives of nearly 65 countries
and international organizations. The goal of the
conference was to assess the progress made in the past
two years and to discuss the remaining challenges
ahead in the context of the full implementation of the
Bonn Agreement of 5 December 2001.

Since the conclusion of the Bonn Agreement, a
genuine partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community has proved that success is, in
fact, possible. The various achievements of the past
two years include the recent ratification of a new
Constitution by the Loya Jirga on 4 January 2004,
which provides the foundation for the upcoming
presidential and parliamentary elections, scheduled for
September 2004, aiming at the completion of the
transitional process.

The Berlin declaration on Afghanistan is
indicative of the continued and sustained support of the
international community aimed at ensuring stability,
security and economic development in that country. We
are grateful to all donor countries that have pledged
support to Afghanistan's reconstruction and reform
programmes, from the time of the Tokyo Conference of
January 2002 to the conclusion of the Berlin
conference. We are convinced that the pledges made at
Berlin, amounting to approximately $8.2 billion for the
March 2004 - March 2007 fiscal years, will keep
Afghanistan on track towards development and
stability.

With regard to security, we welcome the decision
taken by NATO to expand the mandate of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) by
deploying five additional provincial reconstruction
teams. We believe that the expansion of ISAF will
strengthen security in preparation for the elections and
help to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate former
combatants. In addition, the Afghan Government is
currently engaged in the process of forming its
National Army and Police Force, with the assistance of
Afghanistan's friends.

On the issue of combating narcotics, the Berlin
conference provided an opportunity for Afghanistan
and its neighbours to reaffirm their commitment to
work together to combat the problem. To that effect,
we welcome the signing of the six-country accord by
the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of those countries.

My delegation has studied the statement that you,
Sir, drafted, in your capacity as President of the
Security Council, and we find it quite satisfactory.

The successful outcome of the Berlin conference
has been welcomed by the Afghan people.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate
Afghanistan's full commitment to meeting the
guidelines of the Bonn Agreement of 2001, in
partnership with the international community. With
international assistance we can rebuild Afghanistan and
create conditions of peace, security and stability in the
country and in our region.

