Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): In the
light of what you have just announced, Mr. President, and
in order to allow the maximum number of speakers today,
I will shorten my statement so that more representatives can
speak, because of the enormous importance of this subject.

In a certain ironic sense, it is a pleasure - or, to be
more precise, at least a privilege - to represent my nation
before this body on this terrible issue. It is fitting that we
discuss it on a day when over 7,000 United Nations
peacekeepers are on their way to East Timor. With the
Security Council's swift and decisive action, the Council,
this historic body in this historic room, has shown the
important role the United Nations can and must play to help
protect civilians. Unfortunately, East Timor is only the
most recent example, and it certainly will not be the last.

I have personally witnessed the price civilians pay in
conflicts on three continents over my career in
government over the last 37 years. In Viet Nam,
Cambodia, Bosnia, Kosovo and Africa, I have seen the
impact warfare has on innocent civilians. I have seen
bicycles in Cambodia manufactured specifically for
people with only one limb, as well as other unspeakable
consequences of warfare on civilians. The deliberate
terrorizing of civilians - a phenomenon that is not new
in history, but has been perfected in this terrible
century - has added a new and invidious phrase to our
vernacular: ethnic cleansing.

For nearly two centuries, individuals have tried to
design institutions and support principles to temper the
effects of warfare on civilians - from Jean Henri
Dunant, the visionary Genevan who was instrumental in
creating the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) in 1863 after he had seen the horrors of the
Crimean war, to my friend, Fred Cuny, who lost his life
in Chechnya in pursuit of his lifelong goals.

There can be no denying that war is hell. It always
will be hell, but even war has had a code. There is a
terrible sense that, during this terrible century, that code,
such as it was, has almost completely disappeared and
that, to many people today, civilians are no different than
professional combatants. The statistics are dramatic. The
percentage of civilians casualties as a percentage of total
casualties in war has risen from 10 per cent to 90 per cent
from the First World War to today. It is our duty to
confront this reality and do everything we can to prevent
or minimize it.

Increasingly, civilians - including humanitarian
workers - are not just random, incidental victims of
conflict, but targets of it, as we have seen in Chechnya,
in Rwanda, in Bosnia and in Cambodia. The Secretary-
General has noted that women and children are
disproportionately represented among civilians affected by
conflict, and he is so right. We have seen this graphically
in the former Yugoslavia, where rape became a tactic of
war. I have talked to the victims and to their husbands
and wives and sons and fathers. It is terrible to see.

All of us must work together to find ways to halt
these trends. This meeting is an important but wholly
inadequate step towards this goal. We in the United States
support the Council's desire to respond, in accordance

 

with the United Nations Charter, to these situations. Let me
reaffirm the four principles we believe the Council should
focus on.

First, all States must comply strictly with their
obligations under international law. Secondly, the
international community needs to assist and protect civilian
populations affected by armed conflict. Thirdly, all parties
concerned must ensure the safety of civilians and guarantee
the unimpeded and safe access of United Nations and other
humanitarian personnel to those in need. Fourthly,
individuals, who commit grave offences under international
humanitarian and human rights law should be brought to
justice - a point that I am very pleased the Secretary-
General and Mary Robinson both raised in regard to the
current crisis in East Timor. We should pay very close
attention, as we proceed, to what substance we give to that
very brave and early warning. I congratulate the Secretary-
General for being the first public official, to my knowledge,
to raise this issue.

The Secretary-General has made some wise and
far-ranging recommendations. Let me briefly address them.

We concur that, at the outset of any conflict, the
Council should underscore the importance of humanitarian
assistance to civilian populations. It is imperative for
concerned parties to cooperate fully with the United Nations
humanitarian coordinator in providing access. This must be
done in accordance with the principles of humanity,
neutrality and impartiality. We believe that failure to
comply should result in the imposition of targeted
sanctions.

Secondly, the United States also supports using
sanctions as a possible method to deter and contain those
who commit violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, as well as those parties to conflicts
which continually defy Security Council resolutions. The
sanctions committees should convene periodic meetings and
the Council should monitor the humanitarian impact of
sanctions on vulnerable groups and make required
adjustments of the exemption mechanisms to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian assistance.

T hirdly, my Government also supports the
consideration of arms embargoes in situations where
civilians and protected persons are targeted by the parties
to the conflict or where the parties are known to commit
systematic and widespread violations of international law.

Finally, my Government supports the
recommendation that the Council act to strengthen the
United Nations capacity to plan and deploy more rapidly
military and civilian police personnel, as well as to
consider deployment in certain cases of a preventive
peacekeeping operation. This includes steps to improve
the security situation in camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons and to help ensure the demilitarization
and depoliticization of these camps.

I would also like to reiterate the position of my
Government on the following issues addressed by the
Secretary-General. Regarding anti-personnel landmines,
the United States is committed to ending once and for all
the worldwide scourge caused by these terrible devices
and their like. Too many innocent people fall victim to
these indiscriminate killers, which are often left behind
after the wars end and the soldiers go home. My
Government will therefore continue to support worldwide
humanitarian demining efforts and work towards a global
ban on anti-personnel landmines in the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva. Similarly, we also support the
amended Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the
Use of Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices to the
1980 Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the
Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects as an important initiative to provide
humanitarian protection for civilians and protected people.

Regarding the acute tragedy of children in armed
conflict, the United States firmly supports the principles
contained in the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The International Labour Organization Convention on the
Worst Forms of Child Labour and the recently adopted
Security Council resolution on children and armed
conflict both contain the right standard for addressing the
issue of child soldiers.

Regarding the International Criminal Court, the
United States has supported such a concept. We have
been in the forefront of international efforts to hold
accountable those responsible for war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We have worked hard to strengthen the
international war crimes Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. I personally have worked closely
with both Richard Goldstone and Louise Arbour on these
issues and have stood firmly, as has Secretary of State
Albright, for maximum support of these specific war
crimes Tribunals in the absence of anything more global.

 

However, My Government believes that the Rome
Treaty contains flaws that require correction. Working
together, we need to correct such flaws and broaden the
effectiveness and acceptance of such a treaty. This would
result in strengthening the Statute and ensuring full support
by all States, including the United States. Again, for the
second time, I wish to draw everyone's attention to what
the Secretary-General and Mary Robinson have said
regarding East Timor on this subject.

In closing, it is important to recognize all of the hard
work of Canada in focusing the attention of the Security
Council on this issue and to thank the Secretary-General for
his excellent report. I commend our friends in Canada for
their sustained effort on this and so many other issues and
look forward to working closely with Ambassador Fowler
and his colleagues. I hope the Council's focus will
strengthen international interest in this issue.

Finally, we are deeply grateful to the ICRC for
convening its third Humanitarian Forum last May, a
gathering that focused on this topic. Such efforts are
indispensable in complementing the actions of the Security
Council.

Once again, the United States welcomes the Security
Council's attention to this topic and is grateful for the
Secretary-General's hard work on it. As a personal observer
for most of my career of the consequences of the issue we
have talked about, I cannot tell you how strongly I feel
personally on this and, representing my Government on this
subject for the first time, I want to stress how much we
look forward to hearing what all the speakers here think
and working with them to turn rhetoric into reality.

