Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
welcomes today's unanimous adoption of resolution
2360 (2017), based on our conviction that the sanctions
regime contributes to consolidating peace and security
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to support
the efforts to reduce the threats posed by armed groups
and other entities that are threatening civilians,
perpetrating grave crimes, prolonging violence and
causing instability.

In that regard, I would like to mention a specific
situation surrounding the adoption of that resolution,
in the light of the killing of the two members of the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Zaida Catalan and Michael Sharp. We condemn
that act in the strongest terms, as does the resolution.
The Council stands with the families of the victims
and the countries concerned. The Government in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must carry out
a swift and complete investigation to uncover the
truth and hold those perpetrators accountable. We
call on them to cooperate with the United Nations
and the two countries concerned - the United States
and Sweden - in a way that is in line with relevant
legislation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In the light ofthe consultations that took place within
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which reflected our consensus
in supporting the Group of Experts through the extreme
circumstances they are facing, the resolution provides
an additional two months to the Group of Experts so
that it can carry out its work pursuant to the relevant
resolution, resolution 2293 (2016), and submit its final
report to the Security Council.

Based on that, the current resolution provides some
addition elements that cover a number of matters and the
most urgent developments, with some technical updates
to the remaining paragraphs of the resolution so that
the final report that the Group of Experts will submit
will be the basis for new substantive consultations
between the members ofthe Council to fully review the
sanctions measures. On that basis, we can adopt a new
resolution before the end of October 2017.

Egypt reaffirms the importance of the sanctions
regime - an important tool for enhancing security in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which in turn is
considered to be the cornerstone for peace and security
in the Great Lakes region. Based on our chairmanship
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), we seek to enhance the role
of the Committee, especially in the light of the security
challenges in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and given their grave humanitarian repercussions.

