I thank Special Representative Fall for his informative and insightful briefing on the current situation in Central Africa. We appreciate the report of the Secretary-General on recent events in the region (S/2020/1154) and commend his efforts and those of his team to promote long-term peace and stability. Of all the countries under Special Representative Fall's purview, as was noted earlier, the one that presents perhaps the greatest concerns is Cameroon, where more than 6.2 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance - 2.3 million people more than at the beginning of the year. Cameroon is facing multiple crises, including terrorist attacks in the far north, ongoing violence in the Anglophone regions, and the impact of significant refugee flows from its neighbours, all of which are compounded by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We are deeply troubled by the recent increase in attacks by separatist armed groups on civilians, including arson and kidnappings, and, as was noted by my United Kingdom colleague, the murder of school children in Kumba on 24 October is particularly abhorrent. Recent events in Cameroon are a clear indication that to end the violence a political solution is needed. We urge the leaders of separatist groups and the Cameroonian Government to take bold steps to build confidence and move toward a meaningful dialogue. The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) can support them in this effort. We are also closely following Burundi, as the Office of the Special Envoy there prepares to close. We urge the Burundian Government to continue to work with Special Representative Fall, as well as with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region and others to develop a reasonable timeline for the closure of that Office. In the Central African Republic, the United States appreciates the regional role that the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) plays to support the peace agreement by engaging the Central African Republic's neighbours. We strongly support ECCAS's continued work with the countries of the region to support the Central African Republic's stability, especially as that country prepares for national elections on 27 December. The United States commends all Central African countries for their efforts aimed at mitigating the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has had a profound impact on the region, as Special Representative Fall noted today. As countries continue to battle this unprecedented crisis, regional solidarity is crucial. We commend ECCAS's adoption of the COVID-19 regional response strategy for Central Africa and laud the efforts undertaken to preserve macroeconomic stability in the region by the Central African Economic and Monetary Community, the Bank of Central African States, the Development Bank of Central African States and the Paris Club. Finally, we encourage UNOCA and the States of the region to work with the United Nations, the African Union and other relevant partners to develop viable strategies to strengthen their capacity for conflict prevention. This includes adding a gender perspective and building on partnerships with civil society. To that end, we applaud the renewed commitment by the ECCAS Heads of State and Government to operationalize the Coalition of Civil Society Organizations for Peace and Conflict Prevention in Central Africa in pursuit of the United Nations women and peace and security agenda. The United States will continue to do all it can to help the people of the Central African region create a future for themselves that is strong, peaceful and prosperous. We look forward to working with our partners in the Security Council and with those in the region to make that future a reality.
