Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia welcomes the briefing by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), Mr. Modibo Toure. We are also grateful
for the briefings by Ambassadors Elbio Rosselli and
Mauro Vieira in their respective capacities as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2048 (2012), on Guinea-Bissau, and of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We also welcome the presence of the
Ambassador of Togo, representing the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and of
the Ambassador of Guinea-Bissau.

Bolivia is following closely the situation of
political and social instability in Guinea-Bissau, and
we take note of the relative calm in the country. It is
clear that the current context is the result of stagnation
in the implementation of the agreements reached by the
parties to the conflict, notably the Conakry Agreement
of October 2016, which is ultimately the fundamental
framework for a peaceful settlement of the crisis and
the pursuit of lasting and sustainable peace.

We are also concerned by the consequences of
the political and social instability on crucial State
institutions, as noted by ECOWAS following its high-
level ministerial visit in April.

In that context, we again commend the active
participation of the African Union, ECOWAS and the
United Nations, through the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and UNIOGBIS, and their
continued efforts to bring about rapprochement between
the parties in conflict and to provide assistance in the
security sector and in the political field with a view to
encouraging an inclusive Government.

We also encourage and highlight the initiative of
the women's forum for peace. The efforts of women
in Guinea-Bissau in the pursuit of a political solution
demonstrate that the gender perspective and the
participation of women in mediation and dialogue at all
levels is fundamental.

Bolivia rejects any action that may destabilize or
jeopardize the continuity of any process of dialogue
and reconciliation established with the participation
of all the parties involved. We call upon the parties to
definitively consolidate agreements in line with the
inclusive national dialogue, which will enable members
of all sectors of civil society, Government and political
parties represented in the National Assembly to reach
consensus in order to give effect to those agreements
in a constructive manner. We call for a legitimate
commitment to a lasting political solution owned, led
and determined by Guinea-Bissau, for the sole benefit
of its people and in strict respect for that country's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

On the subject of sanctions, Bolivia welcomes
the work of Uruguay's Ambassador Rosselli in his
capacity as Chair of the 2048 Sanctions Committee.
As he himself stated, his was the first visit to Guinea-
Bissau since the establishment of the Committee five
years ago. The visit allows us to have information
regarding the implementation and effectiveness
of the sanctions. It is necessary to emphasize how
important it is that the Security Council - and its
subsidiary bodies in particular, especialy the sanctions
committees - maintain coordination with local
authorities. In that regard, the visit of Ambassador
Rosselli is worth highlighting and commending.
We reiterate that sanctions should not be an end in
themselves. Moreover, it is necessary to carry out
periodic evaluations of sanctions in order to analyse
their effectiveness and to be able to make modifications
where necessary. In this case, the conclusions of the
visit of the Ambassador Rosselli should guide our
future steps.

Along the same lines, Bolivia reiterates its
categorical rejection of the application of unilateral
sanctions. They constitute a flagrant violation of
multilateralism and a serious threat to the international
order, as they are illegal measures that extend the
jurisdiction and the internal legislation of one State over
another, thereby violating the principles of equality,
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States.

Finally, we urge all donor countries and agencies
to continue to fulfil their commitments by contributing
and combining efforts that are conducive to the
definitive resolution ofthe conflict. In times ofpolitical,
institutional and social crisis, ensuring the well-being
of the population, in particular the most vulnerable
segments, must and should be the overriding interest
that determines the path towards lasting stability in
Guinea-Bissau.

