The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed to my
delegation.

I shall now make a statement in my national capacity.
First, on behalf of the Czech Republic and its

Government and people, I wish to join all those who have
expressed their sorrow and sympathy to Ambassador
Albright and the American people in connection with the
terrorist bombing in Oklahoma City.

I turn now to the matter at hand.

On balance, the Czech Republic views the results of
the operations of the ICFY Mission in the former
Yugoslavia as successful. This balance is determined by a
mix of technical and political considerations.

Reports of the ICFY Co-Chairmen of the last 100 days
all contain one main message: the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is continuing to meet its
commitment to closing the land border with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This is a major chord. In addition, though,
there are worrisome undertones.

Some of these have to do with the situation on the
border. Borders cannot perhaps be sealed hermetically, but
they should not be too porous. The phantom helicopter
flights are also troubling. The rupture of
telecommunications contacts with Pale that the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia had instituted was
welcome, and we encourage them to resume those contacts.
These and other aspects are addressed in the resolution we
have just adopted.

Some other of these worrisome undertones, however,
have to do with the Mission itself - including its critical
financial situation, with the attendant need to decrease its
s1ze.

We feel the ICFY Mission is doing a terrific job,
given the resources it has at hand, even if the political
position of Pale has hardly shifted during the period of its
operation. Keeping up the pressure on Pale and continuing
to recognize Belgrade's cooperation by maintaining the
regime of abated sanctions, first enacted in resolution
943 (1994), is the best way ahead. In fact, my delegation
would have preferred an extension of this regime
significantly beyond the 5 July deadline we have now
adopted - both for technical and for financial reasons,
but also because we do feel Belgrade is substantively
cooperating.

However, as we adopt another resolution on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, let us not lose sight
of the big picture. This resolution, with the continuing
abatement of the sanctions, and the functioning of the
ICFY Mission are only tools, instruments, in an effort to
get the Bosnian Serbs, the most recalcitrant party to the
conflict, to accept the Contact Group peace plan. And
even this peace plan is only an instrument to bring about
peace and normalcy in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We will have to take many more such
small, partial steps - many of which will turn out not to
have any effect at all - before we attain the final
objective.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

There are no further names on the list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.
