Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): You have invited us,
Mr. President, to be brief and to the point in our statements
and to concentrate on what Member States or the
international community as a Whole can do to address the
devastating impact of AIDS in Africa. We will of course
comply with your wish, but we do so with some hesitation,
for anyone who speaks about AIDS in Africa feels an urge
to show that he is aware of the almost unimaginable scale
of this humanitarian emergency. To that end, he is tempted
to highlight at least some of the mind-boggling statistics
about the impact of AIDS in making his own contribution
to the debate.

But we agree with you, Sir, that after the statements
we have just heard from the Secretary-General, from Vice-
President Gore, from World Bank President Wolfensohn,
from United Nations Development Programme
Administrator Malloch Brown, from Executive Director Piot
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) and from the Ministers of Health of Namibia,
Uganda and Zimbabwe, there is really no need for a further
description of the unspeakable tragedy that afflicts Africa.
In that respect virtually everything has been said, not only
today but also quite recently during the meeting on the
International Partnership against AIDS in Africa. Yet when
we ask ourselves what the Security Council can do - and
we understand this is the first question you want us to
address - we are inclined to conclude that strengthening
awareness has to be our primary objective.

My delegation does not need to be convinced that the
impact of AIDS is a legitimate subject for an open meeting
of the Security Council. The interface between AIDS and
conflict in Africa seems to be obvious. AIDS is a health
problem, but it is one that devastates whole economies,
overwhelms entire public health systems and ultimately
tends to destroy the very fabric of complete societies. As
such it is responsible for an unprecedented degree of gloom
and despair, which in itself is one of the most virulent
seeds of conflict.

Conversely, conflicts clearly have an accelerating
effect on the spread of AIDS. Soldiers and displaced
civilians on the move are important sources of HIV
dissemination, and in areas of conflict the fight against
HIV/AIDS is particularly difficult. According to a
UNAIDS report, the degree of HIV infection among
military personnel may well be two to five times higher
than that of the civilian population. Therefore, if the
Security Council is expected to contribute to increased
awareness, it might usefully concentrate on this particular
aspect of the problem and call on all African States to
demonstrate their commitment to combating AIDS by
focusing on the armed forces under their command. Let
the awareness and the responsibility and the discipline
start with the military.

The Netherlands will continue to contribute to the
battle against AIDS - especially in Africa - at at least
the current level. According to reports from UNAIDS and
the Harvard AIDS Institute, the Netherlands is the second
largest donor worldwide in both absolute terms and on a
per capita basis. Our contributions are made available
both in a multilateral and in a bilateral context. Bilateral
AIDS programmes exist with Tanzania, Ethiopia,
Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau and Zambia. In
addition, an AIDS component is integrated into basic
health care activities supported by the Netherlands.

It is understood that the Netherlands subscribes to
the statement the representative of Portugal will deliver
on behalf of the European Union.

