Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to welcome the presence at this
Security Council debate the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari.
I would also like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General Gambari, the United Nations Controller,
Mr. Warren Sach, and you, Mr. President, for your
respective statements.

The French Foreign Minister had the opportunity
to note, in the course of his visit to several parts of Iraq
between 31 May and 1 June, the noteworthy progress
that has been made in recent months. France is pleased
with this progress and hopes that the Iraqi authorities
continue their efforts to confront the important
remaining challenges.

Regarding security, the level of violence has
decreased, and my delegation welcomes the advances
made in the transfer of responsibilities to the Iraqi
forces. As Mr. Zebari noted in his letter to the Security
Council, this transfer not yet complete, however, and
the Multinational Force (MNF) must therefore be
maintained.

We also welcome the efforts made by the Iraqi
Government in disarming militias, which is an
important objective towards allowing the full and
complete restoration of State competence in matters of
security and maintaining order.

In terms of the political situation, the process of
national reconciliation remains essential for the
consolidation of the Iraqi State. This process must be
inclusive and succeed in isolating those forces which
seek Iraq's downfall. This requires the cooperation of
all Iraqi political decision-makers, who must, as a first
step, agree on an equitable distribution of authority and
resources on the basis of consensus. In this respect, it
is important that the process of constitutional revision
succeed.

The strengthening of the rule of law and the
promotion of human rights are also important
commitments made by the Iraqi Government at the
follow-up meeting on the International Compact with
Iraq in Stockholm on 29 May, and we encourage
further efforts in this direction.

As the most recent report of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) demonstrated,
the human rights situation, and especially the rights of
prisoners held in Iraq, remains a source of
preoccupation for the international community. All
parties involved must pursue their efforts in order to
improve the situation.
With respect to the economic situation, we
welcome the consolidation of the budgetary resources
in Iraq, which should allow the Iraqi Government to

pursue the reconstruction of the country and improve
the Iraqi people's access to basic services. It is
important to enhance financial transparency and
economic governance in order to attract foreign
investors in greater numbers and to new projects.

The initial progress made by Iraq should enable it
to quickly find a solution to a humanitarian situation
which remains worrying. According to the High
Commissioner for Refugees, there are over 2,770,000
internally displaced persons inside the country and
2 million refugees.

In order to respond to the many challenges that
Iraq faces today, the support of the international
community is crucial. The involvement of
neighbouring countries in the process, relaunched at
Sharm el-Sheikh in May 2007, has progressed
considerably and was welcomed by Bernard Kouchner
at the enlarged ministerial conference in Kuwait on
22 April.

It is important that the three working groups
established by the neighbouring States on questions of
border security, refugees, and energy and resources
arrive at concrete results. More than ever, cooperation
between neighbouring States and the Iraqi Government
is a prerequisite for the stability of Iraq and of the
whole region.

My delegation commends the activity of UNAMI
since the renewal of its mandate and pays tribute to the
action of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, who has the difficult
and important task of leading the deployment of
UNAMI, with its new responsibilities, throughout the
territory of Iraq. As stipulated in resolution 1770
(2007), UNAMI must be able to carry out its work in
satisfactory security conditions. In the context of the
end-of-the-year deadline for the mandate of the MNF
provided for in resolution 1770 (2007), we should
begin to think about protection for the Mission in the
longer term. That same time frame also means that the
Security Council must give some thought to the
evolution of the system based on the Development
Fund for Iraq and the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board. This should be carried out in
consultation with Government of Iraq.
France is committed to the unity, sovereignty and
integrity of a democratic Iraq, and it reaffirms its
readiness to assist the Iraqis. Beginning on 1 July,
France will hold the presidency of the European Union,
and we assure all Iraqis that we are ready to assist them
in building their common future and bringing about
national reconciliation, with a View to restoring the
peace and security they are entitled to, in a democratic
State rich in its diversity. That is the message that
French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner conveyed
during his recent visit to Iraq.

