Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to welcome Mr. Nebojsa Covie,
Deputy Prime Minister of the Yugoslav constituent
Republic of Serbia and President of the Coordination
Centre of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, and to
thank him for his statement. I would also like to
welcome Mr. Steiner. We have listened with interest to
the very useful information he has just given us on the
situation in Kosovo.

We welcome the significant progress that has
been made, including the establishment of a multi-
ethnic Government, the adoption of a plan of
government, and the fact that the Assembly has begun
its work. However, we would like to emphasize the
need to ensure the representation of minorities in the
parliamentary committees and their recruitment into
the civil service. We also support the efforts under way
to organize the municipal elections of next October. We
believe that successful elections will certainly serve to
strengthen the democratic process.

It is essential that the implementation of
economic programmes take into account the interests
of all the members and groups in the province. That
should go hand in hand with strengthening the rule of
law throughout Kosovo. In this regard, we endorse the
establishment of local law and order capacities.

The question of returns of refugees and displaced
persons, as well as their reintegration, is very important
to reconciliation in Kosovo. The fate of missing
persons and the issue of the return of property should
also be giving very special attention. It is essential to
have adequate resources with which to do this work.
We support the Secretary-General's appeal to the donor
community. We also welcome and encourage the use of
media to raise awareness among communities.

We are pleased to take note of the efforts being
made to improve relations between Kosovo, on the one
hand, and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, on the other.
This has contributed to re-establishing confidence and
to ensuring that dialogue continues.

In conclusion, my delegation endorses the
contents of paragraph 61 of the report of the Secretary-
General with regard to the criteria for measuring the
progress made. We would also like to stress our
concern about the substantial reduction in the budget of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, which would oblige it to transfer
responsibility and authority to the provisional
institutions earlier than scheduled. We would
appreciate it if Mr. Steiner could give us more details
about what measures are being envisaged to offset the
consequences of that transfer.

