Mr. Lopez Clemente (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Our delegation welcomes Brazil's initiative of
convening this wrap-up meeting as an open debate. It
is a contribution to the efforts aimed at achieving the
necessary and urgent goal of making the work of the
Security Council more transparent. It would be
appropriate for such wrap-up sessions to be held
systematically in the future and for delegations to
address any question of interest with respect to the
work of the Security Council throughout a given
month.

A great deal has been said about the difficult
circumstances of life in Africa and about the growing
needs of the continent, where the majority of today's
armed conflicts are taking place, killing many people
in several countries and having devastating effects on
their economic and social development.

The historical origins of the African crisis cannot
be ignored. Thus, the former colonial Powers currently
have the moral obligation to make up for the
consequences of their acts. Likewise, the persistence of
an unjust and unsustainable international economic
order, characterized by inequalities imposed by the
neoliberal globalization process, places the so-called
third world, and particularly the African continent, at a
terrible disadvantage. Such vast inequalities are the
sole cause of the fact that the African population,
which constitutes approximately 18.5 per cent of the
world's population and whose territory comprises the
greatest reserves of natural resources on the planet,
contributes approximately 1 per cent of the world's
gross domestic product and 2 per cent of international
trade.

We appreciate the Security Council's efforts to
achieve a better understanding of the conflicts in
Africa, accompanied in recent years by the
development of African mechanisms for resolving
conflicts. Nevertheless, greater and more systematic
support from the United Nations and the international
community in general is required, for the region suffers
from insufficient financial resources, hindering the
achievement and/or consolidation of peace in many
countries, such as the Sudan and Somalia, to provide
just two examples.

Despite what has been stated in debates and
affirmed in many resolutions, in practice emphasis is
still on reaction to African conflicts and not on their
prevention. Prevention requires the deepest causes of
conflicts, such as poverty and underdevelopment, to be
addressed. There can be no peace without development
or development without peace.

On the other hand, many of the measures
necessary to eliminate the causes of conflict in Africa
and to achieve the consolidation of peace and
sustainable development clearly do not fall within the
scope of the Security Council's mandate and are the
purview of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. An adequate level of coordination
between those principal organs is therefore required.

Since its beginnings, the Cuban revolution has
implemented a policy of cooperation in various fields
with the countries of Africa, a continent to which we
are attached by profound bonds of history and
friendship. Cuba, a blockaded country with limited
financial resources but with the necessary political
will, has always offered its cooperation in solidarity
with African countries, expecting nothing in return.
Within the context of such cooperation, its
comprehensive health care programme, carried out in
18 African countries with a total of 1,249 participants,
is of particular note. 3,381 participants have already
offered their services within the framework of that
programme.

Likewise, from 1961 to the 2003-2004 school
year, 29,876 African youths from more than 40 African
countries have graduated from middle and high
schools. Currently, 1,801 African students are enrolled
in educational programmes in Cuba; such studies are
entirely subsidized by the Cuban Government. We have
offered 427 scholarships for the 2005-2006 school
year

Africa does not need paternalism. Rather, it
deserves, first and foremost, respect and solidarity. It
needs cooperation that is free from every kind of
conditions and intervention. There is a great deal of
wisdom and experience among African leaders and
representatives. No one is better qualified than they are
to understand their problems; no one is better able to
determine the best solutions.

I should like to conclude by quoting the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, who, during the most
recent general debate in the General Assembly, said,
with reference to the Millennium Development Goals:

"We said that we would pay attention to
Africa's special needs. However, very little has
been done. African nations do not need foreign
advice or models, but rather financial resources
and access to both markets and technologies.
Assisting Africa would not be an act of charity,
but an act of justice, a settling of the historic debt
resulting from centuries of exploitation and
pillage." (A/59/PV.]0, p. 33)

