The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States of
America.

I thank United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein for his efforts
as well as for the efforts of his team to document
human rights violations in North Korea, and to make
such violations known. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman for briefing the Council today.
In addition, while they are not briefers here today, I
would also like to thank the brave individuals who,
after escaping from North Korea, have taken great
risks to share their testimonies. Were it not for their
determination to make their experiences known, much
of what we know today about the suffering of the North
Korean people would remain hidden.

Almost a year ago, on 22 December 2014, the
Security Council met for the first time ever to discuss
the human rights situation in the Democratic People's
Republic ofKorea (see S/PV.7353). The Council brought
up this issue for discussion because the widespread and
systematic human rights violations being committed by
the North Korean Government not only were deplorable
in their own right but posed a threat to international
peace and security. I would like to address those who
believe that what is happening in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea is not a threat to peace and
security. I would like to ask whether those countries
think that systematic torture, forced starvation and
crimes against humanity are stabilizing or good for
international peace and security. I assume they do
not think that. Therefore, could that level of horror
be regarded as neutral, a level of horror unrivalled
elsewhere in the world? Is it neutral? Does it have no
effect at all on regional and international peace and
security? Is that really so? None? It stretches credulity,
and it sounds more like cynicism.

Those arguments, some of which we have heard
here today, will not go down well in history, particularly
when the Democratic People's Republic of Korea opens
up. For those who have charged double standards,
where in the world are there conditions similar to those
behind the lines in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea? Where? This regime has no double. A
report of the Human Rights Council's commission of
inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea itself states that the human rights
situation in North Korea "does not have any parallel
in the contemporary world" (A/HRC/25/63, para. 80).
The comprehensive report produced by the commission
of inquiry was based on over 200 interviews with
victims, eyewitnesses and former Democratic People's
Republic of Korea officials, whose testimony was
corroborated by other evidence, such as satellite
imagery. The commission concluded in February 2014
that "[s]ystematic, widespread and gross human rights
violations have been and are being committed by the
Democratic People's Republic of North Korea" (ibid).
The Commission also found evidence that provided
reasonable grounds to determine that in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea "crimes against humanity
have been committed pursuant to policies established
at the highest level of the State" (ibid., para. 75).

The Council is meeting again on this issue today,
Human Rights Day, for the first time since it was
formally added to the agenda last year, because the
North Korean people continue to endure a real-life
nightmare and because that nightmare is a threat to
peace and security. The reporting by the United Nations
is explicit. The report of the Secretary-General issued in
September found that, from September 2014 to August
2015, there were "no indications ofimprovements in the
exercise of freedom of expression". That is in a country,
where, according to the commission ofinquiry's report,
the State

"operates an all-encompassing indoctrination
machine that takes root from childhood to
propagate an official personality cult and to
manufacture absolute obedience to the Supreme
Leader"(A/HRC/25/63, para. 27)
and where citizens "are punished for any 'anti-State'
activities or expressions of dissent" (ibid., para. 28).

The Secretary-General's report similarly found
that there were "no indications of changes in the use of
political prison camps" (A/70/393, para. 5) - political
prison camps in which, by United Nations estimates,
between 80,000 and 120,000 people are currently
being held and where, according to the commission of
inquiry's report, tens of thousands ofprisoners have for
generations been

"gradually eliminated through deliberate starvation,
forced labour, executions, torture, rape and the
denial of reproductive rights enforced through
punishment, forced abortion and infanticide" (ibia'., para. 60).

It is not only the blanket denial of enjoyment of
freedom of expression and those infernal conditions
in the prisoner camps that persist, but all of the
grave human rights violations perpetrated by that
regime - the summary executions, the use of torture
and the decades of enforced disappearances with no
accountability, including of citizens from neighbouring
countries, whose families continue to suffer from not
knowing the fate of their loved ones. The list is long,
the abuse is vast and the anguish profound. Also
unchanged is the immeasurable suffering experienced
by many millions of North Koreans who continue to go
hungry as a result of the regime's actions - causing
malnutrition that has repercussions for the rest of
victims' lives and in countless instances leads to death.
According to the Secretary-General's September 2015
report, one third of children in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea under the age of 5 and almost half of
children between 12 and 23 months are anaemic.

The systematic human rights violations persist for
a simple reason: the North Korean Government wants
them to. They continue because the State still seeks to
intentionally dehumanize, terrorize and abuse its own
people. The regime depends on that climate of fear and
violence to maintain its grip on power. When we speak
of the massive scale of the regime's abuses, it can be
easy to lose sight of how they affect real people living
in North Korea, so let me briefly share the experiences
of just two individuals who are with us here today in
the Security Council. I would ask them to please stand
while I share just a small part of what they have endured.

Growing up in North Korea, Grace Jo witnessed
three generations of her family starve to death. Her
grandmother starved to death after digging for grass
for the family to eat. Her father starved to death as he
was transferred between prison camps, where he had
been sent for leaving the country in search of food for
his family. Two of her brothers starved to death, and
Grace too nearly starved to death. It was hunger that
drove Grace and her surviving family members to try to
escape North Korea, but they were returned repeatedly
against their will. As punishment, Grace was sent to
an orphanage where she said children were forced to
work from 6 in the morning to 7 at night. She and her
remaining two family members finally managed to
escape in 2008, when they came to the United States of
America as refugees. I take this occasion to stress how
important the United States refugee programme is and
how essential it is at times of crisis like this one.

Jung Gwang Il served for a decade in the army, and
another nine years in the Workers' Party, before going
to work for a trading company where he was detained
for doing business directly with South Koreans. That
was his crime. State security agents beat him viciously
with wooden clubs, breaking all of his teeth and leaving
scars that he still bears, pressuring him to confess to
being a spy. He refused. As punishment, Mr. Gwang
later later told the commission of inquiry that he was
subjected to what is known in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea as pigeon torture. As he described
it, "Your hands are handcuffed behind your back, then
they hang you so you will not be able to stand or sit." He
was left in that position for days at a time. When, after
10 months of this and other forms of torture, he agreed
to confess. He was sent to Kwan-li-so No. 15, a labour
camp known as Yodok. He spent three harrowing years
there, witnessing, by his count, 26 people die, most of
them from malnutrition. Since escaping to South Korea
he has started a non-governmental organization that
recently released a report listing the names of more
than 180 fellow prisoners from his time in Yodok and
demanding information about their whereabouts.

Those are just two individuals of millions. Yet
their experiences are a powerful reminder of the
human impact of the regime's horrors. I thank Grace
and Mr. Jung for being with us today and for bravely
sharing their stories.

No member of the Council or of the United Nations
can afford to ignore this situation. North Korea continues
to demonstrate that regimes that flagrantly violate
the human rights of their own people almost always
show similar disdain for the rules that help ensure
our shared security. We see that in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's flouting of prohibitions
imposed by the Security Council on its nuclear and
ballistic missile activities, including by undertaking
launches. We see it in the destabilizing rhetoric the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea routinely uses
to threaten the annihilation of its neighbours. And we
see it in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
aggressive response, as the High Commissioner has
mentioned, to the opening of an Office in Seoul by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), an Office aimed at gathering
ongoing information on human rights conditions in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

In March, before the OHCHR Office opened, the
Pyongyang Committee for the Peaceful Reunification
of Korea, a Democratic People's Republic of Korea-
sponsored group like every other group allowed to exist
in the country, said that,

"as soon as the nest for an anti-Democratic People's
Republic of Korea smear campaign is in place in
the South, it will immediately become the first
target for our merciless punishment."

In May, a Democratic People's Republic of Korea-
controlled newspaper issued a near-identical threat.
And, in June, the regime issued a statement accusing
hostile forces of using the United Nations Office to
"make confrontation under the pretext of protecting
human rights".

It is hard to imagine another State Member of the
United Nations making such threats against a United
Nations office or staff, and we as the Council cannot
take them lightly. That is part of a well-established
pattern of intimidation and escalation by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea in response to criticism of
its human rights record. Alarming and unacceptable as
that pattern may be, it shows that the regime is deeply
nervous about the growing international scrutiny of its
abusive practices. That is a good thing. It is another
reason we must ensure that the OHCHR Office
continues to document such abuses.

If we accept that the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is as abysmal as
ever, as United Nations reporting informs us it is, and
if North Korea continues to flout the rules that ensure
our shared security, as we have seen that it does, then
it is clear that we must continue to shine a light on the
human rights situation in North Korea, as we are doing

today. Furthermore, it is incumbent upon the Council
to ask what we can do, individually and collectively, to
change the situation.

We must continue to take steps that will one day help
us to hold accountable the individuals responsible for
such horrors as those experienced by our guests today.
We cannot let immediate obstacles to accountability
undermine our determination to document atrocities
and identify those who order and carry them out, so
that one day the perpetrators will be brought to justice.
That is why the comprehensive report compiled by the
commission of inquiry is so essential and why it is so
crucial that the new United Nations Office in Seoul
provide a place where individuals can continue to
recount their experiences and provide key information.

Of course, multilateral and human rights
organizations should continue to seek unconditional
access to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
We agree very much with the comments of other
Council members. It is access that the regime has too
long denied, no doubt because of what it would reveal.
But it would be a grave mistake to think that, in order
to obtain such access, any country or any body should
soften its criticism of what is, by every measure, the
most repressive regime on the planet. We must do
the exact opposite by speaking with objectivity and
firmness about the real conditions on the ground.

For the Security Council, it is critical not just
to discuss the situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, but to consider the commission's
recommendation that the situation in North Korea be
referred to the International Criminal Court and that we
consider other appropriate action on accountability, as
112 Member States urged the Council to do, just a few
weeks ago.

Our continuing spotlight on the situation sends a
clear message that we hope will reach the North Korean
people, tight as the regime's control over information
may be. We will not turn a blind eye to your suffering.
You, like all human beings, deserve to be treated with
dignity. We will continue to press for the nightmare
that you are living to end. To the regime, our message
is just as clear: we are documenting your crimes, and
one day you will be judged for them.

United Nations States Members, particularly

members of the Council, must stop sending people who
try to flee from the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea back to that country. We know the gruesome
punishments that await North Korean escapees who are
sent back against their will. Yet the practice continues.
A report published in September by the Committee for
Human Rights in North Korea reported that, according
to multiple interviews with former prisoners who had
escaped the country, approximately 800 of the 1,000
women held in one prison labour camp, known as Kyo-
hwa-so No. 12, were people who had been forcibly
returned to the country. They had made it out. Instead
of returning people fleeing the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to gulags, countries should welcome
the North Korean refugees and asylum seekers who
reach their territory. The rest of us must do our part, in
terms of resettlements.

Let me conclude. In April, the United States
co-hosted an event here at the United Nations in which
three people who had escaped from the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea shared their experiences.
One of them was a young man named Joseph, who told
how he had been orphaned when he was 12 years old,
after his father starved to death and his mother was sent
to a prison camp for trying to cross the border. Joseph
said that he spent his days begging in the streets and
his nights sleeping beneath bridges, a life he described
as marked by loneliness and hunger. After three years,
Joseph managed to escape and eventually made his way
to the United States, where he now lives. Joseph told the
people at that meeting that while he was grateful to have
escaped, he felt an unshakeable burden, knowing that
millions of his fellow North Koreans were still trapped
in the conditions that he had managed to escape.

That is a burden that Joseph should not bear alone.
We in the Security Council, the United Nations and the
international community must all bear that burden with
him. That is why the Council must meet regularly to
discuss the human rights crisis in North Korea. It is
the reason that we must all bring greater urgency to not
only witnessing and documenting those horrors, but to
taking steps that will help to stop them and one day
bring to justice the perpetrators of those crimes.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Japan.

