Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): It is with great pleasure
that my delegation expresses its congratulations to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of June. Allow me also to express our appreciation
to Ambassador Merimee of France for his skilful leadership
during the month of May, when he presided over the
Council's activities.

Regarding the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR), my
delegation is cognizant of the significant role UNAMIR has
played in contributing to the prevailing stable condition in
Rwanda, which I believe will substantially contribute to the
process of national reconciliation, rehabilitation and
economic reconstruction. It is therefore imperative for the
Government of Rwanda to maintain such favourable
conditions in order for a just and durable peace to be
achieved.
My delegation is particularly encouraged that the
Government of Rwanda is taking the primary
responsibility in providing security to its citizens, which
is a fundamental task for a sovereign State. It was in this
connection that my delegation fully supported the request
made by the Government of Rwanda substantially to
reduce the military component of UNAMIR. This
reduction not only symbolizes the restoration of the
sovereignty and dignity of the Government of Rwanda,
but also reflects the reality in the field. My delegation
therefore welcomes the agreement reached by the
Government of Rwanda and the United Nations to reduce
the force level to 2,330 troops within three months of the
adoption of this draft resolution and to 1,800 troops
within four months.

It is the considered view of my delegation that
efforts to enhance the security situation in Rwanda are
indeed indispensable for a climate of stability and trust to
prevail, which would positively affect the flow of
returning refugees. We are, however, aware that all these
undertakings should be based on genuine national
reconciliation among the various elements of Rwandan
society.

Nevertheless, these efforts will not bring about the
desired results if the supply of arms and materiel to
elements of the previous Government continue unabated,
with the ensuing consequence of cross-border
militarization. In our view, addressing in a comprehensive
manner this particular problem, which is one of the major
concerns of the Government of Rwanda, would require
cooperation not only between the Government of Rwanda
and UNAMIR, but also with the neighbouring countries.
A regional approach towards resolving the matter would
therefore be most welcome.

Despite the fact that some progress has been
achieved, there are still some difficulties faced by the
Government of Rwanda that have created tensions and
frustrations, which my delegation fully appreciates and
sympathizes with. In this context, I would like to point
out that delay in bringing the perpetrators of genocide to
justice, through both the national judicial system and the
International Tribunal, is one of the underlying causes.
This delay is mainly due to the acute shortage of
personnel and resources. My delegation therefore would

 

like to call upon the international community to be more
forthcoming in providing the necessary assistance to
Rwanda in this respect in order to restore the functions of
the judicial system.
In the light of these considerations, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution now before us.

