Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Let me start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate on protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Egeland for his very good briefing on the
fourth report submitted by the Secretary-General to the
Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2004/431). Moreover, judging from the number of
delegations that have decided to join this debate, the
convening of this meeting is good and timely.

The Security Council has made a number of
important commitments to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, especially by adopting resolutions 1265
(1999) and 1296 (2000). In line with resolution 1296
(2000), mandates of peacekeeping operations have
been broadened to allow missions to protect civilians
under imminent threat of violence, as seen in the
mandates of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), the United Nations Operation in C6te
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations Operation in
Burundi (ONUB).

However, despite the progress so far achieved on
the protection of civilians, the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the road map set out in
the report submitted in 2002, as requested by the
Security Council, is not yet satisfactory. Armed
conflicts still affect millions of civilians around the
world, but especially in Africa, and too often, the
principal victims of armed conflict are women and
children, on whose shoulders lie the future.

The foundation of the responsibility for
protecting civilians should be based on specific
responsibilities: the responsibility to prevent, which
implies the need to address both the root causes and the
direct causes of armed conflict and other man-made
crises putting civilians at risk; and the responsibility to
rebuild, which means full assistance with recovery,
reconstruction and long-term reconciliation. We note
with satisfaction the views contained in the Secretary-
General's report, submitted pursuant to the request of
the Security Council presidential statement adopted on
20 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/41).

Indeed, the protection of civilians demands a
more coherent and comprehensive response from the
Security Council, from the parties involved in armed
conflicts and from the rest of the international
community. In 2003, according to United Nations
sources, humanitarian appeals made with regard to 13
African crises required $2.2 billion, and less than half
of that amount was received. In my delegation's view,
that contrasts with the responses to other crises rightly
or wrongly perceived to be more strategically
important. In that connection, I echo Under-Secretary-
General Egeland's appeal to encourage the Security
Council to consider the link between the maintenance
of international peace and security and inadequate
funding of responses to certain crises.

Existing armed conflicts are no longer national or
local in dimension. A current and good example -
which should concern the international community -
involves the conflict in Darfur and its spillover effects
on Chad.

As we have seen in C6te d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone
and Liberia, serious cross-border issues, the infiltration
of armed elements into refugee-populated areas and the
militarization of refugee camps represent indeed a
great threat to peace and stability. The separation of
armed elements from civilians clearly has great
potential as a protection tool. It also constitutes an
important measure in terms of preventing conflict
escalation.

My delegation wishes to reiterate the view that
closer cooperation between regional and subregional
organizations and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Office of
the High Commissioner for Refugees should be
encouraged in order to ensure that protection-related
considerations are integrated at the earliest possible
stage into the planning and the implementation of
peacekeeping operations.

Furthermore, recommendations by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, the rule of law, impunity,
compliance and long-term national reconciliation, the
widespread use of small arms, mine action and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes, as well as the impact of the illicit
exploitation of natural resources in fuelling armed
conflicts, should also be fully considered in that
context.

The responsibility to respond to the need to
protect civilians implies also making effective use of
sanctions and international prosecution. In that context,
the 1267 Sanctions Committee and the European
Commission, in partnership with four European credit
sector federations, have just established an electronic
database containing all relevant data concerning
persons, groups and entities subject to European Union
financial sanctions. We welcome that initiative since it
constitutes an important tool in the fight against
international terrorism and its financing in line with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We believe that
this and other similar initiatives, such as the Kimberley
Process, are essential for curbing illicit trade in and the
impact of small arms and light weapons that fuel armed
conflicts in Africa. These initiatives are important for
supporting and promoting the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts, as they are an indispensable
foundation for peace, security and stability.

As far as Angola is concerned, we believe that the
New Partnership for Africa's Development provides an
important platform for securing greater commitment to
an improved framework for conflict prevention and the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, which are
indispensable for peace, security and stability.

Finally, my delegation concurs with the
Secretariat recommendation that our Council consider
adopting a new resolution to reflect the developments
that have taken place in different regions over the past
four years, and particularly to strengthen the measures
needed for more effective protection of civilians in
times of armed conflict. This debate is therefore a good
contribution for such a measure.

