Mr. Moussa: The fourteenth progress report of
the Secretary-General (S/2007/593), which is before
Council members, provides an update on major
developments in C6te d'Ivoire since the last report, of
14 May 2007, including the status of implementation
of key steps of the peace process. In anticipation of the
review by the Security Council of the mandate and
troop level of the United Nations Operation in C6te
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the current consultations
provided for in Security Council resolution 1765
(2007), the report notes that none of the benchmarks
set to consider an adjustment of the mandate and troop
level of UNOCI has been totally met, namely the
dismantling and disarmament of the militias, the
disarmament of combatants and the redeployment of
State administration throughout the country.

As the Secretary-General's report speaks for
itself, my presentation will focus solely on the most
recent developments since its publication and on the
underlying risks and challenges. I will also dwell on
the emerging prospects for accelerating the
implementation of the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement.

The continued commitment of the Ivorian leaders
to take ownership of the peace process has yielded
some progress in performing the key tasks provided for
in the Ouagadougou political Agreement. In assuming
their primary responsibility for restoring lasting peace
and stability to Cote d'Ivoire, the Ivorians have also
sought to develop a common understanding of the
challenges facing the process and to define consensual
ways of addressing them with the continued support of
the Facilitator.
07-55602
With regard to military and security-related
matters, the gradual dismantling of the zone of
confidence has reached an advance stage with the
deployment of mixed brigades by the integrated
command centre (ICC), the deactivation of the
remaining UNOCI checkpoints and the subsequent
establishment of the 17 observation posts. As a result,
the UNOCI force is in the process of redeploying its
troops so as to best assist the Ivorian Government in
implementing the military and security aspects of the
Ouagadougou political Agreement. The overall security
situation remains generally stable, although fragile,
owing to the improving political climate.

On the political front, the mobile court operation
was relaunched on 25 September as called for by the
second meeting of the Evaluation and Monitoring
Committee held in Ouagadougou on 4 September. As
an important prelude to the identification process, this
operation was also in line with the Facilitator's
pressing call on the Ivorian leaders to move from
symbolic gestures to taking concrete steps towards
performing the key tasks provided for in the
Ouagadougou political Agreement. Of the 25 mobile
court teams planned for the first phase of the operation,
20 have been deployed and are operational. As at
18 October, nearly 3,400 applications for duplicates of
birth certificates have been received, of which 3,044
have been granted.

The turnout at the mobile court hearings, which
had initially been very low, is now improving gradually
owing to the enhanced sensitization campaign.

As to the restoration of State authority throughout
the country, the Government and the Forces nouvelles
authorities have been addressing the lingering security,
logistical and financial constraints. That has allowed
for the redeployment of 22 prefets, 27 secretaries-
general and 107 sous-prefets as of 18 October.

Meanwhile, in keeping with its new mandate
under Security Council resolution 1765 (2007),
UNOCI continues to support the Ivorian Government
in implementing the key aspects of the Ouagadougou
political Agreement. In addition to providing logistical,
technical and security support, the mission is finalizing
the establishment of a certification cell within the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. Practical modalities for the certification of the
electoral process will be defined in the near future, in
consultation with the Facilitator.
07-55602
(spoke in French)

Despite the Government's tireless efforts to
implement the Ouagadougou Agreement, the peace
process continues to face a number of serious
challenges. Restructuring the Ivorian armed forces
remains a crucial task, aimed at consolidating and
strengthening the reunification of the country. To that
end, the Facilitator has conducted in-depth
consultations with the chiefs of staff of the Ivorian
armed forces and of the Forces nouvelles, as well as
with the commanders of the Forces nouvelles zone and
the commanders of the impartial forces. The Facilitator
intends to submit, in the near future, concrete proposals
to President Gbagbo and Prime Minister Soro related to
the issue of ranks and quotas for Forces nouvelles
elements that will be part of the unified army. We hope
that that will facilitate the launching of the process of
dismantling the militias and disarming the combatants.
Indeed, the ceremonies held to symbolize the
disarmament and dismantlement of armed militias, at
Guiglo on 19 May, and to symbolize the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of former
combatants, at Bouake on 30 July, have not been
followed up by the formal launching of those
processes.

As the Secretary-General noted in his report,
donors have proved generous in their support for the
Ouagadougou Agreement. That support could facilitate
efforts to accelerate the completion of essential tasks
such as DDR, the pre-identification and identification
process, preparation for the elections and post-conflict
recovery programmes. However, in order to encourage
donors to maintain their support for the implementation
process, it is essential that the Ivorian parties send
strong and unequivocal messages regarding their
resolve to meet the deadlines that they set for
accomplishing the essential tasks set out in the
Ouagadougou Agreement.

(spoke in English)

The very positive partnership between the United
Nations and the Facilitator, and the recent appointment
in Abidjan of the Facilitator's Special Representative,
constitute encouraging prospects for accelerating the
process of implementing the Ouagadougou Peace
Agreement. Regular consultations between the UNOCI
leadership and the Facilitator serve the purpose of
identifying emerging risks and challenges and of
exploring practical ways to address them in a proactive
fashion. Through his active engagement with the
Ivorian leaders, the Special Representative of the
Facilitator has been encouraging them to comply with
their obligations under the Peace Agreement. In
keeping with paragraph 10 of Security Council
resolution 1765 (2007), and as requested by the
Facilitator in a recent letter to the Secretary-General,
UNOCI has been providing security support to the
Special Representative of the Facilitator so as to
facilitate his movements and activities.

Similarly, efforts are under way to develop
synergy between the Facilitator's arbitration and
UNOCI's validation and certification functions. The
idea is to define criteria for ensuring the effective
performance of those functions. It is hoped that the
third meeting of the Evaluation and Monitoring
Committee will provide a useful opportunity to define
a clear-cut timetable for performing the remaining key
tasks.

In conclusion, the Ivorian leaders' continued
commitment to take the lead in restoring peace to their
country is a key factor for effective implementation of
the Ouagadougou Peace Agreement. However, if the
peace process is to become irreversible, special
attention should be paid to addressing the outstanding
political and military issues that are linked closely to
the performance of other key aspects of the Agreement.
It is also essential to develop pragmatic arrangements
between the national stakeholders and their
international partners in the context of a new
partnership for peace.

I wish to recall that, as pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report, the overall peace
process and the improved security situation will remain
fragile and vulnerable to reversals unless they are
underpinned by concrete progress, especially in the
performance of the crucial tasks provided for in the
Ouagadougou political Agreement.

