Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): The United States would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for their reports on
the situation in Afghanistan. We share those
assessments of the many challenges facing the Afghan
Government and the international community, as well
as the acknowledgement that we continue to make
progress in key areas.

I would also like to warmly welcome Foreign
Minister D'Alema to New York and to thank him for
Italy's leadership role on this important issue.

The United States reaffirms its long-term
commitment to Afghanistan. The United States is the
leading donor. We have provided over $14.2 billion in
reconstruction and security assistance since 2001 and
are the leading contributor of troops to the country. The
President recently requested that Congress provide an
additional $11.8 billion in assistance for the remainder
of 2007 and for fiscal year 2008 for Afghanistan - a
significant increase in resources, compared to prior
years.

Confronted with a ruthless enemy, Afghanistan
faces a turning point this year. Although robust and
determined military actions must be pursued whenever
needed, the insurgency will not be defeated by force of
arms alone. It is essential that as the international
community steps up its efforts to assist the Afghan
authorities, it carry out a comprehensive security,
political and economic strategy. Illustrating the
strategy, the new United States funding, if approved, is
expected to go to security, infrastructure, governance
and counter-narcotics and rural development projects.

The United States welcomes efforts aimed at
increasing pressure on the Taliban. We support the
existing Afghan-led reconciliation framework and
share the view of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) that the list
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1267 (1999) and other relevant resolutions should be
updated, specifically with new listings and de-listings.
We stress the importance of an enhanced Afghan-
Pakistani relationship in all fields, including security.
The United States takes this opportunity to
express its appreciation for the central role played by
the United Nations in Afghanistan. We commend the
challenging work, which we saw at first hand during
the Security Council mission in November, done by
Special Representative Koenigs and the members of
UNAMA and the United Nations agencies. We thank
UNAMA for its efforts to date to expand throughout
the country, and we encourage further expansion when
security circumstances permit.

The United States believes that the United
Nations should continue to promote sustained
international engagement in Afghanistan through its
co-chairmanship of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board and by reaching out to key members
of the international community. We also encourage an
adequate follow-up of UNAMA's operations in New
York through regular meetings of the Afghanistan core

group.

The Council and the international community
need to continue to work towards a secure, stable and
more prosperous Afghanistan based on the rule of law
and human rights so that the country will never again
fall prey to extremists and terrorists. The United States
will continue to support United Nations efforts toward
that end.

