Mr. Poukre-Kono (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): As this is the first time that the
Central African Republic has taken the floor before the
Security Council in this month of March, allow me,
Sir, to convey to you the most heartfelt brotherly
congratulations of the delegation of the Central African
Republic. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is an integral
part of the peace process in the Central African
Republic. We welcome that country's enlightened
mediation in that process. This meeting, held under
your stewardship, will, I am sure, be successful.

We would like to pay well-deserved tribute to the
Secretary-General for his efforts with regard to the
Central African Republic. Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon is following very closely the developing
situation in our country. In these past six months, he
has not ceased to step up contacts with the highest
Central African authorities. His commitment to the full
restoration of peace in the Central African Republic is
clear to all. Less than four months after the appearance
of his report contained in document S/2008/733 of
26 November 2008, where the idea of an integrated
office was born, the Council is called on to carry
forward that recommendation, which is now before it.

The complexity of the solutions needed to resolve
the problem of the Central African Republic following
the convening of the inclusive political dialogue can
only be organized within the context of an integrated
5
process, as proposed by the Secretary-General in his
letter of 3 March (S/2009/ 128). The Government of the
Central African Republic welcomes the recommendation
for the establishment of a United Nations integrated
Peacebuilding Office to succeed the current United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central
African Republic until 31 December 2009. We endorse
the establishment of that Integrated Office, which is
innovative in its integration of the Peacebuilding
Support Office into the strategic planning and
coordination unit.

The placing of the Central African Republic on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission has
greatly raised the profile of issues related to our
country within international bodies: the United Nations,
the African Union, the World Bank, the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community and others.

The cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Government is one of the most
exemplary. Once the Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding has been finalized by common agreement,
we cherish the hope that efforts towards stabilization
and genuine national reconciliation will be achieved.
The Integrated Office should play a major role in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process,
6
which remains the cornerstone on which true political
momentum rests. With this new body, the United
Nations will be able to speak with a single voice.

We reiterate how pleased we shall be to see the
Integrated Office becoming operational as soon as
possible in accordance with the recommendation. The
Government of the Central African Republic will be
happy to work closely with the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who will lead
this integrated office, as well as with all the agencies of
the United Nations system.

I cannot conclude without sympathizing with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
is leaving his post at a very crucial time in the peace
process in the Central African Republic. I wish him
every success in his future endeavours.

