Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive, up-to-date and very
useful briefing on the implementation of resolution
2401 (2018).

Two weeks after the adoption of that resolution,
the humanitarian situation in Syria continues to
cause serious concern. The United Nations and its
humanitarian partners have failed to ensure safe,
sufficient, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian
access for populations in need of life-saving assistance
due ongoing fighting, in particular in eastern Ghouta.
Nonetheless, we are mindful of the fact that resolution
2401 (2018) applies to all parts of Syria. We note that
the Secretary-General did not overlook that aspect of
the resolution in his briefing.

We had all emphasized the importance of the
effective implementation of the resolution in order to
make positive changes on the ground and alleviate the
humanitarian tragedy in Syria. Given the increasingly
complex situation on the ground, we knew that it
would not be an easy task. After the Council adopted
resolution 2401 (2018), we recognized that the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners could deliver aid
to eastern Ghouta and other affected areas. No doubt,
there remain serious challenges to ensuring the full
implementation of the resolution.

Although it demands the cessation of hostilities
without delay for at least 30 consecutive days throughout
Syria, with the immediate engagement of all parties
to ensure safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery of
humanitarian aid and medical evacuations, there have
been ongoing military activities resulting in civilian
casualties and the destruction of civilian facilities.
Here, one should also not overlook the damage being
caused by the shelling of Damascus.

Therefore, it is clear that much more remains to be
done and all parties should be committed to the full
implementation of the resolution. As the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners are ready to deliver
more aid to all Syrians throughout the country, it is
absolutely critical that all the parties provide them safe,
unfettered and sustained humanitarian access. In that
regard, all those who have influence over the parties
should exert the necessary pressure to contribute to
saving lives. It is also imperative to use all existing
arrangements to facilitate the implementation of the
resolution, particularly the cessation of hostilities. In
that connection, we look forward to the Astana meeting,
scheduled to take place on 15 and 16 March, which
we hope will contribute to the full implementation of
the resolution.

Finally, as the Secretary-General stated, we are
entering into the eighth year since the start ofthe Syrian
crisis. While we look forward to seeing the Syrian
people, as a sovereign State, find a comprehensive
political solution based on resolution 2254 (2015), the
Council also has a responsibility and an indispensable
role in resolving the Syrian crisis. Therefore, we hope
that the spirit of cooperation and consensus that the
Council demonstrated during the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018) will be sustained not only to respond to
the humanitarian tragedy, but also to ensure progress
in the political track with a view to finding a lasting
solution to the crisis. Most importantly, the cooperation
of relevant countries that have influence is key. Without
those countries, there will be no solution in sight.

