Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening this wrap-up session for the month
of January 2015 in open format. As Malaysia has stated
before, open meetings of this nature allow for greater
transparency and afford better insight into the work of
the Council, especially for non-Council members and
other stakeholders. We will continue to support the
holding of such sessions. I also take this opportunity
to thank you personally, Cristian, and your team at the
Chilean Mission for guiding us through the Council's
work in January with great leadership, wisdom and
patience.

At the same time, I would like to thank you and
Ambassador Samantha for the briefings on the Council's
recent mission to Haiti (see S/PV.7372), which, in our
view, went smoothly and successfully. Malaysia shares
the assessment that the Council's visit to Haiti was
especially timely. We believe that the visit provided the
necessary impetus for the parties in Haiti to continue to
pursue peaceful negotiations with a view to resolving
their differences and in order to overcome the deadlock
over electoral reforms, which has prevented the country
from realizing its political and socioeconomic potential
for far too long.

Malaysia also commends Chile for organizing
three open debates during the course of its presidency.
The themes for the debates - namely, the situation in
the Middle East (see S/PV.7360), inclusive development
and the maintenance of international peace and security
(S/PV.7361), and the protection of civilians - are all
current issues and brought about broad participation
from non-Council members, attesting to the importance
of these issues.

At this stage, I would like to share some of the
reflections, insights and experience that Malaysia has
gained after joining the Council roughly a month ago.
The first observation is on how quickly time passes
when one is a Council member. Secondly, and although
I note that this point has been raised before, I feel
compelled to reiterate it. The Council's work appears
to have increased over time and continues to do so.
The fact that the Council remains engaged and meets
more frequently on various issues and situations on its
agenda indicates the importance and centrality of its
role in managing and maintaining international peace
and security. Given the enormity and gravity of its
responsibility, the Council must continue to ensure that
it is able to respond and address such challenges in the
most appropriate, effective and timely manner.

As you rightly indicated, Mr. President, the Council
has adopted a number of important resolutions and
made a good number of important pronouncements of
position on various developing or escalating situations
around the world. For instance, we recall that, for this
month, the Council has adopted several important
resolutions - resolution 2196 (2015) on the situation
in Central African Republic, resolution 2197 (2015) on
Cyprus, and resolution 2198 (2015) on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On that note, my delegation
would like to emphasize that the quality of the Council's
resolutions lies in their implementation and follow-up.
Malaysia hopes that all relevant parties will commit
to implement the provisions of those resolutions.
The Council must remain vigilant in monitoring the
implementation of its resolutions, and we should not
hesitate to address instances of non-compliance.

In addition, the Council has also discussed and
pronounced itself on a number of issues and situations
through numerous statements to the press. We share the
Council's deepening concern on the markedly increasing

number of terrorist attacks around the world. In addition,
we remain deeply concerned by the escalations ofarmed
conflict and violence in several situations around the
world. In this context, we are disappointed that the
Council was unable to reach consensus on addressing
the deteriorating situation in Yemen. At the same time,
the deteriorating humanitarian situations in several
conflict areas, including Palestine, Syria and Ukraine,
continue to remain high on the Council's agenda. It is
a matter of concern that the Council remains sharply
divided on these situations. The incident in southern
Lebanon yesterday is yet another grim reminder of how
untenable the current situation in the Middle East is.

Moving forward, we hope that Council members
will continue to work towards bridging differences
in order to discharge the Council's Charter-mandated
responsibilities. Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to
contributing in that regard.

On working methods, Malaysia is pleased to note
the Council's continued use of technology, including
through the use of video-teleconferencing facilities, to
engage and interact with the United Nations presence
on the ground. We believe that such practices should
continue. We also note that, on many occasions, the
Council has reacted promptly to address certain
developing situations, including through the early
issuance of press statements. We believe that prompt
reactions by the Council are an important feature of
its work and should continue. Malaysia notes that the
"Any other business" agenda item continues to be used
by countries to discuss certain issues on an exceptional
or urgent basis. We support the continued use of that
practice, as it affords the Council the ability to convene
and react quickly to emerging issues and developing
situations.

We also note the convening of the Arria Formula
meeting initiated by Lithuania on the role of human
rights components in United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions. We value the opportunity provided
to exchange views with colleagues on the ground, in
particular on how the Council could better support not
only their mandates but the mandates of peacekeeping
and political missions as a whole. We believe that
greater use could be made of the Arria Formula format.

In conclusion, I wish to once again express my
delegation's heartfelt appreciation to you and your
team, Mr. President, for the exemplary manner in
which you guided the Council's work this this month.
We are pleased and honoured to have worked with you
in furthering the aims and purposes of the Council. I
would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate
the delegation of China on its upcoming presidency of
the Council next month. Malaysia stands ready to work
closely with China and all Council members in pursuit
of our common goals and objectives.

