Mr. Bairagi (Nepal): Let me first congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Council for
the month of June. We wish to express our sincere
appreciation to you for organizing this open debate on
the important issue of children and armed conflict.

We have taken note of the report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2010/ 181),
and we appreciate the presentation this morning by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, on the subject. We
welcome the fact that the Security Council has adopted
various resolutions, including the resolution 1612
(2005), with regard to the protection and promotion of
the rights of children affected by armed conflict.

Children are the most vulnerable sector of society
during conflict. At times, armed outfits recruit children
into their armed groups and misuse them, including
through sexual abuse. The maiming and killing of
children become routine features for armed groups that
are bent on spreading terror in society.

National Governments should be responsible for
enacting the necessary laws and enforcing them
through effective mechanisms to ensure the promotion
and protection of the rights of children and to bring the
perpetrators to justice. The international community
should come forward with the needed mandate and
resources to protect this vulnerable section of society
during the time of conflict. Effective national measures
and international cooperation are essential to curbing
the persistent violations of the rights of the child and to
provide remedial measures to the affected children.
What is true is that there is no short cut to address
this grave problem. It has to be dealt with in a
comprehensive and collaborative manner with the
involvement of national Governments, the international
community, civil society and all other relevant
stakeholders by devising immediate actions for
preventing the violators from recruiting, abusing and
misusing children in conflict. In the meantime,
planning for longer-term policies addressing, among
others, universal access to education and health,
development, care and support of every child in
society, is essential to ensuring the rights of children.

After the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement on 21 November 2006, Nepal's peace
process has reached several milestones of historic
importance. Carrying the peace process forward, the
Government of Nepal and the Unified Communist
Party of Nepal-Maoist signed the action plan on
16 December 2009 for releasing minor combatants.
The process of releasing began on 7 January and ended
on 8 February 2010. We appreciate the role of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the United Nations
Mission in Nepal and the United Nations country team
for their involvement in this process. The Government
of Nepal expresses its commitment to operationalizing
the national plan of action for the reintegration and
rehabilitation of children affected by the armed
conflict.

As a signatory to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocols, Nepal has adopted
the necessary legal instruments and established a legal
and administrative framework for the promotion and
protection of the rights of the child. The Ministry of
Women, Children and Social Welfare, along with its
subsidiary body the Central Child Welfare Board, and
its well-established network of district child welfare
boards and women's development offices in all
75 districts of the country, have been implementing
various programmes for the promotion of the rights of
the child. Children affected in conflict and girl children
have been given high priority.

Clause 7.6 of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement contains the commitment of the
Government of Nepal and the Unified Communist
Party of Nepal-Maoist that both sides fully agree to
provide special protection to the rights of children,
prohibit sexual exploitation and not to recruit or use
children in the armed forces. Above all, Article 22 of
the 2007 Interim Constitution of Nepal guarantees that
no minor shall be employed in factories, mines or any
other such hazardous work or shall be used in the army,
police or in conflicts.

In concluding my statement, I wish to assure the
Council that the Government of Nepal is fully
committed to discharging its responsibilities in a
sustained manner to protect and promote the rights of
children affected by armed conflict. We also believe
that the de-listing process should begin sooner rather
than later, as the report of the Secretary-General
explicitly notes that there were no cases of recruitment
or use, killing and maiming of children or sexual
violence against children by the Unified Communist
Party of Nepal-Maoist during the reporting period.

