Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the President of Djibouti, Mr. Guelleh, and
thank him for his assessments.

Unfortunately, there has still been no progress in
the settlement of the Djibouti-Eritrea border conflict.
Unlike Djibouti, Eritrea has ignored resolutions 1862
(2009) and 1907 (2009). To date, diplomatic efforts to
unblock the situation have not been very effective.

In adopting resolution 1907 (2009) on sanctions
against Eritrea, the Council appropriately reacted to this
degenerating conflict. We expect full implementation
by all parties of that Council decision in the interests of
strengthening peace and stability in the Horn of Africa.
Moreover, we are convinced targeted sanctions against
Eritrea must be accompanied by reliable evidence of
the involvement of specific individuals in unlawful
acts. That is an important principle in the context of the
Council's practice of imposing sanctions as a whole.

It is our view that Eritrea will resume constructive
interaction with the international community, including
the leadership of the Secretariat, for a prompt, effective
settlement of the situation in the region. That is also
important for strengthening the positive momentum in
the peace process in Somalia.

The attempts of an intransigent opposition to
attack the positions of Government troops and the
African Union Mission in Somalia seriously undermine
the efforts of the Transitional Federal Government to
stabilize the situation and establish effective leadership
in the country. The civilian population and staff of the

United Nations and humanitarian organizations remain
under threat, exacerbating an already grievous
humanitarian situation in Somalia. The agenda includes
the strengthening of the coordination of international
efforts to assist the Transitional Federal Government in
the fields of security and capacity-building and in
discharging its management and legal functions. We
anticipate that the upcoming Istanbul Conference on
Somalia will enable the international community to
focus its attention on the critical needs of the Somalis.
Continuing support is also required for the African
Union Mission in Somalia, which remains an important
stabilizing factor there. It is Vital to accelerate the
process of reaching the Mission's full troop level and
to ensure appropriate logistical support.

We reaffirm once again that the Russian
Federation continues to support the efforts made by the
President of Somalia and the Transitional Federal
Government to achieve national reconciliation and
peace in the country on the basis of the Djibouti
Agreement. The international community and the
Security Council View most positively and highly
appreciate the important political mediation role played
by Djibouti and President Guelleh.

In this situation, we must attach high importance
to the role of the present Somalia sanctions regime,
which is designed to shut down the channels of support
to extremists. We call on all countries, particularly
those in the Horn of Africa region, to strictly comply
with the relevant Council resolutions.

The problem of piracy as a factor in the security
situation affects the interests of practically all countries
in the region and elsewhere in the world. Russia
continues to participate actively in international efforts
to neutralize this threat, because a long-term solution
of the problem is intimately linked to the prospects for
a successful settlement in Somalia.

The question ofjudicial prosecution of the pirates
remains unresolved. We hope for a prompt start of
preparatory work to establish special judicial chambers
and an international tribunal on piracy, based on
international practice and Security Council resolution
1918 (2010).

