Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): At the outset, we
welcome the President of the Republic of Croatia and
thank him for presiding over this meeting.

I would like to express South Africa's
appreciation for the convening of this important debate
on terrorism. It comes at a time when we have
witnessed terrorist attacks in various parts of the world
and, in particular, the recent heinous attacks in
Mumbai. My delegation reiterates its condolences to
the Government of India and the relatives of all those
who lost their lives. We also welcome the Secretary-
General and thank him for his statement.

South Africa condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, by whomsoever perpetrated and for
whatever cause. We are firmly committed to addressing,
in multilateral fora and in accordance with human rights
and international law, the threat posed by terrorism and
other forms of international crime. Consequently, we
welcome the unanimous adoption and reaffirmation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which provides a holistic and multifaceted response that
is premised on the respect for human rights and the rule
of law. The Strategy represents a welcome departure
from the security-centric paradigm and recognizes that
it is important to address conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism in their own right and also as part of
an effective anti-terrorism strategy. The Strategy also
builds on the international consensus that terrorism
cannot be ascribed to any particular religion or culture.

Recognizing that it is up to each country and
subregion to contextualize the Global Strategy and to
make it meaningful to the diverse range of local actors
required for its successful implementation, South
Africa recently hosted a national workshop on the
Global Strategy. The workshop raised awareness of the
Global Strategy amongst Government and civil society
actors and generated a number of useful proposals and
interesting ideas. For example, it was argued that
relevant international human rights instruments, such
as the Convention against Torture, ought to be included
in the list of instruments that all countries are urged to
ratify pursuant to their counter-terrorism obligations.
Speakers condemned the practice of some countries to
draw up their own national terrorism lists, which may
be subject to political abuse and may themselves
constitute a source of radicalization and extremism by
unfairly targeting entire communities or countries. It
was also pointed out that there is a need to reverse the
development-versus-counterterrorism debate by
exploring where counterterrorism fits into the
development agenda and not the other way around.

Building on existing international solidarity and
cooperation is the key to progress in addressing the
scourge of terrorism. It is therefore important that we
redouble our efforts to finalize the comprehensive
convention against international terrorism by reaching
agreement on a definition of terrorism and that we
prevent the abuse of the counterterrorism label to
advance political agendas. International solidarity
ought also to include the avoidance of unsubstantiated
usage of damaging terms such as "terrorist safe
havens" and refraining from the issuance of factually
inaccurate travel advisories against other countries
whose cooperation and assistance is required in
addressing the terror threat. All too often those
statements are directed against those developing
countries that pose the least threat. It should also be
borne in mind that developing countries are
disproportionately affected by terrorist attacks,
irrespective of whether they are the intended target,
and the impact on investment and tourism in the
poorest countries can be particularly devastating.

As stressed in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, respect for human rights is
an essential part of our counterterrorism efforts. It is
not possible to claim the moral high ground while
abusing basic rights and compromising laws built up
over centuries in the interests of political expediency.
Consequently, we cannot remain silent when rights are
ignored and individuals are subjected to unlawful
detention, torture and assassination.

United Nations Security Council sanctions have
to be capable of withstanding legal scrutiny, including
on the question of due process. There are a number of
legal challenges in various parts of the world to the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime, notably the
recent judgment of the European Court of Justice in the
cases of Al Barakaat and Mr. Kadi. These challenges
should put the Security Council on notice that it cannot
proceed as if it were business as usual.

In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
thank you once again for convening this debate and to
express our support for the draft presidential statement.

