Mr. Satoh (Japan): First, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
leadership of the Council for the month of February
and to express my sincere appreciation to you for
convening this open meeting. My delegation firmly
believes that it is important for issues relating to
conflict prevention and peace-building to be discussed
regularly in the Council, particularly at open meetings.
It is through such discussions that we will best be able
to develop our ideas on this complex agenda item.
These discussions can also increase awareness and
understanding among Governments and other actors,
including development agencies and non-governmental
organizations, which could contribute to conflict
prevention and peace-building efforts on the ground.
I commend you, Mr. President, for producing a
useful working paper, which incorporates the fruit of
past discussions and provides a basis for further
progress. We also look forward to the Secretary-
General's report on the prevention of armed conflict, to
be submitted by May 2001, which should further
facilitate our discussion.

For its part, in January 1998 in Tokyo, the
Japanese Government hosted the International
Conference on Preventive Strategy and, more recently,
in July 2000, it chaired the G-8 Foreign Ministers'
Meeting, which adopted the Miyazaki Initiatives for
Conflict Prevention. We believe that the results of
these meetings, which we shared with all Member
States ofthe United Nations, were a useful contribution
to this Organization's discussions.

As described in the working paper, there is
already broad agreement on the need to pursue peace-
building through a comprehensive and integrated
approach. This involves taking appropriate steps at all
stages of conflict, from the pre-conflict to the post-
conflict stage, as well as addressing the root causes of
conflict, including economic and social factors. The
importance of involving donors, various organs and
agencies of the United Nations, regional organizations
and international financial institutions in a well-
coordinated manner is also widely recognized.

Today I would like to emphasize a few points. We
must be fully aware of the linkage between conflict and
development, as was stressed not only in the
Millennium Summit Declaration but also in the G-8
Miyazaki Initiatives. Peace and stability are
prerequisites for sustainable economic development,
and sustainable economic development fosters peace
and stability by eliminating the root causes of conflict.
In other words, peace-building efforts and development
assistance must be mutually supportive, and, as Japan's
Prime Minister, Yoshiro Mori, pointed out during his
recent visit to three sub-Saharan States, the two efforts
should be organically linked like the wheels of a cart.

Africa is a case in point. As Prime Minister Mori
stressed during his visit to the region, it is the African
region that requires this approach. The proliferation of
conflicts in the region underscores the urgent need for
a coherent strategy for peace-building and
development. We believe that the United Nations and
the broader international community should make this
a priority at the beginning of this century.

Having recently witnessed the achievements of
United Nations peacekeeping missions in Kosovo and
East Timor, which have been given broad mandates
that encompass reconstruction and capacity-building
functions, we are all the more convinced that
comprehensive peace-building and development efforts
must be pursued in all regions of the globe.

For its part, Japan will remain committed to
assisting African countries in their efforts to overcome
the difficulties they face. Japan's firm commitment to a
comprehensive approach to peace-building and
development in that continent is reflected not only in
its bilateral and multilateral development assistance but
also in its sponsorship of the First and Second Tokyo
International Conferences on African Development
(TICAD). In the same spirit, Japan has proposed to
hold ministerial-level talks on African development in
Tokyo next December in preparation for a future third
TICAD meeting.

It is widely acknowledged that all the relevant
players must fulfil their respective roles in peace-
building and development efforts. That is why Prime
Minister Mori stated, during his visit to the region, that
priority would be given to positioning TICAD as a
forum where African nations themselves can discuss
development strategies.

Lastly, I would like to stress once again that the
Security Council should continue to enhance its
consultations with players outside the Council.
Comprehensive peace-building and development
efforts that encompass economic and social dimensions
cannot be pursued without the cooperation of donor
countries and various agencies and institutions. This
point was underscored by the active participation in the
recent open debate on East Timor of non-Council
members which are substantially involved in the issue,
as well as the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund. We hope that the Council will continue
this practice.

