Mr. Pleuger (Germany): My delegation would
like to align itself with the statement by the Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union to be delivered later today. We would
also like to thank the Special Representative for his
briefing, and we listened with interest to the statement
of Mr. Covie.

Both the report of the Secretary-General and
Mr. lessen-Petersen's briefing this morning provide us
with a thorough analysis of the standards
implementation process. Let me highlight a few aspects
that Germany considers to be of particular importance.

We welcome the fact that the organization and
holding of the general elections in Kosovo were carried
out in a professional manner. The elections were free
and fair. That is a positive and encouraging
development regarding Kosovo's democratization
process. However, the fact that Kosovo Serbs
participated in only negligible numbers is regrettable.
We feel that the appeal by Belgrade authorities to the
Kosovo Serbs to refrain from voting was irresponsible.
We strongly urge the Kosovo Serbs to take their seats
in the Assembly and to participate in the working
groups in Pristina. That is the best place and the best
way for the Kosovo Serbs to address their legitimate
concerns.

With regard to the standards implementation
process, we agree with the Secretary-General's analysis
that more needs to be done in order to achieve a
positive review in 2005. We need more progress,
particularly in the areas of security, sustainable returns
and freedom of movement. The events of last March
were a major setback in that regard.

On the other hand, we share the opinion
expressed in the report that Kosovo is getting back on
track in fulfilling the standards. The Provisional
Institutions have increased their efforts in the
implementation process. That is good news. It will now
be the task and the responsibility of the new Kosovo
Government to follow up on that positive trend. Only
by taking on that task can we create the basis for a
positive outcome of the mid-2005 comprehensive
review. Recalling the presidential statement of
12 December 2003 (S/PRST/2003/26), we reaffirm our
commitment to this review process on the basis of
assessments provided by, among others, the Special
Representative and the Contact Group.

Germany attaches great importance to the reform
of local Government and to the decentralization
process. We would like to see the speedy launching of
the first pilot projects on the basis of the framework
document. They should take into account issues such
as the protection of minority community rights and
security. We hope that Belgrade will assume a
constructive role in the local government reform
process and that it will accept the Special
Representative's offer to send advisers to the relevant
working group in Pristina.

Let me conclude by thanking the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for all its efforts to implement Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and by commending
Mr. Jessen-Petersen for his impressive commitment
and for the new dynamic that he has brought to
UNMIK's activities. Germany fully shares the
priorities he has set, and we will continue to provide
our full support to assist in their implementation.

