Mr. Strammen (Norway): Let me start by
commending you, Sir, for the manner in which
Colombia has conducted the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of August and by saying how
pleased I am to see you, Mr. Foreign Minister, chairing
the Council this morning.

I have a few points to make. Colombia's
maintaining a balanced approach to the work of the
Council and delivering on the agenda established at the
beginning of the month has been important. Yet at the
same time, your presidency has displayed flexibility in
taking up emerging issues in an appropriate manner.
Following your example, emerging issues should to the
extent possible be tackled without compromising or
delaying the consideration of matters that have already
been scheduled on the Council's agenda. Unfortunately,
we have on previous occasions seen examples of a
certain degree of marginalization of already scheduled
matters. Sometimes this is indeed unavoidable.
However, Colombia has demonstrated this month that it
is possible to cover all bases.

Let me also commend you for having convened
an informal working session this month on regional
approaches to conflict management in Africa. This is a
very interesting topic in itself, and given the
importance of finding ways to more effectively address
peace and security in Africa, it was absolutely timely.
We believe that the largely interconnected nature of
conflicts and their root causes in that part of the world
must be borne in mind in order to arrive at effective
and sustainable solutions. Furthermore, this type of
working session, involving a broad range of actors
from within and outside the United Nations system, is
conducive to open-minded and comprehensive
exchanges of information and views.

In a similar manner, the Arria formula
meetings - allowing non-governmental organizations,
special rapporteurs and others to brief and interact with
Council members - are important and should continue
to be used to broaden the scope of the background
information made available to us.

The thematic issue - small arms - that you
wisely chose for the month of August is of great
importance for security, humanitarian and development
conditions worldwide. Practical disarmament measures
are indispensable to any peace-building mission and
are also a necessity in order to avoid regional spillover
effects in conflict areas. You have our full support in
the future process of tackling the issue of small arms.

As a more general note, let me underscore the
importance and necessity of the selected thematic
issues having co-sponsors in the Council in order to
ensure their follow-up. This need illustrates the high
degree to which monthly presidencies must be seen as
interconnected and interdependent.

Regarding the presidential statement issued today
concerning small arms, I must, however, confess that in
our view the text is somewhat voluminous and
therefore unnecessarily cumbersome to comprehend. In
order to maximize political impact we should strive to
make our statements more condensed and focused in
the future. This is a general observation and, needless
to say, has nothing to do with the subject matter at
hand.

On all issues, the Council must above all act in a
results-oriented fashion. The Council must respond
swiftly to major developments concerning international
peace and security in all cases where doing so can
positively influence the efforts for peace on the ground.
In order to have maximum influence, it is important
that the Council speak with a unified voice. When
divisions in the Council are displayed, its influence can
only be diminished. In this regard, I commend your
delegation once again for having facilitated an
expedient and unanimous response by the Council to
the signing of the Framework Agreement concerning
Macedonia on 13 August.

