The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2002/436) and the
briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and supports all efforts by the
United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the international security presence
(KFOR) to implement fully resolution 1244
(1999) of 10 June 1999, which remains the basis
for building Kosovo's future.

"The Security Council welcomes progress
made in the formation of the executive bodies of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
in Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, to
include representatives of all communities. It
commends the efforts of the Special
Representative and welcomes the priorities
outlined in the Secretary-General's report, as well
as his request to develop benchmarks to measure
progress in Kosovo's institutional development,
consistent with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework. The Council
encourages the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, in full cooperation with the Special
Representative and in strict compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999), to take on the tasks
assigned to them by the Constitutional
Framework.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
fundamental importance of the rule of law in the
political development of Kosovo. It strongly
condemns attacks against UNMIK police in
Mitrovica on 8 April and calls on all communities
fully to respect UNMIK authority throughout
Kosovo in line with resolution 1244 (1999). It
supports the continuing efforts of UNMIK and
KFOR, together with the Kosovo Police Service,
in combating all kinds of crime, violence and
extremism. It supports all efforts to control
borders and boundaries, thus fostering regional
stability. The Council supports and encourages
further efforts to facilitate return of all displaced
persons from the Kosovo Serb and other
communities. Interlocking progress in the areas
of public security, political development and
economic reform and reconstruction contributes
to sustainable returns and requires maximum
support from Member States and regional
organizations. The Council calls on the leaders of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
actively to demonstrate their commitment and
support efforts to promote security, returns,
human rights, economic development, and a
multi-ethnic and fair society with peaceful
coexistence and freedom of movement for all the
population of Kosovo.

"The Security Council welcomes the
decision of the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to transfer Kosovo
Albanian prisoners into the custody of UNMIK,
and encourages further progress regarding the
return of displaced persons to Kosovo and efforts
to trace those still missing from all of Kosovo's
communities, as well as the other issues identified
in the Common Document for cooperation
between UNMIK and the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia signed on 5
November 2001. It considers that the further
development of dialogue and cooperation
between the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, UNMIK and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia authorities is vital to the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1244
(1999).

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of The Security Council has thus concluded the
the Security Council under the symbol present stage of its consideration of the item on its
S/PRST/2002/ll. agenda.

The meeting rose at 2.10 pm.
