Mr. Guehenno: I very much welcome this
opportunity to discuss the main challenges facing
Kosovo, which the Council was able to experience first
hand during its recent visit.

The report of the mission concurs with the views
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report on
Kosovo which was circulated on 13 June. The report
points out that the key challenges are indeed
interrelated. They are security, return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, the issue of the missing
and detainees, confidence-building measures and the
holding of Kosovo-wide elections later this year.

The Security Council mission will have seen that
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) is working on all fronts to move
forward in all of these areas, particularly to improve
the situation of the minority communities and solicit
their participation in the UNMIK-led process, which is
the key to the success of the democratic process.

Today I will not go into too many details; these
are amply provided both in the Secretary-General's
report and in the report of the Security Council
mission. Instead, ifI may, I will focus on the main
messages that came out of the Council visit and that are
crucial for the future development of Kosovo: namely,
multi-ethnicity, the engagement of all communities in
the political process and confidence-building measures.

First, how to engage the communities. We were
very pleased to see from the findings of the Security
Council mission's report that its main message to the
representatives of all communities was the need for
multi-ethnicity. This was precisely the message I took
with me when I visited Kosovo back in April. I then
told the members of the Kosovo Albanian leadership
that it is the duty of the majority in a democratic
process to ensure the rights of the minority
communities, and I told the minority communities that
the only way to ensure a viable future was through
participation in the political process. I shared the view
of the Council and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Haekkerup that while the
international community can assist in creating
conditions conducive to a multi-ethnic Kosovo, it is
very much the responsibility of the Kosovars
themselves to achieve that goal. I was pleased to see
that this message was delivered in such an unequivocal
way to those members of the Kosovo leadership with
whom the Council mission met.

As both the Council mission's report and the
Secretary-General's report underline, the political
engagement of all communities in this process,
particularly the Kosovo Serb community, remains a
major challenge for UNMIK. This challenge can only
be rendered more difficult by the continuing division
within the Kosovo Serb community itself.

We are pleased to note from the Security Council
mission's report that the meetings the mission had in
Belgrade were held in a very constructive atmosphere.
The authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
are still concerned about some aspects of the
Constitutional Framework, but they accept that the
document cannot be changed. Instead, we should be
looking at the creation of confidence-building
measures vis-a-vis the Kosovo Serb community.

We fully support this, as does the Council in its
report. It is essential to move the process forward and
elaborate such confidence-building measures in
conjunction with the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. In this regard, we are very
pleased to see an increasing dialogue between Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haekkerup and
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It
is only through consistent and patient dialogue that we
will be able to move the process forward.

As far as the divisions in the Kosovo Serb
community are concerned, we believe that the Council
mission saw these first hand during its visit. We agree
with the assessment of the Council and the Special
Representative that the key element in encouraging the
participation of the Kosovo Serb community is a clear
signal from the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. In this regard, we fully support and
welcome the message that the Council delivered during
its meetings in Belgrade. We would encourage the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to assist in conveying a
clear message to the Kosovo Serb community that
participation and integration into the structures
UNMIK is establishing are indeed in their best
interests.

But this is not a one-way process. We are fully
aware, as is the Council, that the Kosovo Serb
community has legitimate grievances. UNMIK is
addressing these, as highlighted in both reports, and we
must ensure that efforts continue and are enhanced to
eliminate the root causes of these grievances.

One of the main challenges in this regard remains
the fragile security situation, particularly for the
minority communities, as highlighted in the reports.
The communities, particularly the Kosovo Serb
community, continue to suffer disproportionately from
major crimes and ethnically motivated acts of
intimidation. These factors continue to undermine
UNMIK's efforts to convince the Kosovo Serb
community that they will derive tangible benefits from
cooperating in the UNMIK-led process.

I would like to say a word on the security
situation and the law enforcement initiatives recently
taken. We hope in this respect that the recent adoption
of several major pieces of legislation will contribute to
an improvement of the overall security situation.
Namely, these are the entry into force on 4 June of
regulation 2001/10, on the prohibition of unauthorized
border/boundary crossings, and regulation 2001/7, on
the authorization of possession of weapons in Kosovo.
In addition, a week ago today Special Representative
Haekkerup signed into law the regulation on the
prohibition of terrorism and related offences.

In addition to these three key legislative
initiatives, the establishment of the new police and
justice pillar in UNMIK will pave the way for a
gradual improvement in the law and order situation in
Kosovo. I want to note that improvements have already
been made, including the excellent police work in
cooperation with the Kosovo Force that resulted in the
detention, only two days after the attack, of a suspect
in the bombing in central Pristina on 18 April. That
bombing claimed the life of the head of the passport
office of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Committee on Cooperation.

On the issue of returns, progress has also been
made, as can be seen from both reports. Although such
returns remain minimal, a lot of work continues in the
background to identify potential return sites and to
develop conditions that will be conducive to the return
of Kosovo Serbs. A vital element in this process is the
acceptance by the majority population of minority
return. In this respect, we very much welcome the
acceptance by the Interim Administrative Council of a
general statement of principles guiding return, as well
as the identification of 10 sites where return is planned
to take place later in the year. I would note, however,
that although there is clearly an urgent need for
demonstrable progress in this area - and we know that
this issue of return is of key symbolic and political
importance - it remains UNMIK's and our firm policy
that return should take place in secure and sustainable
conditions.

On the issue of the need for developing more
confidence-building measures, I would like to address
the issue of Mitrovica. Mitrovica has been identified as
a key area for confidence-building in order to dispel
the hatred and mutual distrust that still exists on both
sides. We welcome the Council's support for efforts to
develop a comprehensive strategy to resolve the very
complex situation in Mitrovica. Key to the success of
such a strategy, as the Council pointed out, is the
creation of multi-ethnic initiatives in the social,
economic and religious areas to start rebuilding
confidence between the communities. At the same
time, there is a crucial recognition that Mitrovica is a
microcosm of the problems of Kosovo as a whole, and
that the correct approach will entail Kosovo-wide
confidence-building measures, as well as measures that
are specific to the situation in Mitrovica. One area I
would highlight in the context of confidence-building
measures is the very delicate issue of the missing on all
sides. We were pleased to note the Council's
recommendation for further progress in this crucial
area, which continues to be a major impediment to
reconciliation.

In conclusion, one of the major benefits of the
Council's visit to Kosovo is that there is clear
unanimity on the need to move the process forward. As
the Council mission noted, the Constitutional
Framework represents an important step in the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). Moving the process forward on the basis of a
broad consensus is essential to combating extremism
and encouraging moderates on all sides. This in turn
will have a beneficial effect on the security situation
and the prospects for return. There is no doubt that
participation in the political process is a precondition
for progress.

Positive signals in favour of Kosovo-Serb
registration are encouraging, but the Kosovo Serbs
must also take part in the elections and take their
rightful place in the provisional self-government. Both
the Secretary-General and the Council have underlined
that the benefits of cooperation are preferable to
marginalization. This will, of course, entail risks for all
communities and, in particular, for the Kosovo-Serb
community. The Council's report puts it well when it
says:

"although the Kosovo Serbs did not want to
commit to the political process until the process
had produced improvements, the process could
not produce results unless the Kosovo Serbs
committed to it. The only way out was to accept
the structures UNMIK was putting in place and
take some risks in working with moderate views
on the other side." (5/2001/600, para. 17)

The Council's mission has succeeded in
delivering firm and balanced messages. The United
Nations and the international community are
committed to ensuring the protection of the rights of all
communities, but the people of Kosovo must accept
their share of the responsibility. The Kosovo Albanians
must respect the rights of the minority communities
and, in turn, the minority communities must accept the
risk of participation.

The Council mission has made it clear that there
is no hidden agenda. What we are all trying to do, in
conformity with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), is to take the process forward by establishing
provisional self-government through the November
elections and by creating a society in Kosovo that will
be able to produce legitimate interlocutors for the
discussions on a final settlement for Kosovo, as
foreseen in resolution 1244 (1999).

I should like to conclude by extending, on behalf
of the Secretary-General, my warmest appreciation to
the Council for the significant contribution it has made
through its recent visit to the furtherance of the
democratic process in Kosovo. We hope that the
discussion we have here today will enable us to move
further along this path, as this will serve the cause of
peace in Kosovo and in the region.

