Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Mr. President,
Botswana is pleased to see you personally presiding
over the business of the Council today. I wish to express
my delegation's appreciation to your country for
including this item on the agenda of the Council, and
my delegation is pleased to share its views on it. Let me
also express my condolences to you and your country,
Sir, for the loss of lives as a result of the terrorist attacks
that took place in your country on Friday.

My delegation also aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Despite the challenge of resource limitations,
Botswana remains committed to the full and effective
implementation of its international obligations in the
fight against terrorism. Botswana joins the international
community in condemning acts of terrorism in all
their forms and manifestations wherever, however
and whenever they occur. There can never be any
justification for the motive behind such dastardly acts.

Terrorism remains a serious threat to national,
regional and international peace and security. Acts of
terrorism have shown that this phenomenon knows no
boundaries and that its impact is indiscriminate and
deeply wounds the soul of every society. The fact that
it is a violent form of transnational crime that thrives
on the proceeds of crimes ranging from illegal trade
to money-laundering requires the common resolve of
the international community to offer an effective global
response and action.

My delegation strongly believes that the
international community should move a step further
in its concerted efforts against acts of terrorism and
consolidate all 13 existing multilateral conventions and
protocols in order to intensify and harmonize action
against this scourge. That is the united action that is
needed to send the strong message to perpetrators of
violence and potential terrorists that the international
community is unrelenting in its commitment to
fulfilling its obligation to stop countless numbers of
innocent lives from being claimed by terrorist activities.

Above all, we need to strengthen the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in order to
stop arbitrary killings, the destruction of property and
livelihoods, and the spread of terrorism. My delegation
therefore agrees that the international community
should scale up its cooperation and assistance in
support of counter-terrorism activities, programmes,
institutions and training, which are usually lacking in
developing countries.

Botswana believes that the development of strong
institutions of governance, the promotion of the rule
of law, and the promotion and protection of human
rights serve as a useful foundation for countering
terrorism. The sharing of knowledge, experience and
best practices, including through the establishment of
unified customs systems and border control facilities,
could facilitate a seamless flow of information
among neighbouring countries. That is also critical
for addressing the problem of the illicit trafficking
of drugs, small arms and light weapons, the proceeds
of which cannot be separated from the financing of
terrorism and terrorist activities.

At the national level, Botswana has established a
national counter-terrorism committee, with the mandate
of ensuring the implementation of counter-terrorism
strategies. There has been steady progress in the areas
of legislative reforms and strengthening the capability
of the security apparatus to combat terrorism. That
includes the drafting of comprehensive anti-terrorism
legislation to deal with the threat of terrorism and the
creation of new institutions, such as the Directorate on
Intelligence and Security, the Financial Intelligence
Agency and the Non-Bank Financial Institutions
Regulatory Authority.

On the multilateral front, Botswana continues to
intensify its cooperation in the fight against terrorism
at the subregional, regional and international levels.
Botswana's participation in bodies such as the Southern
African Regional Police Chiefs Organization, the
Eastern and Southern African Anti-Money Laundering
Group, INTERPOL and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime is an additional effort to enhance
the implementation capacity of our national counter-
terrorism strategy.

