Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, Indonesia
also welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2499 (2019). We thank the penholder for their efforts in
finding a compromise among the divergent positions.

We heard the call from the Central African Republic
for the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and
maintaining its troop ceiling. The role of MINUSCA is
indeed crucial in maintaining peace and stability in the
country as well as protecting its civilians. That is why
Indonesia voted in favour of resolution 2499 (2019).

I have taken the floor to highlight the
following points.

First, MINUSCA is, first and foremost, a
peacekeeping mission. We salute our peacekeepers for
risking their lives and leaving their families behind to
pursue peace in the Central African Republic. Their
safety and security will always be a top priority for
Indonesia; I would like to make that crystal-clear.

Secondly, it is important to ensure that United
Nations peacekeeping operations will always be a
collective effort in which all stakeholders play an
important role. We therefore emphasize the need for
regular, close consultations between the United Nations
and troop- and police-contributing countries to enhance
mandate awareness, as well as form better-performing
peacekeepers. It is only logical that countries providing
people for peacekeeping missions should be properly
engaged. At present, we are the largest contributor of
personnel to MINUSCA on the Council. Indonesia
has always highlighted the importance of the
professionalism of our peacekeepers in implementing
their mandates on the ground.

Nevertheless, for a peacekeeping mission to
succeed, professionalism should not be limited only
to contingent or uniformed personnel. Professionalism
applies to everyone, including non-uniformed
elements. At the same time, we also believe that
outstanding performance should also be recognized
and incentivized. We will continue to seek such balance
in future peacekeeping resolutions.

Thirdly, the United Nations peacekeeping
operation must be fully prepared, especially in the face
of the changing and complex situation, as well as the
increasingly dangerous security environment. That is
why it is critical to ensure that the Mission is given
clear mandates, as well as the necessary equipment
and resources.

