Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to thank
Malaysia for the convening of this open debate with
the presence of His Excellency Deputy Prime Minister
Ahmad Zahid Hamidi. Algeria hopes that this meeting
will blaze a trail not only in fulfilling and following
up on resolution 1540 (2004), but also in the general
endeavour of disarmament, which we see as a shared
and common responsibility.

My country is fully committed to the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, but I would like to stress the following points.

First, we look forward to examining in depth
the review to be concluded by the end of the year on
strengthening and following up on resolution 1540
(2004).

Second, we see that next step as part of the
disarmament architecture in all its aspects. We clearly
underscore that it is our common duty to make sure that
no weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), no technology
and no trade end up in the hands of non-State actors.

Third, it is the firm conviction of my country that
the elimination of WMD is the surest way to prevent the
threat they pose to all of humankind, as stated 70 years
ago during the first session of the General Assembly.

Fourth, we legitimately look forward to seeing
established an appropriate balance between the need
for peaceful uses of technology for development and
socioeconomic progress and the concern to protect
ourselves from any misuse of those technologies by
uncontrolled or improper sources.
Fifthly, it is evident to us that the review should
clearly indicate the right to have access to such
technologies for peaceful purposes and the ways
to define precisely international cooperation and
appropriate funding.

Sixth, the common defence and security policy of
the African Union clearly sets out all those objectives
and position, including strong support to resolution
1540 (2004) resolution and great expectations from
international cooperation in all fields linked to
combating weapons of mass destruction. Moreover, the
African Commission on Nuclear Energy, established
by the Pelindaba Treaty, is today an impressive
reality that ought to be supported. In that regard,
we specifically recall resolution 1977 (2011), and in
particular its paragraphs 10,15 and 17, and we expect
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) to set the practical steps for
regional cooperation.

Seventh, we understand that the general actions
for the achievement of those goals need further and
stronger encouragement. However, it must be said that
we expect more. In particular, in some cases, such as
with regard to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the nuclear-
weapons States owe it to the world to start to fulfil their
commitments to disarmament and to allow equitable
access for the peaceful uses of associated technologies.
In the prolonged absence of such fulfilment, the
relevance of the Treaty might be questioned. We do not
see those commitments as amorphous promises, but as
clear international legal obligations.

Eighth, the path charted by the international
community with regard to chemical and biological
weapons should set the example for the nuclear threat.
My country deeply regrets that we are not even at
the starting point for the establishment of a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle east - an issue
that impeded any positive outcome at the latest NPT
Review Conference.

Ninth, let me reiterate the importance of negotiation
processes and multilateral mechanisms, all of which
must be strengthened and respected. They remain
the most appropriate frameworks - in particular the
Conference on Disarmament and the General Assembly.

Lastly, Algeria, which will chair the First Committee
during the seventy-first session of the General
Assembly, will spare no effort for the accomplishment
of the overall goals of security and disarmament as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Our
deep conviction continues to be that eradicating the
threat of all nuclear, biological and chemical weapons
must be based on the complete elimination of the
weapons themselves, so as to prevent the doomed fate
they pose to all humanankind

