Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): My
statement is an extension of the joint communique
issued last night by the President of the French
Republic, Mr. Francois Hollande, and the Chancellor of
the Federal Republic of Germany, Ms. Angela Merkel.

I, too, would like to begin by expressing once
again to Sweden our most sincere condolences and full
solidarity with it following the tragic terrorist attack in
Stockholm this morning.

The Security Council is meeting once again
following the use of chemical weapons by the regime of
Bashar Al-Assad. Almost four years after the large-scale
massacre in Ghouta, in August 2013, the 4 April attack
has revealed the truth: Al-Assad has never renounced
the use of chemical weapons or deviated from his
ultimate goal: the annihilation, pure and simple, of all
those who resist him, whatever the price may be.

France has consistently called for strong action
on the part of the international community in the face
of the serious and repeated violations of international
humanitarian law by the Damascus regime, which
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity,
as was already underscored by the Secretary-General
in 2013 following the chemical attack of 21 August
2013. My country has spared no effort to ensure that
these crimes do not go unpunished. That includes
proposing that the Security Council refer the matter
to the International Criminal Court. Those initiatives,
however, have been met with obstacles and vetoes,
notably Russia's. The Syrian regime has violated
its international obligations to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their
Destruction. The actions of Syria also constitute a clear
violation of the resolutions of the Security Council.

In that context, the American airstrike constitutes
a legitimate response to the chemical attack. The
airstrike is also an important reminder that the future
use of such weapons will not be tolerated. To those who
pretend to be astonished, Bashar Al-Assad bears full
responsibility for the situation. For years, the regime
has openly flouted the basic principles of our system of
collective security. It has repeatedly and systematically
violated its obligations under international humanitarian
law, the norm on the prohibition of the use of chemical
weapons, particularly against civilians, as well as
Security Council resolutions. It has become imperative
to respond and deter the regime from such actions.

Recourse by anyone to chemical weapons constitutes
a war crime and a crime against humanity, which cannot
go unpunished. Syria cannot be an exception. That was
already the position of France in the aftermath of the
chemical attack on Ghouta, and we have never deviated
from it. The international community can no longer be
duped by the dilatory tactics of the Al-Assad regime.

In adopting resolution 2118 (2013), the Security
Council made a very clear commitment to sanction any
failure by Syria to fulfil its obligations. That has not
prevented Bashar Al-Assad's regime from continuing
its repeated, methodical and barbaric use of weapons
of mass destruction since 2013, openly flouting
the authority of the Council and its international
commitments. Those violations have been irrefutably
documented by a mechanism created by the Security
Council, the Joint Investigative Mechanism.

On 28 February, action by the Security Council
was once again prevented by Russia's unwarranted
and abusive use of the veto (see S/PV.7893). That
blockage was perceived by the Al-Assad regime as a
signal of impunity. In parallel, Russia has not met its
responsibilities or exerted the necessary pressure on the
regime in Damascus. It is the responsibility of all of the
members of the Council to ensure that light be shed on
the circumstances of the attack carried out by the Syrian
regime in Khan Shaykhun and that its perpetrators are
held accountable for their actions before a court of law.

France reiterates its full support for the mechanisms
of the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to carry out a diligent
inquiry into the matter. France will not compromise
regarding the disintegration of the chemical
non-proliferation regime. France will continue to work
with its partners to strengthen it in all relevant forums.
The attack of 4 April definitively demonstrated
to the world the urgent need for a political solution
in Syria. The maintenance in power of a dictator who
carries out chemical attacks against civilians is not
only a moral abomination. It is an unsustainable threat
to the region and to the world.

All members of the Council agree on one point: the
Syrian crisis will never be settled by military means
alone. Today, because of the tragedy of Khan Shaykhun,
we have the moral and political responsibility to
reinvigorate the talks that have begun in Geneva to find
a political settlement in Syria under the auspices of the
United Nations. That is the top priotity. In that context,
France calls on the international community to coalesce
around a political transition in Syria, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). France and its
European partners will soon be circulating proposals
in that regard.

Our responsibility is to history. Every member of
the Security Council, particularly Russia, must live
up to their responsibilities. We must commit ourselves
to seeking an urgent political solution. It is an urgent
matter because we are talking about the security of
the Syrian people and the region. The fight against
terrorism is at stake. Let us not forget that Al-Assad's
regime is the biggest generator of terrorism.

