Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The British
Government welcomes the adoption of this resolution. We
believe it is a sensible, balanced text, the provisions of
which will contribute to the maintenance of peace and
stability in the region. My delegation is particularly
grateful for the helpful and constructive contribution made
by the Rwandan delegation during the negotiations on the
text. We welcome its agreement to the arrangements for
notification of all arms supplied to the Government of
Rwanda under the terms of this resolution, which we
believe will be an important confidence-building measure
with respect to neighbouring countries.

My delegation also welcomes the provisions in this
resolution aimed at tightening the embargo where it
remains in place. In this context we are pleased to see
that the resolution reinforces the ban on arms transfers to
exiled extremist groups. We look forward to receiving the
Secretary-General' s recommendations on a commission to
investigate alleged arms flows to forces of the former
Rwandan Government in the Great Lakes region. We call
upon all States in the region to respond positively and

 

constructively to the Secretary-General's further
consultations concerning the deployment of United Nations
military observers to monitor the embargo.

The British Government hopes that, when the Security
Council comes to review the issue of the operation of the
arms embargo in 12 months' time, we will be able to
register a net improvement in the political and security
situation in the Great Lakes region.

At the same time, we believe that a lasting solution to
the problems of this region can be brought about only by
peaceful means, through political and diplomatic activity,
including, in particular, dialogue and negotiation. In that
context, we welcome the efforts made by the Government
of Rwanda to promote national reconciliation. We hope
these efforts can be intensified in order to help create an
atmosphere of security, trust and confidence conducive to
the safe return of refugees, which remains essential for the
long-term stability of Rwanda and the region as a whole.

The international community must also play a part in
this process. We look forward to receiving the
Secretary-General's report on his efforts to convene a
regional conference on security, stability and development,
and on the case for a possible regional meeting on the
repatriation of refugees, in which, no doubt, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) will have a role.

