Mr. Acharya (Nepal): Mr. President, I should
like to extend my congratulations upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month and to thank you for convening
the discussion of this important issue, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. On behalf of the delegation
of Nepal, I express our sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his fifth comprehensive report on
the subject, as well as our appreciation for the
presentation today by Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland.

The safety, security and well-being of civilian
populations who are badly affected by terrorism, armed
conflict and violence are our common interest. We
share the view that national Governments should take
primary responsibility for the protection of their
civilian populations from violence and terrorist
activities. Only recently, our leaders have agreed to
devise methods of taking responsibility to protect
innocent civilians from genocide, ethnic cleansing, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Protection of
civilians, including women and children, in armed
conflicts, especially from the threats of non-State
actors, remains the primary challenge for us to address
effectively. The Security Council should remain
engaged as to how such violations by non-State actors
can brought under control through international justice.

My own country, Nepal, has been the victim of
terrorist activities committed by illegal armed groups
who have shown little respect for human dignity and
even for human life. In their brutal attacks, civilian
lives and livelihoods have been destroyed, as has
infrastructure for essential services. Innocent civilians,
including women and children, are victims of ruthless
killings, maiming, torture, forced recruitment and
kidnapping. These activities have not abated, despite
the declaration of the so-called unilateral ceasefire in
recent months.

I would like to make a few comments with regard
to references to Nepal in the Secretary-General's
report.

His Majesty's Government is committed to taking
the necessary measures to protect the lives and
livelihoods of innocent civilians who are the victims of
terrorist and disruptive activities. The Government is
fully conscious of its responsibility to protect civilians,
even in the face of difficult circumstances. The security
forces have exercised the utmost restraint in the
security operations that are carried out to protect
innocent civilians from terrorist and disruptive
activities.

His Majesty's Government has given the highest
priority to the protection of civilians, including by
mobilizing resources to provide the necessary
assistance to internally displaced persons. The
Government is committed to intensifying its efforts to
provide such assistance, taking into account the short-
term and long-term perspectives. The Government will
implement a comprehensive policy for the welfare of
internally displaced persons. We welcome the efforts of
the United Nations system to complement national
efforts to provide humanitarian assistance and protect
innocent civilians, including internally displaced
persons in Nepal.

Nepal fully respects and strictly observes the
principles of international law on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, through full adherence to
international humanitarian law, in particular the
Geneva Conventions. Security personnel are given
instructions and training on international humanitarian
law and human rights. We have also allowed the
International Committee of the Red Cross to operate in
Nepal with full access to all places in Nepal, including
places of detention. His Majesty's Government has
allowed unhindered access for non-governmental
organizations, human-rights defenders and international
humanitarian agencies in all parts of the country. The
reference in the report of the Secretary-General to the
registration process does not apply to humanitarian
organizations that are already operational in Nepal.
Non-governmental organizations will be allowed
unhindered access to the civilian population without
any hindrance if they are registered in accordance with
the law.

The office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Nepal, which was
established under an agreement this year, is fully
functional in all areas of the country. It has not
reported any access problems, for humanitarian
agencies or other entities, in any part of the country.
The Representative of the Secretary-General on the
human rights of internally displaced persons, who
visited Nepal earlier this year, also reported that there
is no humanitarian crisis in Nepal.

His Majesty's Government of Nepal is fully
committed to protecting civilians and making every
effort to restore peace and re-energize the country's
democratic institutions, including through the
municipal elections scheduled for 8 February 2006 and
the parliamentary elections to be held by April 2007, as
commanded by His Majesty the King. We believe that
those elections will help foster a competitive
democratic process, which will pave the way for the
better protection of civilians and put an end to the
ongoing violence.

Nepal welcomes the humanitarian assistance to
the victims of terrorist and disruptive activities. We are
of the view that, in making such efforts, the special
circumstances on the ground must be taken into
account. We support the idea that humanitarian
assistance by the international community for victims
of violence and internally displaced persons should be
provided with the consent of the State concerned, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Any guidance by the Security Council
should take into consideration that direct access to
illegal armed groups can be counterproductive to
efforts to protect civilians in armed conflicts and can
even jeopardize peace and stability.

