Ms. Juul (Norway): Absent a credible political process to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it is of key importance that we continue to build the institutional and economic foundations for a Palestinian State. Norway continues to assist in these efforts, as we have done since the Oslo Process, and we will continue do so, including by chairing the next meeting of the international donor group to Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians, in Brussels this spring. The recent efforts to resolve outstanding economic issues between Israel and the Palestinian Authority (PA) need to continue with a view to improving the fiscal situation of the PA. Moreover, facilitating trade and easing restrictions on movement and access are preconditions for a more sustainable Palestinian economy. The recent flare-ups of violence risk escalating tensions around Gaza. Norway notes the positive effects of donor efforts and that humanitarian and infrastructure programmes need to continue. The ongoing health crisis is of particular concern. We urge all parties to work closely with the United Nations to ensure proper supply lines to Gaza. Norway's position on the Israeli establishment of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, remains clear. Such settlements constitute a grave violation under international law and a major obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution towards just, lasting and comprehensive peace. Norway welcomes plans to hold general elections in Palestine this year. Free, fair and _ inclusive elections are important for renewing the legitimacy of Palestinian national institutions. We encourage all parties, including the Palestinian Authority, Palestinian factions and Israel, to act constructively in facilitating and holding elections across Palestine, including in East Jerusalem and Gaza. Allow me to make a few remarks on the situation in the region. We are deeply concerned about the increased tensions between the United States and Iran over the past weeks and the violent escalation in Iraq. While the situation seems to have calmed down for now, the conflict remains unresolved. Norway urges all parties involved to de-escalate, exercise maximum restraint and engage through dialogue and diplomacy. The people of Iraq deserve peace and security. Further escalation will put the stability and territorial integrity of Iraq at risk. We must safeguard the progress achieved so far, including through the fight against terrorism and violent extremism. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is important for regional and global security and remains key to continued confidence in the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. While we regret the United States decision to withdraw from the JCPOA and to reimpose sanctions, we express our strong concern about Iran's steps to reduce its compliance with its nuclear commitments. Norway urges Iran to return without delay to full compliance with the provisions of the nuclear agreement. The efforts of European partners to preserve the JCPOA, within the framework of the agreement's dispute mechanism, have our full support.Promoting peace and security in the Middle East, in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions, remains a priority for Norway. We stand ready to support any endeavour that seeks to further that aim. If the past weeks have taught us anything, it is that only diplomacy, de-escalation and credible political processes can lead to a more stable region.
