Mr. Hamburger (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The candidate countries Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey
and Croatia, the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro, and
the EFTA countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway,
members of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this declaration.

Since the previous meeting in this Council on
Timor-Leste last August, the European Union has not
significantly changed its position on the way forward
for Timor-Leste. We congratulate the Government of
Timor-Leste for the tremendous progress it has made in
rebuilding a functioning civil administration, training
security and police forces, adopting important
legislation and preparing for local elections.

We also would like to commend the invaluable
contributions made by the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), which the EU
holds in high regard for its exemplary function as a
true multilateral effort at peace-building and
reconstruction. In this respect, I am pleased to
welcome and to commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa,
today for his leadership of UNMISET.

The EU pays tribute to the multilateral
institutions and bodies that have jointly contributed to
the recent economic recovery in Timor-Leste. Although
the first signs of growth are still modest, the EU is
encouraged by this upward trend that gives hope for
further economic consolidation in the future. The EU
wishes to see more efforts aimed at developing and
expanding private sector activity in Timor-Leste.

The EU also would like to praise both Timor-
Leste and Indonesia for their steadily improving
relationship, which we hope will result in the early
determination of their joint land border.

The report of the Secretary-General clearly
outlines the various reasons for which Timor-Leste has
not yet reached the critical threshold for self-
sufficiency. I will not go into those details here.
However, the European Union shares the Secretary-
General's conclusion that UNMISET is to be
maintained in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1543 (2004). Moreover, the EU can support
the Secretary-General's recommendation that the
Mission focus on an exit strategy during the coming six
months, aimed at increasing Timorese ownership. The
EU trusts that the United Nations system will continue
to support Timor-Leste after the departure of
UNMISET next year.

I would like to recall the European Union's
concern at the lack of progress in ending impunity.
Ensuring that those responsible for serious crimes
committed in East Timor in 1999 are held accountable
and that justice is secured for the victims and people of
East Timor is essential. The European Union looks
forward to receiving the proposals of the Secretary-
General, with a view to supporting them.

