Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian): I have the honour to deliver my statement
on behalf of the States members of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO): China, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.

I thank the Russian presidency for its important
initiative to convene today's Security Council
debate on cooperation with three important regional
organizations: the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Commonwealth of Independent States. Constant and
close dialogue between the United Nations and the
organizations of the vast Eurasian region is vital to
us all. We support the development of effective and
cooperative relations between the United Nations and
CSO, which is an important global partner in efforts to
ensure international peace and security.

This year, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
celebrates its fifteenth anniversary. Over the course
of its existence - the twelve years during which it
held observer status at the General Assembly - CSO
secured a commendable place and a rank of authority
among the influential, international and regional
organizations. It has become an effective entity
in maintaining security, stability and sustainable
development in the modern system of international
relations. While reflecting the fundamental principles
and ideas of the Organization, the Shanghai spirit is a
unique source of the successful activities conducted by
SCO and an important guide in developing inter-State
relations, countering global challenges and threats, and
settling international disputes. It is based on mutual
trust, equality, consultation, respect for the diversity of
civilizations and cultures, and the aspiration to achieve
development for all.

SCO strictly follows the approach of avoiding bloc-
based, ideological and confrontational approaches to
addressing urgent international and regional problems.

In strict adherence to the principles enshrined
in the charter of SCO - including the fact that SCO
is not directed against other States or international
organizations - SCO member States are actively
developing contacts and cooperating with other
countries and international and regional organizations.
Partnerships have been established and maintained with
the United Nations and its specialized agencies, and
we are also engaging in cooperation efforts with other
international and regional structures. On 21 November,
the fifth anniversary General Assembly resolution
65/ 124 on cooperation between the United Nations and
SCO will be adopted. The principle of openness in SCO
is consistently implemented. Procedures are under way
for admission of India and Pakistan as full members of
SCO in mid-2017.

The rapidly changing global situation is marked by
ever-increasing geopolitical tension and the growth of
terrorism and violent extremism, all ofwhich negatively
affect the entire system of international relations. In
such conditions, the United Nations remains the leading
universal international organization for the maintenance
of global security and the main platform for addressing
inter-State and international issues. We reaffirm our
commitment to strengthening the central coordinating
role of the United Nations in international relations.
The countries of SCO intend to continue to adhere to
the universally recognized purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, primarily with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security, the development of
cooperation among States, independence, equality,
the independent choice of social systems and paths
for development, mutual respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, the inviolability of borders,
non-aggression, non-interference in internal affairs,
the peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use of
force or threat of force.

We support the further strengthening of the lead
role played by the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security by continuing
extensive consultations in search of a package solution
for its reform in order to improve the transparency
and effectiveness of the Council, guided by the
interest of ensuring the unity of the States Members
of the United Nations, without setting artificial time
lines and expediting options that do not enjoy broad
support from Members States. We believe that all
relevant disputes should be resolved peacefully through
friendly negotiations and agreements among the parties
concerned without internationalization or external
interference. We are firmly convinced about the
inadmissibility of ensuring our own security at the cost
of the security of others. We support strict adherence to
the provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the comprehensive and consistent
promotion of all of the goals and principles reflected
therein.

We stress the importance of preventing the
militarization of outer space so as to ensure equal
and indivisible security for all and to maintain global
stability. We express serious concern about the growing
threat of terrorist groups gaining access to weapons of
mass destruction, including terrorists' use of chemical
and biological materials for terrorist purposes. We also
call on the international community to work on creating
a peaceful, secure, fair and open information space
based on the principles of cooperation and respect for
national sovereignty and non-interference in States'
internal affairs.

We believe firmly that all States Members of
the United Nations should develop coherent political
approaches to the fight against terrorism, establishing
the cooperation between international and regional
organizations that can help to create conditions
conducive to expanded collaboration in combating
terrorism in the context of our new realities. In that
regard, we would like to affirm our solidarity with
multilateral counter-terrorism efforts and our support
for joint actions against terrorist groups, conducted
under the auspices of the United Nations. We also
support further close cooperation in combating the
spread of terrorist ideology, particularly among young
people and through the Internet, as well as in preventing
ethnic, racial and religious intolerance and xenophobia.

We are concerned about the worsening international
drug problem and in that regard we took special note of
the outcome of the General Assembly's special session
on the world drug problem, held in April in New York.
In our view, it is vital that, with the United Nations
playing a central coordinating role, we unite our efforts
in an integrated and balanced approach based on the
principle of States' common and shared responsibility
for eradicating global drug production and on improved
cooperation in the areas of drug rehabilitation and
effective reduction of the demand for drugs.

We would like to emphasize that one of SCO's
priorities in its cooperation with the United Nations
is combating terrorism in all its forms, including
the financing of terrorism, the illicit production
and trafficking of drugs, transnational organized
crime, crimes that exploit modern information and
communication technologies, illegal migration and
human trafficking, the illegal smuggling of arms,
ammunition and explosives, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery, and
strengthening border security.

Today's debate reflects the desire of all Member
States to discussthemostpressingandmulti-dimensional
global issues relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security around the world. SCO countries are
determined to participate actively in that dialogue in
order to help ensure the synergy of the three pillars of
the United Nations - peace and security, sustainable
development and human rights. We intend to deepen our
dialogue and cooperation with all of the international
and regional organizations that we have official
relations with, as well as to encourage relevant external
contacts in order to expand our network of multilateral
partnerships, in accordance with the initiative launched
by SCO Heads of State at the Tashkent Summit in 2004.

