Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): You, Mr. President,
understand the great importance we attach to this
meeting. My first words are to congratulate you for the
outstanding manner in which you have been guiding
the work of the Security Council since the beginning
of the month and, above all - I repeat, above all - for
the relevance of the items that you have included in the
agenda of the Council. Mali congratulates France for
its monthly presidency and welcomes in particular the
fact that, under its enlightened leadership, the Security
Council will in a few days proceed to renew the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Mali will
always remember the date of 11 January 2013, when
President Francois Hollande, responding favourably
to the Malian authorities' request, authorized the
deployment of Operation Serval, which made it possible
to halt the advance of terrorist groups.

I also wish to express my delegation's appreciation
for the excellent manner in which the Arab Republic of
Egypt presided over the work of the Council during the
month of April.

Allow me also to reiterate, on behalf of His
Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, President
of the Republic of Mali, the profound gratitude of
the people and the Government of Mali to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, his Special Representative,
Minister Mahamat Saleh Annadif and his predecessors,
Mr. Mongi Hamdi and Mr. Bert Koenders, for their
invaluable efforts in support of peace and stability
in Mali.

The Security Council's numerous visits to Mali
attest to the Organization's strong interest in Mali and its
people. I sincerely thank the Council for such attention.
I would like to express the gratitude of the people
and the Government of Mali to the various countries,
subregional, regional and international organizations,
previous members of the mediation team, who are
now members of the Monitoring Committee of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which
emerged from the Algiers process. Our appreciation also
goes out to the countries that are active on the ground
helping to restore peace and security in my country.

Many victims, civilian and military, national and
foreign, have fallen on Malian territory. The toll of
casualties, already heavy, as mentioned by the Special
Representative, has worsened in recent months with
the deterioration of the security situation. The month
of May was particularly deadly for MINUSMA: just as
the world was commemorating the International Day
of United Nations Peacekeepers, that cerulean blue
was disrupted by sandstorms. This is an unacceptable
situation. We reverently pay tribute to the memory of
the victims, and we offer our heartfelt condolences to
their families and to their countries.

On behalf of the people and the Government of
Mali, we welcome with great gratitude the invaluable
contribution of MINUSMA to our country's
stabilization process. And we express our profound
appreciation to the United Nations and the troop-
contributing countries.

The delegation of Mali takes note of the report
(8/2016/498) of the Secretary-General under consideration
and thanks Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of MINUSMA, for his briefing, which focused
on the implementation of the Agreement and the
recommendations to the Security Council with regard
to renewing the MINUSMA mandate. We welcome
the fact that the Secretary-General recalls the progress
made towards implementing the Agreement. In
that regard, we thank the Secretary-General for the
tribute he rendered to President Keita, as well as for
his leadership and his firm, total commitment to the
implementation of the peace agreement in its entirety.

As we commemorate the first anniversary of the
signing of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, we are pleased to note that hostilities between
the Government and the signatory movements have
ceased, as the Secretary-General recalled. While a
few misunderstandings might have arisen between the
signatory movements, they managed to resolve those
disputes through intra- and inter-communal meetings.
That reconciliation process should be supported by
all actors. It has been established, as the Secretary-
General's report thankfully underscores, that the
Government of Mali has made enormous efforts that
eloquently illustrate its determination to honour its
all commitments.

For our part, we will focus on two key issues
emerging from the report of the Secretary-General,
namely, political and institutional reforms and defence
and security matters.

In the area of political and institutional reforms,
during the consideration of the previous report
(S/2016/281) of the Secretary-General, on 5 April (see S/PV.7665), the delegation of Mali informed Council
members that, on 31 March, the National Assembly of
Mali had adopted a law a law modifying the territorial
municipalities code. As members are aware, the law,
initiated by the Government of Mali, is the legal
provision that paves the way for the establishment of
the interim authorities.

The compliance of the provisions of the law with
the Malian Constitution was decided by a competent
court, thereby ending all forms of dissent. The President
of the Republic signed the law, and the Government
adopted an implementing decree. In that respect, I must
point out that there must be no lingering doubt about
the willingness of the Government of Mali to bring the
process to fruition. While there were disagreements
with respect to interpretation and approaches on
how best to advance the process, the Malian parties
remained Malian parties.

Fortunately, as the Secretary-General has recalled,
the Government of Mali and the signatory movements
agreed a few days ago to amemorandum ofunderstanding
that sets the timing for critical operations, including
for the setting up of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism in the regions, the appointment of interim
authorities, the redeployment of the Administration
and the delivery of basic social services. That is an
important step forward.

The process of revising the Constitution is under
way, and a review commission was set up with the task
of ensuring that the provisions of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali accord with it.

As Council members know, the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission was set up in an inclusive
manner and is already operational.

With respect to matters ofdefence and security - an
important point - the implementation of the Agreement
must be comprehensive and complete, which is why it
is imperative to move forward on other important and
urgent issues, such as disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and the quartering of troops. The
Government has provided the Operational Coordination
Mechanism with vehicles forjoint patrols and is waiting
for the conditions to be met by all parties - and I mean
by all parties - to achieve success in the operation.
The Government has played its part in that regard.

We would remind the Council that, in addition to
political, institutional, security and defence measures,
the Government of Mali has continued its development
activities on the ground, in places where security
conditions permit it, particularly through projects and
programmes already under way, such as an emergency
programme for the revival of development in the North
and programme for reconstruction and economic
recovery. The Government of Mali has also developed
a specific strategy for development of the northern
regions, which includes a plan for implementing the
Agreement that allows - and must allow - regular
follow-up on all its commitments.

The establishment of a lasting peace in Mali
naturally needs the efforts of all parties involved in the
process - the signatories - as well as the international
community. For its part, the Government of Mali has
fulfilled all its obligations. Never has its good faith
objectively failed, and its commitments, including in
keeping the peace, have always gone in the direction of
the fulfilment of the Agreement. Moreover, the actions
of the Government were the subject of a memorandum
submitted to the Security Council. The memorandum
eloquently illustrates the determination of the Malian
authorities to effectively and comprehensively
implement the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali.

I therefore appeal to the other Malian parties for
greater commitment and greater effort, at a time when
we are at a turning point, when our people, having
suffered enough, are still unfortunately having to wait
to enjoy the dividends of peace. Each day of delay in the
implementation of the Agreement is obviously one more
day won by the enemies of peace, those who have sworn
to see the peace process fail, who have bet against the
peace process. We must remember this.

I appeal to the international community, through
the Agreement Monitoring Committee, to exercise
its role of guaranteeing that the parties respect
their commitments by assigning responsibilities in
accordance with article 54 of the Agreement.
The dismantling as soon as possible of bases
and checkpoints by all of the Agreement's signatory
movements is a sign of goodwill and reflects effective
compliance with the requirements of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation. Furthermore, the drafting and
transmission of lists of combatants within a specified
period of time - lists that we are still waiting for -
will allow for joint patrols to become operational and
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process and the quartering of troops to begin.

All that is expected to make it easier for the interim
authorities to work, for basic social services to be
provided and for the reconfigured Malian defence and
security forces to be deployed throughout the national
territory. The return, resettlement and reintegration of
refugees and displaced persons remains a concern. The
safety of people and property is at stake. We would like
to express our deep gratitude to the friendly, fraternal
countries that have, in the pure tradition of African
hospitality, generously hosted Malians on their soil.

In resolution 2227 (2015), the Security Council
considers applying sanctions to all those who are a
threat to the implementation of the Agreement and who
do not set themselves apart from terrorist groups. It is
useful and urgent that those provisions be implemented.
But the Government of Mali hopes that, with deep
involvement by all stakeholders, such extreme measures
will not be necessary.

Icongratulate the Agreement Monitoring Committee
for its efforts aimed at overcoming differences and
allowing progress to continue unimpeded. The
Government hopes that the plan of action to implement
the Agreement, developed by the National Coordinating
Committee and communicated to all stakeholders,
including the Agreement Monitoring Committee, is an
effective assessment tool.

The Government of Mali welcomes the unanimity
that is emerging with respect to the hostile nature of the
environment in which MINUSMA is operating and the
need to make adjustments to change its situation. There
has been an increasing number of terrorist attacks, which
have grown in complexity. Unfortunately, MINUSMA

peacekeepers have become a prime target for terrorists.
On behalf of the people and the Government of Mali,
I reiterate my expression of gratitude to the troop-
contributing countries for all the sacrifices they have
made in order to bring about a final settlement of the
crisis in my country.

My briefing today should challenge and invite us to
reflect on the need to take into account the environment
and the context in which peacekeeping operations
are deployed in order to enable the Blue Helmets to
achieve their mission of saving lives and restoring
and stabilizing peace. The Government of Mali
welcomes the Secretary-General's recommendations
on strengthening MINUSMA's operational capabilities.
We welcome in particular the fact that MINUSMA's
mandate will provide support for Malian authorities as
they strive to stabilize the main towns, especially in the
northern regions, in order to remove threats and take
active steps to prevent armed elements from returning to
those areas. In that regard, as the Special Representative
mentioned, Mali's defence and security forces provide
the basis for the restoration of State authority throughout
the national territory. Mali's armed forces, who are on
the front line in the fight against terrorism, are and
remain the first legitimate bulwark in protecting the
Malian people and our national borders. They deserve
the support of the international community.

In general, the Government of Mali believes that if
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General
in paragraphs 45 to 55 of his report are endorsed by the
Security Council, it would allow MINUSMA to carry
out its stabilization and protection-of-civilians mission.
While taking note of the recommendation of Secretary-
General for an increase in Mission personnel, I recall
that the Government of Mali has always felt that
MINUSMA's effectiveness must also be ensured via
strengthening its operational capacities, which, in our
view, requires a stronger and more active position; a
redefinition of the rules of engagement; support for
the armed forces of Mali, accompanied by operational
coordination; and support for regional counter-terrorism
initiatives, including those of the Sahel Group of Five,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union.

It is a platitude, but terrorism is a global threat
that concerns all countries. To effectively fight this
phenomenon, we must coordinate our efforts. We would
like to express our sympathy and compassion to all the
peoples of the world who have been affected and who
have suffered greatly as a result of acts of terrorism,
unjustifiable in any form.

Given the persistence of the terrorist threat in Mali
and in the region, ECOWAS leaders, at ameeting in Dakar
on 4 June on the occasion of the forty-ninth Ordinary
Session of the Heads of State Meeting, reiterated their
commitment to respect the unity, territorial integrity
and sovereignty of the State of Mali. The Heads of
State and Government expressed their concern about
the deterioration of the security situation in Mali,
which has been marked by a resurgence in terrorist
attacks targeting the Malian defence and security
forces, the United Nations forces, the French forces
of Operation Barkhane and civilians. This situation
is a serious threat to the entire subregion. Also at the
conference, the Heads of State and Government urged
the Security Council to take the necessary measures to
strengthen MINUSMA's mandate and provide it with
the appropriate means and equipment to adapt it to the
security context, which threatens peace and security
throughout the region and which has genuine potential
for spreading.

We are pleased, after having listened to the
briefing by the Under-Secretary-General, to note that
this decision by the Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS dovetails with the recommendations of
the Secretary-General on the issue. We hope that the
Security Council will support the idea of redeploying
the defence and security forces throughout the national
territory once the interim authorities have been put in
place and in compliance with the mechanisms provided
for in the Agreement on Peace. The importance of
such redeployment not only complies with all United
Nations resolutions, which rightly recall the primary
responsibility of the Government of Mali when it
comes to security and protecting civilians, but it is also
an essential condition for the effective return of the
Administration and basic social services throughout
the country. In that regard, the next mandate should
authorize friendly forces, namely, those of MINUSMA,
to support that process and ensure that the requirements
of human rights and international humanitarian law be
taken into account.

I would like to recall that the Secretary-General has
on previous occasions called our attention to the need
to uphold human rights in the context of the conflict
in Mali. With respect to human rights violations,
I am happy to announce that the Malian Minister of
Justice and Human Rights has established, together
with MINUSMA's Human Rights Division, a monthly
dialogue mechanism. The mechanism, involving the
Minister of Justice and MINUSMA in Bamako, will
make it possible to clarify many situations and dispel
many misunderstandings. However, I assure the
Council that the Government of Mali is fully committed
to the defending and promoting human rights. I take
this opportunity to ask that all appropriate measures
be taken to enable the diligent implementation of an
international commission of inquiry, which we have
asked the United Nations for since July 2014.

I thank Mali's partners for their engagement and
support during the international conference for Mali's
recovery and development, jointly organized by the
Government of Mali and the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development on 22 October 2015
in Paris. We hope that the pledges of support will be
fulfilled so that the necessary funds for the economic,
social and cultural development of Mali can be
mobilized on time. It would also be useful to mobilize
the necessary funds for the smooth functioning of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee in Bamako to allow
it to fulfil its commitments.

For its part, the Government of Mali will
continue to honour its commitments, and in particular
all its commitments within the framework of the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. That is a reflection ofthe personal
determination of the President Keita, who has provided
every opportunity to the peace and reconciliation
process and has just appointed a High Representative
for the Implementation of the Agreement. The person
he appointed, Ambassador Diagouraga, who is with us
in the Chamber. That is a reflection of the importance
that the highest Malian authority attaches to the
implementation of the Agreement.

I would like to recall the gravity of the security
situation in Mali, the deterioration of which undoubtedly
poses a threat to all our States. I have the pleasure to
announce to all those who believed that there were
delays in the implementation of the Agreement that
the signatories, movements and Government adopted
by consensus a protocol of understanding, which will
make it possible to establish the interim authorities
to ensure the return of basic social services and the
Administration and to contribute to the implementation
of the Agreement. This took place just a few days ago.

In doing this, yes, there are delays, but it is beyond
the control of the Government. For example, we
focused the entire process on the interim authorities.
And it was said that the Government of Mali was taking
a long time to set up them. Everyone knows that we are
a democratic country and that we had to respect that
democracy when the Malian opposition attacked the
draft law in court. We had to do that; we had to wait;
and we had to respect the opposition, as it was acting
within its capacity. That delay was was implied to signal
that my Government had no desire to move forward.

Today hope has been restored. The Under-
Secretary-General has said that he is optimistic, adding
that it is measured optimism. He could add as well that
it is optimism capable of overcoming resistance and
meeting everyone's expectations.

For my final comments, I would like to express
once again the gratitude of the people and the
Government of Mali to the regional, subregional and
international organizations and to all the countries
that continue to provide their support to, and their
solidarity with, the people of Mali. Long live the United
Nations in the service of peace in the world. Long live
international solidarity.

