Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy to the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
their briefings.

We are deeply concerned about the reported use
of chemical weapons in the city of Douma. Bolivia
reiterates its condemnation of the use of chemical
agents as weapons and considers it to be an unjustifiable
criminal act. There can be no justification for their
use, regardless of the circumstances or by whom
they are used, as it constitutes a serious violation of
international law and a grave threat to international
peace and security.

We believe that the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission, in line
with its mandate, should verify in the most objective,
methodological and technical manner the reported use
of chemical weapons. Should their use be verified, it
must be investigated in an effective and transparent
manner in order to ensure that the perpetrators can be
identified and tried by the appropriate bodies so as to
prevent impunity. We therefore need an independent,
impartial and representative entity that will conduct a
comprehensive, credible and conclusive investigation.
Our major challenge is to ensure that we do not politicize
or exploit the Security Council for our own purposes.

We regret that so far there have been obstacles to
the full implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), and
we call on all the parties involved to make every effort
to effectively implement it throughout Syrian territory.
We emphatically reject the ongoing bombardments and
indiscriminate attacks, especially those on civilian
infrastructure such as health facilities, and we deplore
all military activity in residential areas. Such actions
only cause more displacements, injuries and deaths.
We call on all the parties to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights law, including
authorizing humanitarian access throughout Syria and
to all persons in need, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

We reiterate that there can be no military solution
to the Syrian conflict and that the only option is an
inclusive, negotiated and coordinated political process,
led by the Syrian people for the Syrian people, aimed
at enabling sustainable peace to be achieved in the
area without any foreign pressure, as provided for in
resolution 2254 (2015). We also reject any attempt at
fragmentation or sectarianism in Syria.

Bolivia wants to once again make clear its firm
rejection of the use of force or the threat of use of force.
We also reject unilateral actions, which are illegal and
contrary to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic, and undermine any effort
to achieve a political solution.

Lastly, with regard to the events in the city of
Salisbury, we reiterate the importance of conducting an
independent, transparent and depoliticized investigation
in accordance with current rules and regulations
of international law, especially as set forth by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
We believe that cooperation among the relevant parties
will be essential to making progress through the
appropriate diplomatic channels in solving the crime
and strengthening the non-proliferation regime.

