Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me, first of all, express my thanks to the Permanent
Representatives of the Republic of Korea, Morocco and
Australia for their informative briefings and for the
work they are doing at the head of the subsidiary bodies
that they are chairing. I wish to express the gratitude of
our delegation for the way in which they are conducting
the work of the three Committees.

Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
is a threat to human life and dignity, to peaceful
coexistence and to international peace and security.
In saying that, I also say that my country, Argentina,
fully believes that the United Nations has a central role
to play in the multilateral action being undertaken. We
therefore believe that the General Assembly and the
Security Council and its relevant bodies are the most
appropriate forums for efficient action to prevent and
eradicate terrorism.

The work carried out by the three Committees we
are considering today on combating terrorism is vital to
ensuring effective action on the part of the international
community in that regard. Therefore, continued
cooperation among the Committees and its Groups
of Experts will undoubtedly make a contribution to
bolstering coordination and consistency across United
Nations counter-terrorism activities. We also believe
that holding open briefings is a very useful outreach
tool to spread information about the work of the
Committees and for maintaining an ongoing dialogue
with all Member States, so much so that we must
continue to stress that greater participation by Member
States in open meetings of the Security Council is a
goal worth achieving.

A major challenge for the international community
in combating terrorism is that of avoiding any chance
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and their
delivery systems falling into the hands of terrorists. In
that regard, resolution 1540 (2004) and its Committee
is a key instrument in that it urges States to adopt or
strengthen their national monitoring systems in order
to prevent the proliferation of such weapons.

Argentina is firmly committed to the non-proliferation
of WMDs and their delivery systems, while it develops
and implements dual-use technologies for peaceful
purposes to further economic growth, scientific and
technological innovation and sustainable development.
In that respect, I wish to recall the fact that Argentina
is the only Latin American country to be a part of the
five export-control regimes. Furthermore, pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent resolutions, my
country has submitted its national reports and updates
highlighting the domestic legislation that has been
adopted to comply with our international obligations
and which is under constant discussion and review.
In addition, Argentina is one of the six countries that,
pursuant to resolution 1977 (2011), have submitted
national action plans defining our priorities and plans
in implementation of the fundamental provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Beyond our national endeavours, we believe that
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) must be
carried out through a regional approach adapted to the
specificities of each instance, as the effective control
of technologies and dual-use materials is possible only
possible by means of real harmonization of operational
and legislative efforts in each region. The Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) therefore
carries out extremely important work in providing
international assistance and cooperation, which, we
believe, must be maintained and strengthened, thus
building States' capacities to implement the resolution.

As we approach the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004) next year, Argentina, like
others, believes that it is important for the Committee
to adopt a creative approach, keeping in mind the
specificities of each State to ensure the universal
implementation of the resolution and submission of
reports.

The efficacy of international efforts to combat
terrorism is contingent upon the ability of each State
to adopt and implement national measures within the
framework of the specific features of each region. In
that regard, the Counter-Terrorism Committee plays an
essential role in making the international community's
efforts more effective. We believe that the new diagnostic
and assessment tools for implementation adopted by the
Committee, the implementation assessment summary
and the detailed implementation study will make it
possible to improve the Committee's work still further
and will contribute to the fulfilment of its mandate
as it completes the efforts of the United Nations in
implementing its Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force.

We emphasize the importance of the special
meeting held this year on strengthening cooperation
and technical assistance to States ofthe Sahel region, as
well as the special events on the use of new information
and communications technologies in combatting
terrorism and the strengthening of States' capacities
to fight terrorism on their borders. I also highlight the
important work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate in assisting the Committee and
in strengthening the capacities of States. I note in
particular its work with respect to human rights as a
cross-cutting element in the fight against terrorism.

Argentina reaffirms that terrorism must be fought
in the framework of the rule of law and respect for
fundamental guarantees. In that context, I thank the
Executive Directorate and the Committee for their visit
to the Argentine Republic in 2012. We believe that
visits to States are a very useful tool for monitoring the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) in the context
of the circumstances of each country and the nature of
the potential terrorist threats it faces.

Finally, I refer to the work of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
concerning which we highlight the improvements
made in the consideration of requests for exclusion,
and in particular the work of the Ombudsman. On
the basis of the independence that it has developed its
work, we believe that proposals should be considered
to strengthen its mandate and replicate its experience
in other Sanctions Committees. We understand that
the Security Council should continue to ensure that
sanctions enforcement bodies become ever more
efficient and transparent, and that they are endowed
with appropriate mechanisms to follow up and review
the measures taken.

I reiterate our support for all initiatives that
contribute to strengthening coordination and
cooperation among the three Committees and their
expert groups, including through information briefings
like today's. That will undoubtedly improve the
Security Council's contribution to the fight against
terrorism, as it will encourage greater cooperation and
commitment among Member States in improving the
implementation of the relevant resolutions.

