Mr. Mahiga: I welcome this opportunity to brief
the Security Council following my appointment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia. I wish to begin with a briefing on some of the
critical developments regarding Somalia that took
place since I assumed office.

For the past two months, I have held
consultations with various Somali stakeholders,
including the Transitional Federal Government (TFG),
the Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a group, and regional and
international organizations, as well as civil society
organizations. I have just completed consultations with
countries in the region, as well as with the African
Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). I consult regularly with envoys
and partners on the Somali crisis on how to advance
the peace process.

Regional leaders have raised concern that the lack
of cohesion within the transitional federal institutions
encourages insurgents to intensify their military and
propaganda campaign against the Government and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). I have
visited Mogadishu three times in the past 10 days to
consult with the President on the political impasse. I
have undertaken similar initiatives with the Prime
Minister and the Speaker of Parliament, and urged
them to resolve their differences and to continue
working together. Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe conveyed a similar message when he visited the
10-5364]
region earlier this month and met with President
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed in Mogadishu.

Earlier today, the Somali Parliament adopted a
resolution to request the Prime Minister to come before
Parliament and seek a vote of confidence. In this
context, the Security Council may wish to underscore
the need for unity and cohesion in the TFG in
addressing insurgency and advancing the peace
process.

The Transitional Federal Charter and the Djibouti
Agreement provide for the establishment of a new,
more inclusive and democratic dispensation following
the end of the transitional period in August 2011. There
are several tasks to be accomplished before the end of
the transition. These include continuing the initiatives
on reconciliation, building civilian and security
institutions, and the completion of the constitution-
making process, which could also serve as a vehicle for
the Government and Parliament to reach out to the
population through wide consultations within Somalia
and with the diaspora. Furthermore, the leaders of the
transitional federal institutions need to urgently discuss
and agree on post-transition arrangements.

I have urged the TFG to reach out to more
opposition groups, expand the political process and
focus on delivering basic services to the people. In this
context, the TFG must develop a road map of
achievable objectives and clear timelines to be
developed for the remaining transitional period. In this
context, I have urged the TFG to convene without
delay the high-level committee to define a political
strategy and tasks to be accomplished prior to the end
of the transition. These key elements will define the
future institutions of a united, democratic and stable
Somalia.

I commend AMISOM. for ably defending the
transitional federal institutions and the vital
installations in Mogadishu, and for preventing the
recurrent attacks by the terrorist insurgents, led by
foreign fighters, from undermining the peace process.
While the crisis in Somalia persists, positive
opportunities still exist in both the political and
security sectors to move the peace process forward.
Scaled-up assistance from the international community
is needed to make a difference.

I am concerned about the security situation in the
country and its potential impact on the entire region.
The suicide attacks carried out in Kampala on 11 July
10-53641
evidently bear the political and operational hallmarks of
the international terrorism that threatens the subregion.
Kismaayo has become the entry point for foreign
fighters and war materiel for the insurgents, and a scene
of criminal activities and illicit trade. There is a need
for increased maritime and aviation security to deter
such materiel from being used against AMISOM. and
the TFG. I hope that the Security Council will send a
message to those State and non-State actors supporting
these illicit activities, deterring them from doing so.
Importing radical terrorism has negative effects not
only for Somalia but for the entire subregion.

The brutal attack on the Muna Hotel in
Mogadishu during the holy month of Ramadan left
more than 70 people dead, including six
parliamentarians. On my second visit to Mogadishu, I
witnessed continuous attacks on AMISOM. positions by
the insurgents armed with light and heavy weapons.
During my third visit on 9 September, accompanied by
the envoys of the African Union and IGAD, there were
suicide attacks by extremists at an AMISOM
checkpoint in the approaches to Mogadishu Airport.
The operation was foiled but left 14 people dead,
including two AMISOM. peacekeepers, and several
others injured. The insurgents' operation points to the
need to strengthen AMISOM's defensive capabilities.

With only 11 months until the end of the
transition period, the TFG and the international
community should heighten their political resolve to
preserve and expand the fragile peace ushered in by the
Djibouti Agreement and protected by AMISOM. The
military capability of the TFG should be supported and
developed to expand the territorial space and widen the
political space for the TFG to operate and reach out to
the Somali people. Concerted regional and
international support and assistance are required at this
very critical stage of the peace process if the TFG is to
play the role envisaged by the Djibouti Agreement. In
this connection, the decision of IGAD and the AU to
deploy in Mogadishu 2,000 additional troops to enable
AMISOM. reach its authorized strength of 8,000 must
be speedily implemented. The initiative of the United
States Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs,
Mr. Johnnie Carson, to help generate more troops,
needed equipment and financial support to AMISOM
has been well received by IGAD and the AU.

The threat level in Mogadishu and in southern
Central Somalia has actually increased; therefore
IGAD and the African Union foresee the need for a
3
new AMISOM. troop level of up to 20,000 in the
coming months. The AU Peace and Security Council
will soon submit to the United Nations Security
Council a request for authorization for increased troop
levels for Mogadishu and other strategic locations in
Somalia. However, this military strategy needs to be
developed within the construct of an overall political
strategy.

The United Nations support operation for
AMISOM. has discharged with distinction its mandate
to deliver a support package to AMISOM. The AU and
the Force Commander have on several occasions
expressed their appreciation of these valuable services,
which I have had the opportunity to see for myself in
Mogadishu. I should also take this opportunity to thank
all partners for their collective and bilateral
contributions to the United Nations trust funds and
direct assistance to the TFG. In the immediate future,
support to the security sector and building the TFG's
institutional capacities stand out as top priorities.

I should also bring to the attention of the Council
the outstanding work performed by the United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS). This effort by
UNMAS staff has dramatically reduced casualties
among civilians and AMISOM. peacekeepers. Through
their efforts, we have significantly reduced the number
of AMISOM. troop casualties since last year.

It is not the number of initiatives for Somalia that
is in deficit, but concrete and practical actions on the
ground. As we all realize the dangerous conditions in
which the TFG and AMISOM. troops operate, I appeal
to all Member States to move from the usual political
commitments to more practical actions. While one
appreciates the value of the support so far extended to
AMISOM, gaps - such as lack of helicopter support
for troop lift and casualty evacuation - still exist in
financial and material support to the Mission. I
therefore would like to stress the importance of the
predictable and timely provision of these resources to
AMISOM. and TFG security forces during this crucial
time. Furthermore, AMISOM. troop allowances should
match those paid under United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

Of equal importance is the proper equipping of
AMISOM. troops with appropriate means to identify,
track, deter or respond to insurgents attacks in a
populated urban setting. AMISOM. is currently
critically short of means to prevent civilian casualties
and lacks adequate surveillance and operational
intelligence systems. Pre-deployment training in
humanitarian law on the protection of civilians remains
an important requirement. The protection of United
Nations civilian staff to be deployed under the light
footprint in Mogadishu and elsewhere is also critical.

We are encouraging cooperation between the
TFG, Somaliland and Puntland authorities on matters
of security, including anti-piracy issues and the
movement of people, such as internally displaced
persons. Somaliland and Puntland indeed serve as role
models to the rest of Somalia, illustrating that peace
and stability can be achieved.

Additionally, we will continue to advocate for
and mobilize more support to the TFG, Puntland and
Somaliland in other forums, such as the forthcoming
international Contact Group meeting in Madrid later
this month and the mini-summit on Somalia that the
Secretary-General will convene here in New York on
23 September. The Istanbul Conference earlier this
year was also a useful forum for profiling Somalia's
present and future needs and encouraging private-
sector involvement. A follow-up implementation
meeting to the Conference is envisaged.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
dire. The sustained attacks on TFG and AMISOM
positions by the insurgents have compounded the
suffering of innocent civilians, particularly in
Mogadishu. A growing number of civilians, including
those who had recently returned to their homes, have
had to flee the capital as the fighting has intensified.
Refugees continue to arrive in neighbouring countries
and are a major concern to those countries. The
international community ought to make more
assistance available to address the persistent
humanitarian crisis.

That there is a need for greater cooperation and
coordination among the three United Nations entities -
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
(UNPOS), the United Nations Support Office for
AMISOM. and the country team - cannot be
overemphasized. Recommendations on approaches to
integration have been laid out, but implementation has
stalled. I have initiated senior policy group meetings
among the heads of the three United Nations entities,
and a joint planning mechanism is being put in place.
However, there is a need for greater impetus in moving
the integration process forward, consistent with
10-5364]
practices elsewhere and the prevailing trend for greater
cohesion in the United Nations system. UNPOS has
also initiated its regional deployment of international
staff in Somaliland and Puntland.

I request and encourage the Council to remain
engaged and seized with the situation in Somalia,
which, unlike many African conflicts, contains
multiple threats to international peace and security: a
protracted civil war, international terrorism,
international piracy and international trafficking.
Experience in Somalia has shown that the more
delayed or inadequate the response, the more complex
the crisis becomes. We have to act in a comprehensive
manner to address these complex challenges.

