The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia.

I should like to preface my remarks by expressing
deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
active participation in this debate and for the important
insights he has shared.

Regional and subregional organizations have
become an integral part of the global architecture. They
are increasingly recognized for their role in the
promotion of security and prosperity in their respective
regions. Indonesia is a consistent and robust supporter
of regional organizations. It is a founding member of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
It has vigorously promoted interregional cooperation
involving South-East Asia and the South-West Pacific,
and between Asia and Africa. It has also strongly
supported cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. In that spirit,
we have initiated this meeting of the Council.

The capability of regional and subregional
organizations to promote international peace and
security is yet to be fully realized. The wealth of their
experience in this vital activity is yet to be tapped. In
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, modalities can be developed to
enhance their contribution to international peace and
security.

Indonesia's experience as a founding member of
ASEAN attests to the importance of a regional
organization to peace and security. On the basis of that
experience, we offer the following observations.

First, a regional organization can fundamentally
shift the dynamics of the region towards peace and
security. It can build bridges of understanding, it can
transform relations from enmity to amity and it can
bring stability and prosperity where conflict and
discord previously reigned.

When ASEAN was established, in 1967, a war
was raging in South-East Asia, which was then an
economic backwater. Trust and confidence among the
five founding members were at a low point. With
patience and perseverance and by taking a step-by-step
building-block approach, ASEAN has grown to include
10 South-East Asian countries. For 40 years, ASEAN
member countries have enjoyed peace and security. It
has therefore enabled the region to focus on economic
development, which in turn reinforces peace and
security.

ASEAN's Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
Southeast Asia serves as a code of conduct for relations
among its members, and between ASEAN and acceding
external States. Signatories and acceding States
renounce the use of force and bind themselves to
peacefully settling their disputes in the region. Indeed,
ASEAN has been able to reinforce the norms of the
Charter of the United Nations and conflict prevention
efforts.

Our second observation is that a regional or
subregional organization must adapt to new challenges,
in order to remain relevant to the pursuit of
international peace and security. In the face of the
challenges of the downside of globalization and the
new threats to human security, ASEAN is transforming
itself from a rather loose association of States into an
ASEAN community resting on three pillars: an ASEAN
security community, an ASEAN economic community
and an ASEAN socio-cultural community.

The attainment of the ASEAN security
community will enhance ASEAN's capacity for
conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding. It will entail political development
based on the principles of democracy, human rights
and good governance. ASEAN will thereby emerge as a
community that goes beyond addressing economic and
social issues and traditional security concerns. It will
be deeply committed to human rights and democracy.
The ASEAN charter is expected to be signed two
weeks from now. Its adoption will make ASEAN a
rules-based organization.

Thirdly, a regional organization can influence the
dynamics for peace and prosperity well beyond its
geographic borders. Since its inception, in 1967, while
promoting internal integration, ASEAN has pursued an
outward-looking strategy. It has been an open
organization that continues to enhance cooperation
beyond its geographical boundaries and with other
regional organizations. It has therefore cultivated
dialogue-partner relations with 10 countries and
organizations.

It maintains its ASEAN+3 cooperation with
China, Japan and South Korea - a process that links
South-East Asia with North-East Asia.

It is the driving spirit behind the ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF), which it established in 1994,
and the only forum of dialogue and consultation on
political and security issues, confidence-building and
preventive diplomacy in the larger Asia-Pacific region.

In 2005, ASEAN launched the East Asia Summit,
bringing the countries of the ASEAN+3 process
together with Australia, India and New Zealand. The
Summit envisions the establishment of a new
architecture for peace, security and prosperity in East
Asia.

ASEAN has developed dialogues with Europe,
through the Asia-Europe Meeting, and with Latin
America, through the Forum for East Asia-Latin
America Cooperation. ASEAN is thereby sharing with
countries beyond its own region its norms and
practices in the promotion of peace and security.
Although ASEAN's membership does not formally
include countries in East Asia and the Asia-Pacific
region, the activities of ASEAN cover those larger
regions through its dialogue-partner mechanism.

Indonesia has been a great proponent of such
ASEAN-driven efforts. Indeed, Indonesia has also
promoted, and directly benefited from, intraregional
cooperation.
In that connection, Indonesia wishes to pay
tribute to the European Union and ASEAN for their
contribution to our successful effort to restore peace
and security in the province of Aceh during the years
2005 to 2007, in particular by providing a joint
monitoring team to supervise the implementation of the
Aceh peace agreement.

Indonesia is deeply committed to and involved in
those intraregional and interregional activities. At the
same time, we are also deeply committed to the
principles, ideals and goals of the United Nations.
Hence, we are totally convinced of the strategic need
for enhanced cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations. Through
such cooperation, we can effectively address the global
security challenges of our time. It is Indonesia's
fervent hope that our discussions today will help attain
that goal.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to my colleague His Excellency Mr. Alberto
Romulo, Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of the Philippines, and give him the floor.

