The President: The Security Council will now

begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among the members of the

Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council welcomes the conclusion
of the electoral process in Somalia and the election
of President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
'Farmajo'. The Security Council pays tribute to
former President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud for
his service and commends the swift and gracious
transfer of power in Somalia.

"The Security Council welcomes the political
and security progress in Somalia since 2012, and
underscores the need to maintain the momentum
towards democratic governance in Somalia.
The Security Council commends the increased
participation and representation of the people of
Somalia in the electoral process. The Council
emphasizes the importance of governing in a spirit
of national unity in an inclusive manner and of
adhering to the political road map in order to reach
one-person, one-vote elections in four years' time.

"The Security Council commends the role of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) in enabling the electoral process, in
close cooperation with the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other international partners. The Security Council
pays tribute to the contribution of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to lasting
peace and stability in Somalia, noting in particular
AMISOM's critical role in ensuring the provision
of security for the electoral process, which, along
with the Somali security forces, enabled voting to
take place across the country.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
recent Al-Shabaab attacks that attempted to disrupt
the political process in Somalia and pays tribute
to the bravery and sacrifice of AMISOM. and the

Somali security forces for their efforts in reducing
the threat posed by Al-Shabaab.

"The Security Council welcomes the increased
representation of women in the Upper House and the
House of the People, and underlines the important
contribution of women to Somalia's peacebuilding
and State-building process.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of the timely and transparent
appointment of Ministers and Cabinet positions,
in consultation with the Somali Parliament. The
Council calls on Parliament and all Federal and
State leaders to cooperate fully with the Federal
Government of Somalia in driving forward reform
and addressing immediate priorities without delay.

"The Security Council calls on President
Farmajo and his Government to give urgent
attention to the immediate risk of famine, to
take active steps to prevent it, and to address the
consequences of the severe drought in Somalia.
The Council appeals to donors to increase support
to the humanitarian response plan for Somalia and
to support the appeals for aid by Somali Federal
and regional authorities. The Council reiterates the
need for full, safe and unhindered access for the
timely delivery of aid to persons in need across
Somalia.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need
to accelerate agreement between the federal and
regional authorities on a Somali federal security
sector architecture which clearly defines the roles,
responsibilities and structures of relevant security
sector institutions, under full Somali ownership,
as an immediate priority. The Council stresses
the importance of the Federal Government of
Somalia enhancing and strengthening efforts to
strengthen Somalia's security capabilities in order
to move towards the eventual handover of security
responsibilities from AMISOM. to the Somali
security services. In this regard, the Council
encourages UNSOM. to continue to undertake
a comprehensive approach to security in close
coordination with the Somali authorities, AMISOM
and international partners.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of good-faith cooperation between
federal and regional authorities in Somalia in
order to accelerate Somalia's peacebuilding and
State-building process, and calls on the international
community and Somalia's partners to step up their
support to efforts to build and strengthen Somalia's
national institutions, governance structures and
socioeconomic infrastructure.

"The Security Council underlines the need to
ensure progress in the Somali-led constitutional
review process. The Council encourages the Federal
Government of Somalia to promote a comprehensive
reconciliation process that brings about local,
regional and national cohesion and integration in a
climate of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and to establish an effective federal
political system. The Council further encourages
President Farmajo and the federal and regional
authorities to reiterate Somalia's commitment to
increasing the transparency and accountability of
public financial management, including to advance
security sector reform.

"The Security Council urges the new Federal
Administration to take active steps to lay the
foundations for inclusive and transparent elections
in four years' time, including by ensuring that
public office in Somalia cannot be achieved
through harassment, intimidation, corruption or
manipulation.

"The Security Council reaffirms its respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia.

"The Security Council recognizes that the
coming months will be an important period for
Somalia. The Council will continue to follow
progress closely, and reaffirms its support for
peace, stability and development in Somalia."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/3.

The meeting rose at12.40p.m.
