The President: I shall now make a very brief
statement in my capacity as representative of Angola.

I would like to start by welcoming Minister
Francisco Madeira, representing Mozambique in its
capacity as Chairman of the African Union; the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tanzania, Mr.
Abdulkader Shareef; and Keli Walubita, Special Envoy
of the Chairperson of the Commission of the African
Union for the Great Lakes Region.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his keynote statement this morning and to commend
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing on
the preparatory process of the international conference
on peace, security, democracy and development in the
Great Lakes region.

This initiative is an effective contribution to the
creation of mechanisms for the strengthening of the
traditional friendly relations among States in the
region. The process of the conference also lends
support to the efforts under way in that part of the
African continent in general and in each of the
countries in particular.

The process of the Great Lakes conference
follows the logic of General Assembly resolution 2625
(XXV) of 24 October 1970, and particularly of its
annex pertaining to the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. The Constitutive Act of
the African Union also stands firmly on the same
principle.

Some years after the adoption by the Security
Council of pertinent resolutions and presidential
statements, the new developments in the region have
created favourable conditions for the start of a new era
for the Great Lakes region. This enhances the potential
feasibility of the conference, given its unanimous
acceptance by the countries of the region.

An important role has also been played by the
efforts of the African Union in the search for a global
solution to the problems affecting the region since the
Tunis Summit of 1994, while the Maputo Summit of
July 2003 reiterated the support of the continent for the
process. We welcome the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations.

The establishment of good and friendly relations
among States in the Great Lakes region is a
prerequisite for peace and development. Following this
principle, the Republic of Angola undertook initiatives
to enable the establishment and strengthening of
diplomatic relations among Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, which
culminated in the signing of an agreement, the Luanda
Accord, and the creation of the Ituri Pacification
Committee in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Republic of Angola has been one of the
countries most affected by the lack of peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region. More than 2,000
citizens from the Great Lakes region, mostly from
Rwanda, were involved in the Angolan armed conflict.
Among these was one of the leaders of the 1994
genocide, a war criminal handed over by the Angolan
authorities to the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. In addition, thousands of refugees from the
region remain in Angola.

As the preparatory process for the conference
evolves, it is our conviction that the issue of the scope
of the conference should be carefully addressed by the
African Union, the United Nations and, in particular,
the core countries that are directly or indirectly
affected by the conflict. Within this framework, Angola
is ready to continue to make its contribution to the
establishment and consolidation of peace, security,
stability and development in the Great Lakes region.

At this stage of the process, more efforts will be
required from all of us. In addition, it is imperative that
adequate resources be made available for the fulfilment
of this task. The assistance of the international
community is pivotal. Without it, it would be difficult
to successfully bring peace, security and development
to the Great Lakes region.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Ibrahima Fall to respond to
the comments made by members of the Council -
briefly, if possible, given the lateness of the hour.

