I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's important meeting. I also sincerely thank Secretary-General Guterres and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for their insightful briefings. In the past few decades, Africa has made important strides towards greater regional integration. Efforts to promote stability and security, inclusive social and economic development, justice and governance are being implemented. Peace is now a reality across the continent. Endowed with cultural diversity and abundant resources, Africa has the true potential to become a global powerhouse of the future. The contributions of African nations to regional and international peace and security cannot be overstated. The African Union (AU) and subregional organizations have become key drivers of progress. The AU's Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want and its strategic partnership with the United Nations provide important frameworks for enabling the African Union to be an integral part of the global governance system. Yet conflicts continue to overshadow many parts of the region. Sustainable development in Africa is further hindered by emerging threats, especially terrorism, transnational organized crime, climate change and food and water insecurity. While the Ebola outbreak is still fresh in the memories of many, African countries are now heavily affected by the coronavirus disease pandemic. These collateral challenges compound the problems of already fragile situations, especially in conflict-affected areas. In the face of such uncertainties, collective efforts on the African continent, led by the AU, are more crucial than ever. The role of regional and subregional organizations in the maintenance of peace and security is clearly identified in the Charter of the United Nations. Within this framework, United Nations-AU engagement has grown into a strategic partnership central to the implementation of peace initiatives across the region. Indeed, such engagement is exemplary and mutually reinforcing. Enhanced cooperation between the two organizations has enabled the effective utilization of global efforts and expertise, as well as regional ownership, in addressing region-specific issues. With regard to this process, regional mechanisms such as the AU have also been empowered to play a more robust and active role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, through the deployment of peacekeeping and peace missions and the establishment of regional frameworks for sustaining peace. The partnership between the United Nations and the AU could be further strengthened in three key ways. First, it could be strengthened by supporting the AU's coordination efforts on regional issues, on a basis of respect for regional visions, values, culture and history. With effective international support, the members of the African Union could translate their valuable insights and experience into real solutions for defusing local conflicts and tensions. Secondly, it could be bolstered by strengthening strategic cooperation between the United Nations and the AU at both the institutional and operational levels, including by supporting the implementation of the AU's Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Thirdly, it could be strengthened by expanding interregional cooperation to help Africa, as well as other parts of the world, cope with global problems that affect all nations alike. It would be of significant benefit to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the AU, for instance, to explore more opportunities for sharing experiences and best practices in addressing common challenges and realizing regional goals. Viet Nam holds dear its traditional friendships with African countries. Throughout history, the national struggle for independence and quest for post- conflict reconstruction and development of Viet Nam has occurred in parallel with those of our African brothers and sisters. Viet Nam's very first peacekeepers have been deployed to United Nations peacekeeping operations in South Sudan and the Central African Republic, and Viet Nam will continue this momentum in extending its strong support for Africa's path to peace and development. During our tenure on the Security Council, cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations will remain one of our consistent priorities, as exemplified in our initiative to preside over the first ever Council briefing on United Nations-ASEAN cooperation in January (see S/PV.8711). Building on this vision, we stand ready to contribute to enhancing cooperation between ASEAN and the AU in the future, for the common progress of Africa and Asia.
