Mr. Diarra (Mali) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to congratulate Benin for
convening this open meeting of the Security Council
on ways to combat subregional and cross-border
problems in West Africa.

We associate ourselves with the statement just
made by the representative of Nigeria on behalf of the
African Group.

My delegation congratulates the Secretary-
General on his progress report contained in document
S/2005/86 of 11 February 2005. We also congratulate
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa for his presentation.

The instability that has prevailed in our subregion
for over 15 years has required regular monitoring by
the United Nations, in particular by the Security
Council. The various Security Council missions to the
subregion in recent years clearly attest to the concern
of this body about the precarious regional peace and
security situation. The establishment of the United
Nations Office for West Africa was properly intended
to enhance the contribution of the United Nations to
security and peace in the subregion. In the Secretary-
General's previous report on this matter (S/2004/200),
the Office identified a series of problems besetting the
subregion and causing instability. Most of them had
one thing in common: their cross-border nature. In
addition to the work of the various United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions managing existing
crisis situations, my delegation welcomes the
initiatives taken by the Office to develop coherent
conflict-prevention strategies.

The multidimensional nature of the problems
calls for close cooperation among humanitarian,
military and political actors. My delegation is therefore
pleased that steps are being taken to implement those
strategies in cooperation with various partners. The
interaction of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and other United Nations bodies
with the heads of the various peacekeeping missions
makes it possible to carry out an exchange of
experiences in order to foster greater consistency in
managing their activities.

As evidenced in the joint work programme for
2004-2005, cooperation between the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
United Nations Office for West Africa will help to
improve the capacity of ECOWAS in the areas of
conflict prevention, crisis management, post-conflict
stabilization and the development of a strategy to
combat youth unemployment. All of those things are
priorities for the subregion. My delegation welcomes
the involvement of the European Union in that process,
which should ultimately lead to a plan of action in May
2005. The measures to be included in the plan of action
will facilitate unhindered cross-border movement of
people and goods in the States of the region, which is
an important aspect of subregional integration. Those
measures will also aim at protecting children in armed
conflict.
Civil society is increasingly involved in
designing and implementing plans of action dealing
with cross-border issues. In that connection, my
delegation welcomes the establishment of a
coordination centre for civil society in the ECOWAS
secretariat and the setting up of the West Africa Civil
Society Forum. The involvement of the private sector
through the Secretariat's Global Compact office in the
search for peace and stability in West Africa -
especially through the promotion of commercial
practices that reflect the needs of local communities, in
particular those affected by conflict - is an innovative
approach that will strengthen solutions that have
already been implemented.

In assessing the progress made in solving cross-
border problems, the report of the Secretary-General
refers to the creation of the ECOWAS Small Arms
Control Programme, whose purpose is to transform the
ECOWAS moratorium into a legally binding
instrument and to strengthen the capacities of national
commissions - to which end ECOWAS has
established a Small Arms Unit. My delegation supports
the report's recommendation that generous
contributions be provided to that new structure so that
it can discharge its mandate. The report also proposes
other measures to reduce the circulation of small arms
and light weapons in the subregion: strengthening the
mandate of peacekeeping operations to monitor and
implement arms embargoes; institutionalizing the
practice of marking and tracing the weapons used in
those missions; and punishing those guilty of
violations. Those measures can have an impact if they
are effectively implemented.

My delegation encourages the effort to establish
greater interaction among the various peacekeeping
missions in the subregion in order to harmonize
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes and eliminate the contradictions that exist
between them. We agree with the Secretary-General
that such a regional approach could help reduce cross-
border movements of combatants and weapons. It
could also serve as a way to take joint action whenever
possible. Moreover, the reintegration and
reconstruction elements also need to be strengthened in
order to avoid any possibility of the resumption of
conflict. In that connection, particular focus should be
placed on women and children.

The joint activities of ECOWAS and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) on behalf of refugees and displaced persons
should create conditions for voluntary return when
circumstances so permit, or integration in the host
countries. In the latter case, the host community should
be given support by the international community.

The previous report of the Secretary-General
(S/2004/200) revealed the problems caused by security
forces where there is no rule of law. Such forces can be
a danger to the constitutional order, stability and
respect for freedom, rather than defending them. The
need for security sector reform is sorely needed in
some countries, as are training and outreach activities.

Sensitive border areas deserve special attention
from the Governments of the subregion and the United
Nations. Governments of the subregion must work
together to develop integrated strategies to deal with
the problems of these regions; those activities should
be aimed at stabilizing those areas. My delegation is
pleased to note that ECOWAS, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and other partners launched
such an initiative in October 2004. We encourage them
to implement it for the sake of the well-being of the
inhabitants of border areas and of the people of the
subregion as a whole.

