Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Many thanks
indeed to Presidents Robinson and Byron and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their briefings
this morning, their comprehensive reports (see S/2010/588 and S/2010/574) and their reminders of the
nobility and importance of their work in the interests of
international justice. I would like to start by reiterating
the United Kingdom's continuing support for the work
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in combating impunity
and bringing justice to victims in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We thank all the judges and
staff of the Tribunals for their contributions to these
important efforts.

The United Kingdom welcomes the ongoing work
to implement the completion strategies of the two
Tribunals, although we remain concerned that further
slippages have taken place in the forecast completion
dates. However, we welcome the rapid commencement
of the ICTR trials of two fugitives arrested during the
past year, which have successfully been incorporated
within the ICTR completion strategy without undue
delay. We also note with satisfaction that a significant
landmark in international criminal justice is forecast
with the completion of first-instance trials at the ICTR
by the end of2011.

The United Kingdom also acknowledges the
Tribunal's efforts to expedite trials without sacrificing
due process and to reduce the impact of contempt
proceedings. We note the successful time- and cost-
saving measures, for example, greater efficiencies in
the provision of documents. We encourage all parts of
both Tribunals to look for such innovative approaches
and to share best practices where possible, with a View
to avoiding further delays in completion.

We recognize, however, that both Tribunals
continue to face difficulties caused by staff losses,
which have contributed to delays in the progress of
trials and appeals. Staffing matters are not directly
within the competence of the Security Council. Taking
Judge Robinson's analogy of the Council as the
architect of the Tribunals, the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly are the quantity
surveyors. But we take this opportunity to express our
support for action by the Secretariat and the
responsible organs of the United Nations in order to
find practical solutions to address these problems. The
Tribunals need to be adequately staffed to enable them
to complete their work.

State cooperation is Vital to enable the Tribunals
to fulfil their mandates, in particular in relation to the
provision of documents and in tracing fugitives. The
work of the Tribunals will not be complete until all
fugitives have been brought to justice. We note with
satisfaction the arrest of one of the remaining fugitives
from the ICTR in the past six months. We note also
Prosecutor Jallow's report this morning of recent
progress in his discussions with Kenya, which we hope
will bear fruit in relation to the search for Felicien
Kabuga. The United Kingdom is encouraged by these
positive developments. We call on Kenya to continue
to work with the Prosecutor and to supply all the
relevant information it holds on the current
whereabouts of the fugitive Kabuga. In the light of the
Prosecutor's briefing this morning, we also call upon
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zimbabwe
to step up their cooperation with the Tribunal in order
to bring the remaining ICTR fugitives to justice.

The United Kingdom has noted Prosecutor
Brammertz's assessment of cooperation with the ICTY
by the States of the former Yugoslavia. We welcome
the steps now being taken by Serbia and Croatia and
urge both States to maximize coherent and expeditious
efforts across all relevant Government agencies to
provide documents and access to witnesses, to resolve
inconsistencies and to bring the fugitives to justice as
soon as possible. These efforts are key to the
successful completion of the Tribunal's work. We will
continue to follow events closely to ensure that as
much as possible is being done.

As the two Tribunals approach the completion of
their mandates, the Security Council must establish a
mechanism to carry out the essential residual functions
of the Tribunals that need to continue after their
closure. The Security Council's Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals has been working
steadily on these complex and novel issues over
several years, and has made significant progress in
recent months towards the finalization of a draft
resolution, as reported by Ambassador Mayr-Harting in
his statement. I would like to take this opportunity to
commend Ambassador Mayr-Harting and his
delegation for their hard work, dedication and
leadership in taking this issue forward during their time
on the Council.

The United Kingdom believes that the time is
now ripe for the adoption of a draft resolution to
establish a residual mechanism. The adoption of such a
draft resolution would, for the first time, provide a
clear road map for the closure of the Tribunals while
maintaining essential legal safeguards and signalling
that fugitives will not be able to outlast justice. We call
on all members of the Security Council to engage
positively over the coming days to reach a successful
result.

