Mr. Husni (Sudan): First and foremost, I would like
to congratulate Indonesia on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May and thank
Germany for its leadership of the Council in April. I
also want to thank Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Indonesia, for her presence in the Council this morning.
I commend the Secretary-General and the two briefers
for their presentations.

The Sudan aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the African Union.

I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to all the peacekeepers who have lost their lives
while serving the cause of peace worldwide. Their
valuable sacrifices will always be recognized.

The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
and the report by former United Nations Force
Commander Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers, emphasized the necessity
of training and capacity-building for improving
peacekeepers' performance, safety and security. The
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, along with the efforts to reform the peace
and security pillar through the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and its Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, have all stressed the importance of
training and capacity-building in conducting effective,
efficient and robust peacekeeping operations. The
implementation of those commitments is therefore vital
to advancing the Declaration and ensuring that we walk
the talk.

Partnerships between the United Nations and
regional organizations, especially the African Union,
are pivotal to enhancing the capacity and training of
peacekeepers, for African Union-led peace operations
as well as those ofthe United Nations. The streamlining
of training and capacity-building in Africa is crucial
if we are to maintain inclusivity, cover all the African
subregions equally and enhance women's participation,
thereby supporting the agenda of silencing the guns
in Africa by 2020 and advancing the cause of African
solutions to African problems. Taking the culture,
values and traditions of host nations into consideration
is crucial to the capacity-building and training of
peacekeepers in order to make them fit for purpose
and to address the diverse nature of the challenges and
mandates in the field. Giving regional perspectives a
leading role in matters of training, capacity-building,
performance, safety and security is therefore essential.

The intelligence services of host countries could
also provide peacekeepers with prevention assistance,
which could help to reduce fatalities among uniformed
and civilian personnel. In order to harness that
intelligence, we must enhance cooperation and promote
confidence and coordination between peacekeeping
operations, the Secretariat and host countries.
Furthermore, transparency and synergy between
the Secretariat, the Security Council and troop- and
police-contributing countries are central to evaluating
and reviewing performance.

Following the new dawn of its December revolution,

the Sudan is looking forward to participating in future
peacekeeping operations once the gradual exit of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur is concluded. We are relying on our long-
standing experience with uniformed peacekeepers,
including our recent participation in peacekeeping
and military observation under the mandate of the
African Union in the Comoros and the umbrella of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in South
Sudan, respectively. Training and capacity-building for
our peacekeepers is now very much needed.

