The President: I shall now make a further statement
in my national capacity.

This morning, the Russian representative, in
his statement, claimed that failure to implement the
agreement signed by the opposition, former President
Yanukovych and European observers three years ago, on
this very day of 21 February 2014, brought about all the
problems my country faces today. He failed to mention
that the Russian representative at those negotiations
was the only one who did not sign the document. He
also failed to mention that as early as 20 February 2014,
While the Moscow representative was sitting at the
negotiating table in Kyiv, Russian troops had started a
military operation in Crimea. No wonder the Russian
envoy declined to sign that document.

The chain of events that followed is well known:
the occupation and attempted annexation of Crimea,
and the destabilization of certain areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions, with overt Russian military
intervention. Since the early 19905, Russia has created
a belt of instability at its borders, and that instability
keeps spreading to Europe and beyond. That is why,
when Russia says it wants a united Europe from Lisbon
to Vladivostock, we must indeed take Putin's assertion
that Russia has no borders as not merely a joke. In the
context to a united Russia, the reference in the statement
of the Russian representative earlier today was not just
a slip of the tongue.

Russia sees nothing wrong in recognizing
documents issued by authorities in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions, which are not under the control of
the Ukrainian Government. However in resolution
2166 (2014) on the downing of MH17, there is a clear
reference to the fact that those areas are controlled by
armed groups. Now, the Russian Federation recognizes
documents issued by leaders of those armed groups. In
resolution 2202 (2015), the Security Council reaffirmed
its full respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. Recognition of the
documents of the authorities acting in certain areas of
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions is a clear violation
of that resolution. I wonder, how can one recognize
documents of non-recognized entities?

With regard to the Minsk agreements, despite the
recent agreement of yet another ceasefire reached in
Minsk and fully supported by the Russian Federation
at the Normandy format meeting in Berlin just a couple
of days ago, on 18 February, the Russian-backed
militants continue to shell territories under the control
of the Ukranian Government, including residential
areas. Since 18 February, there have been more than
70 such attacks. The matter of who is undermining
the implementation of the Minsk agreements is
quite obvious.

Finally, a country that violated all possible
agreements with Ukraine referring to the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of my country, from the
Memorandum on Security Assurances in Connection
with the Republic of Belarus's Accession to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to the
Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation, the Border
Treaty, the Partition Treaty on the Status and Conditions
of the Black Sea Fleet and more, is not in a position to
lecture anyone on the implementation of agreements
nor on international law.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

The meeting rose at 4.45 pm.
