Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): My delegation has listened
very carefully to this important discussion relating to a
subject which is not an easy one for any among us, and
we heard the categorical words uttered by some
concerning the question of the use of force by States. It
is true that sometimes force is used without an explicit
basis in Security Council resolutions. This is not a new
phenomenon. It may be different from the kind of perfect
world which we would all like to have, but it is a part of
reality.

I would like to refer to only one historical example.
In 1971, in Asia, a State Member of the United Nations
used force in a situation of extreme necessity. That was
a case of the use of force without the authorization of the
Security Council and without reference to legitimate self-
defence. Nevertheless, the situation of necessity was very
widely understood in the international community. I think
that the historical lessons that can be drawn from that
example should not be completely ignored today.

I would also like to say something about Security
Council resolutions: resolutions 1199 (1998) and 1203
(1998), which are applicable law in the case discussed
today. The situation in Kosovo is defined by the Security
Council as a threat to international peace and security in
the region. This defines that situation as something other
than a matter which is essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of a State. In other words, Article 2,
paragraph 7, of the Charter clearly does not apply.
Of course, resolutions 1199 (1998) and 1203 (1998)
could be clearer, and one might have hoped that such
resolutions would develop more completely the
responsibility of the Security Council for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Those of us who
participated in the drafting of those resolutions know very
well that the original draft texts were intended to do
precisely that, and that, because of differences of views
among permanent members, it was not possible to provide
in those resolutions a sufficiently complete framework to
allow for the entire range of measures that might be
necessary to address the situation in Kosovo with success.
That is another example of an imperfect world.

I would like to make one more point by way of
conclusion. The responsibility of the Security Council for
international peace and security is a primary
responsibility; it is not an exclusive responsibility. It very
much depends on the Security Council, and on its ability
to develop
 

policies that will make it worthy of the authority it has
under the Charter, whether the primacy of its responsibility
will actually be the reality of the United Nations.

