Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We thank the
Secretariat for producing a very good report
(S/2009/189) on this topic, and we thank Burkina Faso
for its leadership on this issue.

Given the purposes of this Organization,
mediation should naturally play a central role in its
activities. To an outside observer, it must therefore
come as a surprise how little attention and limited
resources have been invested in this area so far and that
it is only now that we are talking about the need to
professionalize these efforts. It appears that the
inherent strengths of mediation are, ironically, a
weakness in the context of intergovernmental
discussions. It is essentially preventive in nature, done
in sometimes very discreet ways, potentially very cost-
effective and ideally carried out at a time when a
conflict may not be Visible. Our neglect of mediation
so far is thus an expression of our continued reluctance
to invest in preventive diplomacy. While we have
talked about the need for such diplomacy for many
years now, we have yet to make the transition in
practice.

We must consider one central statement in the
report in this context: "Early mediation in a preventive
context can, if successful, obviate the need for some
peacekeeping missions" (S/2009/189, para. 59). At a
time when peacekeeping costs continue to skyrocket
and the relevant parts of the Secretariat are clearly
overstretched, we hope that this will help make
mediation indeed the core activity that it should have
been in the first place.

The establishment of a Mediation Support Unit
was an important step, made after of years of
consultations, and is showing positive first results. We
must carry this momentum forward on the basis of the
recommendations contained in the report, which we
support in their entirety. We welcome the presidential
statement that we understand will be adopted later
today, but more importantly, we hope that there will be
concrete and early follow-up on the recommendations
by all those whose contribution is needed - that is,
this Council itself, the Secretariat and the General
Assembly.

Allow me to make some brief remarks on three
specific areas of the report.

First, we welcome the concise and thoughtful
paragraphs on peace and justice, in particular the
reaffirmation that there can be no United Nations-
endorsed peace agreements that offer amnesty for the
most serious crimes under international law. The
relationship between peace and justice can be complex,
and mediators can find themselves in the midst of
relevant discussions. It must indeed be clear that
mediators cannot negotiate justice issues if they are
dealt with by independent judicial bodies - such as, in
particular, the International Criminal Court - and that
the situation under international law in this respect
must be clear to all parties involved. Chief among the
factors that keep conflict cycles alive are spoilers of
mediation efforts, who benefit from war economies in
particular and often operate in a climate of impunity.
Negotiated settlements of disputes are particularly
prone to relapse into violence, and addressing impunity
for serious crimes is an essential element in preventing
such violence and thus helps consolidate achievements
reached through mediation.

Secondly, the selection process for special
representatives and special envoys of the Secretary-
General and the efforts to build operational support for
these envoys must take into account the important role
that women play in mediation and the settlement of
disputes. This has been said many times in the past,
including in the presidential statement adopted last
year (S/PRST/2008/39), but the reality is of course
different. As stated by the speaker preceding me, since
2000 not a single woman has been appointed as a
mediator in negotiations of comprehensive peace
agreements, and only one woman is currently serving
as a special representative of the Secretary-General.
What is important in the relevant part of the report is
that the involvement of women is not a matter of
political correctness, but a question of making
mediation efforts more effective.

Thirdly, we must address the issue of resources.
The very sensible measures mentioned in the report,
such as training programmes and developing capacities
for operational support, of course cost money. But
more importantly, they are an investment that is likely
to lead to a significant reduction of the overall costs for
the Organization. We wish to state our view that
mediation is a core activity of the United Nations and,
as such, should in principle be funded from the regular
budget. At the same time, we are aware, of course, that
this will not be possible in the near future, and we will
continue our financial support for the Mediation
Support Unit. However, we hope that this area will
attract particular attention in future discussions on the
regular budget.

