I wish to thank the Special Representative for her briefing today. She and her team continue to distinguish themselves despite the constraints that the pandemic has imposed on their work. Today I will focus our remarks on just a few key points. I am pleased to report that last week's United States-Iraq strategic dialogue was a great success. The fact that the United States hosted such a logistically complex in-person, strategic dialogue in the midst of a pandemic speaks to our commitment to a stable, sovereign and prosperous Iraq. That Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi, along with his Ministers for foreign affairs and of finance, defence, electricity and oil, led such a delegation speaks to Iraq's good-faith efforts to meet the needs of its people and embrace the international community. During their meeting at the White House, President Trump and Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi reaffirmed that the strategic partnership between the United States and Iraq is based on a mutual desire for security and prosperity. We continue to work in close coordination to ensure that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham is rendered incapable of posing a threat to Iraq or any other nation, including by holding it to account for the atrocities it has perpetrated. We are committed to long-term security cooperation to build Iraq's military capability and address threats to our shared interests. The United States is committed to Iraq's economic development as well. By the end of last week's strategic dialogue, the United States and Iraq had signed nine memorandums of understanding codifying bilateral cooperation in health, economic reform, private-sector investment, trade and energy. Five of those memorandums were with United States companies, to help Iraq develop its energy sector. Moreover, the United States announced nearly $204 million in additional humanitarian assistance for the people of Iraq, Iraqi refugees in the region and the generous communities that are hosting them. That funding brings the total for the United States humanitarian response for Iraq to more than $706 million since the beginning of fiscal year 2019, and more than $2.4 billion in both humanitarian and development assistance since 2014. That assistance will provide critical shelter, essential health care, emergency food assistance and water, sanitation and hygiene services across Iraq, and it continues to support the return of displaced persons, including ethnic and religious minorities. It will also improve access to civil documentation and legal services, enhance the capacity of health-care facilities and increase access to education and improved livelihood opportunities. We welcome the Prime Minister's 31 July announcement of early parliamentary elections; it is an important step in addressing the Iraqi people's demand for a responsive and representative Government. The Security Council recognized the critical role that the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) plays in assisting the Government of Iraq in its election preparations by enhancing electoral assistance language in UNAMI's mandate renewal this past May. I call upon the United Nations and all Member States to ensure that UNAMI has the resources necessary to foster credible, free and fair Iraq-led and Iraq-owned elections. As a demonstration of support for Iraq's democratic process, the Trump Administration announced plans to fund UNAMI's electoral-support activities. We plan to announce $10 million in funding, subject to congressional notification, through a voluntary contribution routed through the United Nations Development Programme. That grant will bolster Iraqi efforts to hold free and fair elections, and we expect that it will include activities to support Iraq's Independent High Electoral Commission and enhance voter engagement. Once again, we implore Iraq's other international partners to follow suit and provide voluntary contributions to support UNAMTD's invaluable work in helping Iraq prepare for elections. I also want to reiterate my Government's outrage at the killing of peaceful protesters, civil-society activists and members of the media. To date, more than 600 have been killed and thousands injured. The Government of Iraq must bring those responsible for the killings to justice. As Secretary Pompeo made clear during the United States-Iraq strategic dialogue, the United States is committed to helping Iraq achieve economic prosperity and freedom from foreign meddling in its internal affairs and through support for local militias. This includes malign influence and activity from Iran, the world's leading State sponsor of terrorism. Iran's actions in Iraq and elsewhere in the region show that it is not interested in being a responsible member of the international community. Instead, Iran wants to sow chaos and mistrust across the region. As we have said many times, the United States will not allow that to happen. That is why we have taken action to reimpose United Nations sanctions on Iran. Iran must never gain access to more modern weaponry to threaten its neighbours or the region. A stable, prosperous and independent Iraq is what the Iraqi people want - an Iraq that is for the Iraqi people. Iraqi protesters could not have made that any clearer, and the United States stands with them to make it a reality.
