This pandemic is having profound impacts on international peace and security. It has increased the fragility of conflict-affected countries, and some of them are very close to falling back into crisis. Many unresolved conflict drivers may add to the heightening of tensions, from inequalities to weak governance, from rampant poverty to poor health infrastructures, and from collapsing economies to food shortages. This unprecedented disruption may reverse years of peacebuilding efforts. At the same time, the pandemic complicates the work of United Nations peacekeepers and mediation efforts on the ground. Peace processes may run off the rails. Since February, at least 69 countries have decided to postpone their elections, some of which are a critical part of a peace process. All in all, tasks relating to peacebuilding and sustaining peace have become even more daunting. With that in mind, allow me to underline three important points. First, sustaining peace must be a part of our comprehensive response to this pandemic. It is imperative for us to continue supporting the efforts of countries in conflict to take a holistic approach to addressing the interlinkages between the health crisis and its implications, which range from socioeconomic to peace-and-security-related. Our support should focus on strengthening the institutional capacities and resources of conflict-affected countries. It should also address unequal access to public-health goods and coronavirus disease (COVID-19) treatments in conflict- affected countries. Competition in the acquisition of a COVID-19 vaccine, once it exists, would only leave them further behind. Moreover, advancing the sustaining peace agenda requires the inclusive participation of local stakeholders. They have a better understanding of the risks of conflict that must be addressed. A conducive international enabling environment is also important to sustain peace during this pandemic, including in my region, South-East Asia. For that reason, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations issued a joint statement on 8 August that underlined the importance of the principles embedded in the Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality in South-East Asia and the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia to the maintenance of peace and stability in the region amid the current geopolitical dynamics. Secondly, sustaining peace requires synergy between the work of all entities of the United Nations system. The United Nations system can no longer work on the basis of a silo approach. It must respond in a coherent manner by harnessing the strengths of its various organs. The United Nations should also integrate a conflict- sensitive approach into its pandemic response. The Security Council must play its role to ensure the full implementation of resolution 2532 (2020). A general cessation of hostilities and a humanitarian pause would enable the timely delivery of aid and COVID-19 treatments to civilians caught in conflict. As those operating directly on the ground, United Nations peacekeeping operations have the capacity to monitor risks of conflict that may be exacerbated by the pandemic, serving as part of an early-warning system. Meanwhile, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes have the technical capacities necessary to address specific conflict drivers during the pandemic. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), as the lead United Nations body in sustaining peace, plays a vital role in coordinating responses across the principal organs of the United Nations and beyond, including regional organizations, international financial institutions and private sectors. The PBC must make use of its advisory role to develop a comprehensive United Nations strategy to deal with the long-term impacts of COVID-19. Our efforts to sustain peace during COVID-19 serve as a valuable input for the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. Thirdly, sustaining peace requires the smart use of resources. The latest report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2020/773) documented a decline in the share of the official development assistance budget dedicated to peacebuilding in conflict-affected countries. The majority of those countries are now faced with a hard choice between spending on health infrastructure or spending on peacebuilding. It is important, therefore, that we optimize the use of the limited resources at hand. The partnership between the United Nations and international financial institutions is vital. At the same time, we need to continue thinking outside the box to explore innovative funding for peacebuilding, South-South and triangular cooperation and the involvement of philanthropists and private sectors. The pandemic may aggravate some conflict dynamics, but I am an optimist, as history has taught us that crisis may also create an opening for peace. Let us use that momentum to better sustain peace.
