Ms. Plepyte (Lithuania): Let me start by thanking
the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing today.
I also thank the Chinese presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this timely debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

The United Nations is now 73 years old. Addressing
the assembled delegates at the start of the meeting
in San Francisco at which the Charter of the United
Nations was signed, the President of the United States,
Harry Truman, said

"You members of this Conference are to be the
architects of the better world. In your hands rests
our future."

Today his words are more important than ever. The
United Nations was created to provide the foundation
and framework for a rules-based multilateral system.
Such a system is the backbone of, and a recipe for, a
better world. Since the end of the Second World War,
multilateral institutions have helped countries around
the world to avoid catastrophic wars and achieve
unprecedented levels of development. As much
as we need more international cooperation today,
multilateralism has come under pressure. As this open
debate serves to indicates, we are arriving at a point
where multilateral cooperation is beginning to seem
like more of an aspiration than a reality.

Lamenting the dire state of multilateralism is only
paying lip service to the rules-based international order.
We all know the diagnosis of current global affairs. We
all know too well the consequences when the United
Nations Charter-based order fails. Protracted conflicts
in Ukraine, Syria, Yemen and elsewhere, as well as the
worst humanitarian crisis since the end of the Second
World War are only a few stark reminders of such
failure. We need action. During her statement at the
general debate of the General Assembly in September
(see A/73/PV.10), the President of Lithuania, Ms. Dalia
Grybauskaite, urged the international community
to take responsibility for our future and enable the

United Nations to act. Responsibility, political will,
commitment to reforms and making compromises are
top prerequisites in order to change the current state of
multilateral affairs. We need to use this moment as an
opportunity for genuine and lasting reforms.

Our commitment to stronger global governance and
binding rules should translate into the effective reform
of the United Nations system. There is no better way
to preserve and reinforce the relevance and credibility
of the United Nations than making the Organization
more efficient. In that regard, we stand fully behind
the Secretary-General's reform agenda in all its
dimensions. That agenda has the potential to make the
whole United Nations family less fragmented and more
united and coherent.

A relevant and strong United Nations requires an
efficient, transparent and inclusive Security Council.
Directly or indirectly, inaction by the Security
Council and the international community encourages
aggression and the use of force and threatens the entire
multilateral system, which is based on international law.
Restraining the use of the veto, inter alia, would make
the Council's responses to ongoing crises more coherent
and reliable. Lithuania therefore strongly supports the
French-Mexican initiative on limiting the use of the
veto in cases of mass atrocities, genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Lithuania also actively
endorses the relevant initiatives of Liechtenstein and
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.
Justice cannot be vetoed. It must go beyond political
manipulation. International peace, security and justice
are not possible without international law. Ending
impunity and ensuring justice for all is an absolute
must in order to reinforce trust in the United Nations
and ensure the credibility of our multilateral system.
At the same time, when justice is not ensured and
impunity thrives, multilateralism can neither function
nor perform.

It is important to acknowledge that many of the
current challenges to the global order are born and
grown domestically. Blaming the United Nations,
international institutions and agreements for our
domestic failures is not a viable way forward. While it
is true that multilateralism needs to deliver much better
at the country level, it is also true that respect for the
rules-based global system starts at home. It begins with
open, peaceful societies based on the rule of law, the
freedom of expression, access to independent justice,
respect for human rights and accountable and inclusive
institutions.

Finally, let me conclude by underlining that the
value of multilateralism itself transcends any particular
policy or goal. The rule of law has intrinsic value.
Multilateralism must not lead to inaction, and we all
need to contribute to rebuilding trust in the capacity
of the United Nations to deliver. Lithuania remains
committed to playing its active role in multilateral
action.

