Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Coordinator Serry for his briefing.

We have today arrived at the nine-month mark
since final status negotiations resumed between Israel
and the Palestinians in July last year. It was the most
ambitious and substantial chance to secure a permanent
peace in years. The extraordinary and singular nature
of that opportunity cannot be overstated. We commend
the persistence and patience of the United States in
encouraging serious negotiations between both sides.
The Israelis and the Palestinians - with the support
of the international community - need to confront
the urgency of the moment and reach an agreement for
talks to continue.

We commend the statesmanship and commitment
that President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu
displayed in launching negotiations last year, but we
urge leaders on both sides to press on. Those who work
with Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas
in their respective Governments must also support
the peace process by showing restraint, especially
during difficult periods. We urge both sides to refrain
from actions or statements that increase tensions on
the ground. And any Palestinian unity Government
must uphold the principle of non-violence and accept
previous commitments the Palestinians have made,
particularly on Israel's right to exist. All rocket attacks
towards Israel from Gaza must cease.
The economic and security gains that a peace
deal would bring to both sides are tremendous.
Conversely, the fallout from failed negotiations would
be devastating. A just and lasting two-State solution
remains in the fundamental interests of both parties and
the wider region. We urge both sides not to be diverted
by mutual recriminations, but to maintain their political
courage so that the immense efforts invested to date do
not prove futile.

The Syrian conflict has now entered its fourth year.
Nearly half the Syrian population needs assistance;
one-third has been displaced and over 2.7 million have
fled as refugees to neighbouring countries. Last week,
the Foreign Minister of Australia visited Jordan and
Lebanon to see first-hand the tragic refugee situation
created by this conflict. She announced an increase to
Australia's humanitarian response targeted specifically
at Syrian refugee children, who make up half the Syrian
refugee population.

A political solution is urgently needed, and Joint
Special Representative Brahimi has made very sound
proposals on how negotiations should be conducted.
But the Al-Assad regime's refusal to discuss transition
in parallel with security talks - as Mr. Brahimi has
proposed - demonstrates that it is not interested in
serious negotiations, as does President Al-Assad's
announcement he will run for re-election as President
before substantive negotiations have even begun. The
circumstances of the civil war in Syria - a completely
fractured country - make genuine elections
impossible. They will have no credibility in the eyes of
the Syrian people and the international community, and
will further undermine the prospects for a solution. The
Syrian authorities must return now to the negotiating
table.

In the meantime, reality for millions of Syrians
remains increasingly desperate and brutal. Despite
the unambiguous language in resolution 2139 (2014),
indiscriminate weapons continue to be savagely used
by the regime against civilians. Some 240,000 civilians
remain besieged, the vast majority by regime forces;
millions more are in hard-to-reach areas, and are denied
food and medecine. The Syrian military strategy, which
deliberately targets civilians through indiscriminate
aerial bombardment, barrel bombs and surrender-or-
starve tactics, is unacceptable.
The Syrian authorities continue to remove
medical supplies from humanitarian convoys, and to
put up bureaucratic hurdles that prevent the effective
distribution of aid. We welcomed the opening of one
Syria-Turkey border crossing in March, but there are at
least seven more border crossings that could be opened
or better utilized. That needs to happen now. It is the
Al-Assad regime that has the primary responsibility
for addressing the desperate humanitarian situation in
Syria, but there is unavoidable evidence that it is not
complying with resolution 2139 (2014). If this persists,
the Council will need to take further measures.

The Council has heard recently of further horrific
crimes being committed in Syria. It remains essential
that those responsible for such crimes- including those
outlined in the Caesar report - be held to account.
Australia also condemns terrorist acts perpetrated by
the jihadist groups Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Jabhat al-Nusra, and the involvement of foreign
fighters, including from Lebanese Hizbullah, in this
conflict. Extremists have no place in Syria's future. We
commend the efforts of Special Coordinator Kaag and
her team in assisting Syria to meet its obligations to
remove its chemical weapons. It is essential that the final
deadline of 30 June be met. The Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons mission authorized
today to establish the facts about the possible use of
chlorine in Syria must be given access to all it needs.

The Australian Foreign Minister's visit to Lebanon
and Jordan last week reaffirmed our very strong
support for both countries as they face increasingly
insurmountable humanitarian and security challenges
as a direct result of the Syrian crisis. Last month, the
millionth Syrian refugee crossed into Lebanon - a
staggering 300 per cent increase over one year ago. We
also commend Iraq, Turkey and Egypt for their intake
of Syrian refugees; international support for all these
countries is necessary to manage the burden. During
her visit, Foreign Minister Bishop encouraged Lebanon
to maintain its policy of disassociation regarding the
Syrian conflict. We welcomed the formation of the
new Lebanese Government in February, which was a
crucial step for the country's political stability. It will
be vital that the Lebanese Parliament elect a president
by 25 May, as scheduled, and that an incoming
President can continue President Sleiman's efforts to
unite all Lebanese and act as a force for stability during
appallingly this difficult time.

