The President: I thank Mr. Meza-Cuadra for
his briefing.

I shall now provide a briefing in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

On behalf of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), I am pleased to report on
the progress made since our previous briefing, in
October 2018 (see S/PV.8364). We fully endorse the
joint statement delivered on behalf of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, as
well as of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
1540 Committee.

While the mandates of the three Committees differ,
there are important areas of complementarity. The
focus of the 1540 Committee remains the prevention
of the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, their means of delivery and related materials
to non-State actors, particularly for terrorist purposes.
It is widely recognized that the use of nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons, including for terrorist purposes,
could have devastating and potentially catastrophic
consequences. The readiness of non-State groups and
individuals with extreme or apocalyptic views to use
extreme violence in various parts of the world remains
a matter of serious concern. In that context, no State is
exempt from the task of making every effort to prevent
such proliferation.

The obligations under resolution 1540 (2004),
which are designed precisely for those purposes,
involve a wide range of activities that go together with
the requisite adoption and enforcement of measures
to prohibit non-State actors from manufacturing,
acquiring, possessing, transporting, transferring or
using nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and
their means of delivery. Among those are domestic
controls over nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
and related materials, including measures to account for
and secure such items, appropriate effective physical
protection measures, effective border controls and law
enforcement efforts, appropriate effective national
export and trans-shipment controls and controls on
providing funds and services related to exports, such as
financing and transporting.

The full and effective implementation of those
obligations requires continuous attention. The
Committee will continue to undertake a number of
activities this year to promote the full and effective
implementation of the resolution and to assist States,
upon request, in strengthening national capacity. We
will also intensify our engagement with international
organizations whose mandates are directly related to
resolution 1540 (2004).

The Committee will continue to enhance
information-sharing, coordination on visits to
countries, within their respective mandates, technical
assistance and other issues of relevance to the 1540
Committee; the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism, as appropriate.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight that the
spirit of cooperation and dialogue with Member States
continues to inform the 1540 Committee's activities.

I thank members for the opportunity to make this
statement to the Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

