Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): We would like to extend a
warm welcome to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hasegawa, who today has made
an appearance in the Security Council in his present
capacity. We thank him for introducing the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2004/888) and for the update
he has given to the Council on the situation in Timor-
Leste. We also wish him good luck in his efforts.

Timor-Leste has made remarkable progress since
its independence. The credit for the success is largely
owed to the people and the Government of Timor-
Leste. We commend them for their achievements, in
spite of extremely difficult circumstances. We
appreciate, in particular, the bold efforts of the
Timorese leadership to encourage national
reconciliation. We hope that it will continue to strive to
heal the deep wounds of the past, both internal and
external.

Pakistan supports the efforts of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
to consolidate peace and assist institutional
development in Timor-Leste, especially in key
programme areas of public administration and justice,
development of law enforcement and maintenance of
security and stability. Those tasks continue to remain
critical for the transition from peacekeeping to peace-
building. We also acknowledge UNMISET's key role
as a confidence-building mechanism, both within
Timor-Leste and between Timor-Leste and Indonesia.
That is a model that the United Nations could replicate
in other regions where its missions are deployed.

The report of the Secretary-General provides an
update on the progress made in each of the programme
areas. While some progress has been made in those
areas, it is obvious that much more still needs to be
done. For example, the Timorese public administration
sector continues to require substantial international
assistance in the short and medium term. The justice
sector is also in need of considerable strengthening.
The lack of a suitable framework continues to hamper
the training and development of the national police,
which continues to face capacity, management and
resource constraints, as well as discipline issues.

With respect to the capacity of the Timorese
defence forces, in spite of progress, that important area
remains hampered by a lack of experienced personnel
and appropriate training regimes, and by limited
equipment and logistic capacity. All that underscores
the need for UNMISET's close and continuing
engagement with its Timorese counterparts, to
overcome the shortcomings.

Pakistan supports the extension of UNMISET's
mandate at its present strength and composition for the
further period of six months, in order to consolidate the
gains made thus far and to complete the key tasks
assigned to UNMISET in Security Council resolution
1543 (2004).

In addition to the efforts of UNMISET, the most
imposing long-term challenge confronting Timor-Leste
remains its socio-economic recovery. While the
country's economy has shown signs of recovery,
serious deep-rooted structural problems,
underdevelopment of the private sector and the lack of
enabling legislation continue to hamper progress in key
economic areas.

It will continue to be difficult for Timor-Leste to
sustain its economic recovery without sustained
international support. We hope that the international
donor community will continue to provide its
indispensable assistance to Timor-Leste in order to
enable that country to stand on its own feet.

The continued support of Timor-Leste's
neighbours is also vital in that regard. Pakistan
believes that the development of close and friendly
relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia is of
utmost importance and is in the best interest of both
countries. We also hope that Timor-Leste's other
neighbours could also resolve their bilateral issues with
Timor-Leste in order to allow that country to attain its
true economic potential.

Finally, Timor-Leste is widely considered a
success story for United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
However, the real success of peacekeeping is not
measured in years, but in decades. Timor-Leste will
continue to need our support in the remaining phases of
UNMISET'S presence, and beyond. All efforts must be
made to ensure that the gains so painstakingly achieved
are consolidated and not lost.

