Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Secretariat for submitting the report of the
Secretary-General on ways to combat subregional and
cross-border problems in West Africa (S/2004/200).
We also thank Nana Akufo-Addo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ghana, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), Mr. Jan Egeland,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Mr. Zephirin
Diabre, Associate Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), for their briefings.
We welcome the detailed analysis of the principal
challenges confronting the region, as well as the
concrete recommendations in that regard contained in
the report.

Since the representative of Ireland will make a
statement later on behalf of the European Union, we
shall confine ourselves to a few brief comments.

First of all, we are pleased to observe the trend
towards greater coordination of the activities of the
United Nations system in the region, and we support
the Secretary-General's recommendation that periodic
meetings be held among the United Nations
peacekeeping missions and political offices in the
region. In addition, we understand that we should
actively promote participation, where relevant, by
representatives of ECOWAS and of civil society in
such meetings.

Secondly, the Mano River Union occupies a
special place among subregional cooperation forums.
We believe that, in the current context, revitalization of
that forum would play a very constructive role in
confidence-building, which could lead to the adoption
of concrete initiatives, as recommended by the report.
Basically, the establishment of joint patrols along the
borders of Sierra Leone, Guinea, Liberia and Cote
d'Ivoire would improve the security situation and
would have an additional dissuasive effect.

As for small arms and light weapons, we support
the recommendation made by the Secretary-General
that member States of ECOWAS consider the
possibility of adopting a legally binding instrument,
before the expiration of the current Moratorium this
year

Additional initiatives, such as establishment of a
regional ECOWAS registry, the possibility of a ban on
the activities of mercenaries who operate in the
countries of the region, or the establishment of national
commissions in order to carry out the Moratorium, are
relevant recommendations that warrant serious study
by the countries in the region.

Fourthly, the security sector reform and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes are two key issues necessary to achieving
lasting peace in West Africa. DDR is a major challenge
which goes beyond the national framework and has
clear subregional consequences. Hence, we support a
comprehensive approach in applying those programmes
that would include the regional dimension and pay
particular attention to the reintegration of ex-
combatants, with special attention given to the needs of
women and of child soldiers.

Fifthly, the efforts in West Africa must be
accompanied by a reconciliation process as well as a
strengthening of the social fabric of the populations
affected by the conflicts. Implementation of the
report's recommendations referring to increased
participation of civil society through concrete
initiatives, in order to convey values of peace,
reconciliation and respect for human rights, would, in
fact, have beneficial effects in the post-conflict phase.

In conclusion, the report in question provides a
solid basis for the work of the Council and my
delegation will play an active role in subsequent
discussions in order to move forward on the path to an
integrated and focused regional approach that would
provide an adequate response to the complex
challenges faced by West Africa.

