Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We join others in wishing the Italian presidency
every success, and we also extend our gratitude to the
French delegation.

We welcome the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and thank him for his briefing.

Assistance to refugees and stateless persons is today
a key component of the comprehensive efforts aimed
at maintaining international stability. We commend
the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to boost the
effectiveness of the international protection regime. We
note the leading role of UNHCR in drafting a global
compact on refugees and introducing a corresponding
set of measures. We believe that if the efforts of the
international community are combined, those measures
will significantly improve the situation of refugees.

The current situation of refugees is largely a
consequence of interference in the internal affairs of
States, primarily in the Middle East and North Africa.
We believe that those who have taken an active part
in such interference bear the primary responsibility for
delivering assistance to the victims of those policies,
namely, refugees and forced migrants. What will
most help to alleviate the suffering of refugees is the
establishment of lasting peace in Syria, Libya and
other conflict-ridden countries. It is also important
to consistently fight terrorism. Assistance to host
countries and countries of origin is key, including to
create the conditions necessary for the voluntary return
of refugees and ensuring their reintegration into society.

Our hope is that the experience and professionalism
of UNHCR will allow us to achieve swift progress in
addressing the situation of refugees from Myanmar,
who, thanks to the consistent and steadfast efforts of
Bangladesh, have been greeted with a warm reception.

The urgent challenge still remains to prevent
refugees from being subject to political manipulation
by forces inciting ethnic and religious enmity. It is also
important to pursue efforts to prevent terrorists from
infiltrating among refugees, and avoid the use ofrefugee
camps for the recruitment and training of militants.

Our country strives to facilitate international
efforts to assist refugees. We are a donor to UNHCR,
and we host and provide arrangements on our territory
for a significant number of refugees and forced
migrants from various countries. We also provide
substantial amounts of bilateral and multilateral
humanitarian assistance. We trust that UNHCR will
actively facilitate that process by taking measures to
create suitable conditions for the return of refugees to
their homes in Syria.

Russian territory is currently hosting more than
1 million Ukrainians fleeing conflict zones, to whom
we are providing a decent life. We are in constant
contact with UNHCR on that issue. On a regular basis,
we send part of our voluntary donation to finance
UNHCR operations in Ukraine, and we provide
significant amounts of humanitarian assistance to
victims in south-eastern Ukraine. We thank the Office
for its efforts to draw the attention of the international
community to this issue, and we call for ongoing,
objective coverage of the humanitarian consequences
of the Ukrainian crisis to facilitate the reintegration of
returning refugees and internally displaced persons to
south-eastern Ukraine.

In conclusion, I reaffirm our high praise for
the activities of UNHCR, which frequently acts as a
lifeline for millions of people who are forced to flee
their homes.

