Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to thank the Council for
affording me the opportunity to speak in this important
meeting.

I also extend my thanks to the delegation of the
United Kingdom, and to Ambassador Rycroftpersonally,
for their efforts and cooperation during the drafting
of resolution 2240 (2015), which was just adopted by
the Council. It is a resolution that meets the wishes of
the European Union (EU) and takes into account the
concerns of Libya and the African continent. More
importantly, the resolution is an important step towards
saving lives and reducing the dangers to which migrants
are exposed. It is a step that we hope will be followed
by further steps to deal with the crisis of migrants in
the Eastern Mediterranean.

We recognize the grave threat to international peace
and security posed by the smuggling and trafficking
of migrants, and we appreciate the European Union's
concern for the dangers to which those migrants are
exposed. We also recognize the huge financial burden
borne by certain countries of the European Union as a
result of disorganized migration. However, we believe
that some efforts to tackle the crisis could lead to an
increase in the number of migrants and help smugglers
to collect more money, if the Libyan Government is
unable to extend its authority to its entire territory and
is not receiving the necessary assistance to control its
borders.

We are all aware that illegal migration cannot be
tackled solely with security measures. It cannot be dealt
with only in the countries of origin or the countries of
destination. It must be dealt with by tackling its root
causes, such as armed conflicts, economic crises and
poverty. That requires a concerted effort on the part of
the international community to assist the Governments
concerned in establishing social peace and promoting
development and prosperity. We look forward to the
European Union playing an important role in that
regard, based on consultations with the African Union
and the countries concerned. However, we are not just
tackling illegal migration as a whole. We are dealing
with only one aspect of illegal migration, which is
reflected in an unprecedented increase in the number
of refugees being smuggled from Africa to Europe
through the Mediterranean, as well as the catastrophic
rise in the number of migrants who lose their lives by
drowning at sea.
I do not believe that anyone would stand against
an international effort to put an end to that loss of
life in the Mediterranean Sea or that humanitarian
tragedy, provided that it is done in full respect for the
principles of international law, and, in particular, the
principle of respect for the sovereignty of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs. Libya, as a
country that is seriously affected by this issue, does not
object to the deployment of a European Maritime Force
in the Mediterranean off the Libyan coast aimed at
saving illegal migrants or, even, at targeting smugglers
and their boats in international waters, when necessary.
However, we would like that to be done in coordination
and cooperation with the European Union and the
countries concerned, particularly when it involves
military operations in the exclusive economic zones of
those countries. In that regard, we would like to warn
against any misuse of this resolution or ofthe European
Union's operations for the purposes of conducting
illegal fishing and the plundering of fish stocks in
waters under Libyan control.

Libya believes that, if migrants know that the
risk they face of drowning at sea has been removed or
reduced, the numbers of those migrants and the number
of migrants who enter Libya through its practically open
borders will increase. Libya is having great difficulty
in accommodating thousands of migrants and in fully
respecting their rights and dignity. Libyan authorities
are, at the same time, busy fighting terrorism and
seeking to extend the authority of the State to its entire
territory, with extremely limited resources. Libya
faces continued obstacles in providing the necessary
weapons to its army. That is a problem that we wish
to resolve immediately. Undoubtedly, members of the
Council realize that the chaos in the capital, Tripoli,
owing to the absence of any political authority
controlling the militias in control of the sites where the
boats begin their illegaljourneys, is the main engine of
the unprecedented increase in the number of migrants.
That calls for the international community to support
any upcoming agreement among Libyans to establish a
Government of National Accord.

Stability in Libya will mean that somewhere
between 2 and 3 million migrant workers will find
decent work in Libya, and that, in turn, will reduce
the number of migrants across the Mediterranean.
The European Union has played an important role
in supporting political dialogue in Libya. We highly
value that role, and we trust that the dialogue currently
underway in Skhirat in Morocco will succeed and
lead to the establishment of a Government of National
Accord, so that we can deal with the myriad of serious
problems, such as illegal migration. The Libyan House
of Representatives and the Government have chosen a
path of flexibility and tolerance in dealing with disputes
amongst Libyans. They have fully cooperated with the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bernadino
Leon, in efforts to establish a Government of National
Accord and have agreed on the necessary measures to
restore security and put an end to the chaotic situation
that we witness.
The House of Representatives has made difficult
concessions so as to appease those who did not
accept the results of the elections, and we are pleased
that yesterday, at Skhirat, it was announced that an
agreement among the parties had been reached on
the name of a President for a Government of National
Accord and on a statement on the constitution of that
Government. At a time when we salute the courage of
all those who have worked with the interest of Libya
in mind, we hope that the new agreement will also
gain the approval of the House of Representatives, the
support of the Libyan people and all political groups
and armed groups in every village and town in Libya,
so that when the Government has been fully established
and endorsed by the House of Representatives, it will
be able to restore the institutions of the State in the
capital and extend the authority of the State to its
entire territory. That, undoubtedly, represents the only
guarantee for improving the quality of life of the Libyan
people and putting an end to illegal migration or, at least,
significantly reducing it across the Mediterranean. In
conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the Libyan
authorities will remain ready to cooperate, as much as
we possibly can, with any international effort aimed at
reducing the suffering of illegal migrants.

