Mr. Dinka: As the Security Council is aware, on
1 November 2001, the Transitional Government of
National Unity was inaugurated in Burundi. That
solemn occasion was witnessed by the Presidents of the
United Republic of Tanzania, Nigeria, Zambia, Malawi
and Rwanda, as well as by the facilitator of the
Burundi peace process, Nelson Mandela, the Deputy
Presidents of South Africa and Uganda and the
Secretary General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU). I represented the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, and the European Union was
represented by its Special Representative for the Great
Lakes region, Mr. Aldo Aiello. A number of other
African States were represented at the ministerial level.

During the week leading up to the main event,
important preparatory measures were undertaken. On
27 October, the National Assembly adopted a
transitional constitution, which will guide the work of
the Transitional Government during the coming three
years. The first group of the special protection unit has
arrived from South Africa. A number of political
leaders have returned from exile to participate in the
new Government.

The inauguration of the Transitional Government
constitutes a significant step in the implementation of
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement. The
momentum created by that event should be built upon
in order to consolidate and render irreversible the hard-
won gains. The people of Burundi, as well as the
friends of Burundi and all those who supported or
participated in the peace process, are hopeful that the
installation of the Transitional Government will usher
in a new and historic era of reconciliation, tolerance
and peace. It is now up to the Burundian political
leaders, with support from the region and from the
international community at large, to ensure the success
of the transitional institutions. That is the only way that
durable peace and stability can be guaranteed. Failure
is not an option.
In his statement at the inauguration, President
Buyoya set out the priorities of the Transitional
Government. They are: ceasefire negotiations,
commune-level council elections, repatriation of
refugees, rebuilding of infrastructure, reform of the
security and judicial systems, et cetera. He appealed to
the countries of the subregion, the facilitation and the
international community to continue to assist, so that
those priorities can be achieved. He indicated that his
Government would approach the Security Council in
due course to create an international judicial
commission of inquiry to investigate possible cases of
genocide, war crimes and other crimes against
humanity, while his Government would set up a
national truth and reconciliation commission as
provided for by the Arusha Agreement.

The facilitator, Madiba Nelson Mandela, has
announced that his task as facilitator has now been
completed, and that he is now "passing the baton" to
the Implementation Monitoring Committee (IMC). He
will, however, continue to serve as moral guarantor of
the Arusha Agreement, and will be represented on the
IMC. We are all grateful to him.

What has been achieved so far would not have
been possible without the initiative of the leaders of the
subregion, the relentless efforts deployed in turn by
two of Africa's most renowned statesmen - the late
Mwalimu Julius Nyerere and Madiba Nelson
Mandela - and the generous support and
encouragement of the international community. As a
result there is today strong reason for cautious
optimism.

But we must not lose sight of the fact that there
are unfinished and challenging tasks ahead. First
among them is the issue of the ceasefire, because so
long as violence persists the peace process will remain
fragile. The two armed groups - the Forces pour la
De'fense de la Democratie (FDD) and the Forces
Nationales de Liberation (FNL) - have stepped up
pressure against Government forces in recent days. The
two armed groups must realize, and the international
community must send them a clear signal, that the time
has now come for them to put down their arms and
without delay join their compatriots in the search for
durable peace in Burundi; that it is time to put an end
to the killing, to the suffering of innocent people and to
the devastation of the country; that it is time to
reconcile and to move the country on towards much-
needed reconstruction and development.

There are other challenges as well. As members
may recall, the decision to deploy a regional force in
Burundi was necessitated by the fact that an all-
Burundian special protection unit could not be trained
before 1 November. Consequently, it was decided that,
pending the completion of training by Burundians
coming from the army and from the G-7 group of
parties, troops from South Africa, Ghana, Nigeria and
Senegal should provide protection to political leaders
returning from exile. The presence of the regional
force, therefore, is only a stopgap measure. The
training of an all-Burundian special protection force
which will take over from the regional force remains a
priority.

The regional force which is already in place in
Burundi has the capacity to carry out the task of
protecting returning politicians while at the same time
undertaking the task of training. There is, however, an
urgent need for the international community to provide
the force with the financial and material resources it
needs to accomplish its dual mandate. The deployment
of foreign forces, even when they are from the region,
requires a significant resource outlay. The only way to
bring down costs and at the same time ensure the long-
term success of the transitional arrangement is
immediately to initiate the training of a national
protection unit with a View to replacing the regional
force with an all-Burundian special protection unit as
soon as possible.

The other major challenge that must be tackled on
a priority basis is the reconstruction and development
of the country. Now that the Transitional Government
is in place, the Burundian population, which has been
suffering for years, should be made to see in a concrete
way that what happened last week was more than a
power-sharing arrangement among the country's
political elite. The only way to ensure that the
population of Burundi continues to support the peace
process long after the current euphoria of the moment
has worn off is if their lives are positively affected by
the changes. It is imperative that there be a peace
dividend. The international community can bring that
about by resuming in a significant way its socio-
economic development cooperation and enhancing its
humanitarian assistance, qualitatively and
quantitatively.

The international community has supported the
Burundi peace process since its inception. The
installation of the Transitional Government on 1
November has created an even more propitious
atmosphere for that support and cooperation not only to
continue but also to expand. The Security Council may
therefore wish to consider calling on the two armed
groups - the FDD and the FNL - to engage the new
Government in serious negotiations and to conclude a
ceasefire agreement without delay; expressing support
for the regional special protection unit already in
Bujumbura and calling on all Burundian parties to
cooperate with it to enable the contingent to carry out
its tasks freely, expeditiously and without any
hindrance; urging strongly all those in a position to do
so, particularly the donor community, to stay the course
and to provide adequate financial resources to enable
the regional special protection unit successfully to
carry out its double mandate of providing protection
and training a Burundian special protection unit;
calling on all the Burundian signatory parties to respect
the independence of and cooperate fully with the IMC
in the discharge of its mandate under the Arusha
Agreement; and calling on donor countries and
institutions to release all resources that have been
destined for Burundi's socio-economic development
but that remain undisbursed so far, including those
resources pledged in Paris in December of last year.

That would go a long way in assisting the
Transitional Government of Burundi to consolidate the
peace process by responding to the needs of its people.
Donors should also be urged to enhance their
humanitarian assistance to Burundi.

