Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your leadership
of the Council for the month of December. I also
want to thank Mr. Lacroix and Ms. Patten for their
briefings today.

My delegation would like to express its appreciation
to the Secretary-General and to welcome his report
(S/2018/1103). The period it covers has indeed been
marked by several momentous and historic events in
South Sudan. Prominent among them were the signing
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and the
peace celebration in Juba, which was attended by the
leaders of the opposition parties, and the meetings of
the various pre-implementation committees in Juba,
Addis Ababa and Khartoum. In that regard, I would
like to remind the Council that we are still in the
pre-implementation phase, and the peace process has
not yet been implemented.

The implementation is admittedly behind schedule,
but not because the parties are not committed to what
they have signed. The delays are due to technical
challenges. It is because of those challenges that our
delegation agrees with the Secretary-General that what
is needed now in South Sudan for the signed peace
Agreement to be implemented on time is political
will, and specifically international political will in
support of the Agreement. We know that the technical
challenges can be overcome with the political will
of the international community. We would like to
take this opportunity to thank the region, led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union, for their steadfast determination to see
to it that South Sudan is peaceful and that the refugees
are returned to their homes and communities as soon as
it is logistically possible.

As we look forward to the full implementation
of Peace Agreement in the next few months, the
Government is taking reports of sexual attacks on women
in the country seriously. The recent report of a sexual
attack on 150 women is disturbing, and the culprits
must not be allowed to get away with this criminality.
Accordingly, the investigating team formed by the
Government, which is led by the Minister of Gender,
Child and Social Welfare, Ms. Awut Deng Acuil, has
just returned to Juba from Bentiu and will soon make
the team's findings public. Quick condemnation may
be good public relations for some, but investigating
and getting to the facts and bringing the rule of law
to bear upon the alleged criminals is more prudent. I
believe that in some countries it is called due process.
Sanctions alone have never brought peace to any
conflict in the world.

In conclusion, allow me to bid farewell to the
non-permanent members that are finishing their terms
at the end of this year. My delegation will miss their
wise advice and the opportunities for close working
relations they have extended to us. In particular, we
want to wish Ethiopia, Bolivia and Kazakhstan success
in their future endeavours in the international arena.
In the same vein, we look forward to welcoming the
new members, especially the Republic of South Africa,
upon the start of their tenure early next year.

(spoke in Arabic)

Lastly, I would like to congratulate Kuwait and all
Arabic-speaking countries on the occasion of World
Arabic Language Day.

The meeting rose at 5.25 pm.
