Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
Mr. President, I join you and others in welcoming the
Secretary-General in our midst. I thank him for his
presence on this occasion.

The United States is gratified by the swift action
taken by the Security Council in adopting this
important resolution on Liberia, introduced by my
delegation. Our sponsorship of this resolution reflects
the importance that the United States places on finding
the right and effective means to bring peace to Liberia.
It is our conclusion that an effective response demands
intensive involvement by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the rest of the
international community, anchored by the United
Nations. The United States will do its part to support
this endeavour. We ask all Member States to show their
support through contributions to the staffing, funding
and sustenance of the Multinational Force and the
United Nations peacekeeping mission to follow.

This resolution will permit the Multinational
Force to deploy in Liberia under the authority of
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. It also sets
in motion the establishment of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission. The resolution authorizes the
peacekeeping forces in Sierra Leone to provide support
to the initial phase of ECOWAS deployment without
jeopardizing the continuing mission of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), and it
authorizes the Secretary-General to take immediate
steps to begin to prepare for deployment of a follow-on
United Nations peacekeeping mission.

We are confident that the committed efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Jacques Klein, backed fully by the will of the Council
and the resources of the Secretariat, will significantly
advance this critical deployment. The Multinational
Force and a follow-on United Nations peacekeeping
operation go hand in hand. The Multinational Force is
a crucial short-term bridge to our goal of placing
United Nations peacekeepers on the ground in Liberia
as soon as possible.

We appreciate the willingness of many of the
West African States to assist in the vital task of
restoring peace to Liberia. I would like to take special
note of Nigeria's commitment of two battalions for
immediate deployment. The United States is pleased to
provide support for those deploying units. President
Bush has directed the Secretary of Defense to position
appropriate military capabilities to support the
deployment of an ECOWAS force. A United States
Marines force will shortly reach the coast off Liberia.
A first ECOWAS reconnaissance team has arrived in
Monrovia. As part of the ECOWAS vanguard for the
Multinational Force, a first Nigerian battalion is set to
move into Liberia as soon as Monday.

Clearly, there was a manifest need for the Council
to adopt this resolution quickly. As the security situation
deteriorates, humanitarian conditions - already
appalling - continue to worsen at a devastating pace.
Peacekeepers on the ground will secure the environment
for the delivery of humanitarian assistance. Their
presence will support the implementation of the 17 June
ceasefire agreement, including establishing conditions
for initial stages of disarmament and demobilization
activities. Very importantly, peacekeepers will safeguard
security in the wake of Charles Taylor's departure from
the Liberian presidency. I cannot emphasize enough how
crucial it is for Taylor to leave now.

Furthermore, it is imperative that all Liberian
parties who are signatories to the 17 June ceasefire
agreement - in particular the leadership of the
Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy
(LURD) and of the Movement of Democracy in Liberia
(MODEL) - immediately and scrupulously uphold the
17 June ceasefire agreement. In that regard, all
Liberian parties must cooperate fully with the
Multinational Force and ensure the Force's safety and
security in Liberia.

The Multinational Force, starting with the
Nigerian battalion that is leaving UNAMSIL, can now
deploy confident of the support of the Council and in
the knowledge that planning for a follow-on United
Nations peacekeeping force is under way.

Finally, I would simply note that, in order to deal
with the demands of this urgent situation, we ask the
Secretary-General to direct his Special Representative
for Liberia to establish a presence in Liberia as soon as
possible.

