Mr. Fulci (Italy): Italy welcomes the adoption of
today's resolution on Croatia, which it joined in
sponsoring and in the drafting of which it participated. In
our opinion, the Security Council had the duty to take this
initiative to deal with a situation that we continue to
consider unsatisfactory and dangerous. While we can
understand the frustration of the Croatian Government and
people over the lack of progress in the political process of
peaceful reintegration of the sectors that were known as
United Nations Protected Areas, we cannot justify a
military offensive that is in clear violation of the Cease-
Fire Agreement of 29 March 1994 and that seriously risks

 

hindering implementation of the Economic Agreement of
2 December last.
Nor can we justify the fact that the Council's requests
contained in the presidential statements of 1 May 1995
(S/PRST/1995/23) and 4 May 1995 (S/PRST/ 1995/26) have
not yet been fully met.

Furthermore, we are extremely concerned over the
attitude adopted by the parties, in particular the Croatian
forces, towards the forces of the United Nations Confidence
Restoration Operation in Croatia (UNCRO) stationed in the
zones of separation. These are unacceptable incidents of
harassment and intimidation that must be condemned with
the utmost firmness. We express our full solidarity with the
Blue Helmets, who have found themselves in a difficult and
dangerous situation. Above all, I wish to request my
colleagues from Argentina and the Czech Republic to
convey the feelings of understanding and solidarity of the
Government and the people of Italy to their Governments
and peoples.

The Croatian Government has given repeated
assurances at the highest level that it would completely
withdraw its forces from the zones of separation in Sectors
East, North and South. While noting that the withdrawal
has actually begun, especially in Sectors East and South,
we must, unfortunately, point out that this precise
commitment has so far not been honoured completely.
According to the Secretariat's latest reports, contingents of
Croatian and Serbian forces continue to face each other in
the zone of separation of Sector North in particular. We
consider the speedy withdrawal of those forces to be of
paramount importance to ease tensions and prevent the risk
of incidents that could trigger new chain reactions of
violence.

As for Sector West, we believe it is essential that full
respect for the rights of the Serbian population be assured
in conformity with internationally recognized standards. To
this end, we feel that the UNCRO presence in that territory
can play a role of fundamental importance. We therefore
ask the Croatian Government to the greatest possible
freedom of movement and monitoring capacity for United
Nations personnel.

Today's Security Council resolution can and must
encourage the Croatian parties to speed up their complete
and unconditional withdrawal from the zones of separation
in order to allow the complete and immediate deployment
of UNCRO and the full implementation of its mandate as
outlined in resolutions 981 (1995) and 990 (1995).

Nevertheless, today's resolution is not merely an
attempt to remedy a situation created on the ground by
the recent Croatian offensive: it also sets its sights on the
future. In this regard, I wish to emphasize the importance
of paragraph 10, which contains a firm warning to the
parties, demanding that they refrain from taking any
further military initiatives that could lead to a new
escalation of the conflict. If it is determined that they
have not, the Council, in our opinion, should not hesitate
to consider further measures to ensure compliance with
this demand.

I wish to reaffirm our strong view that for the
Croatian question, as for the Bosnian, there can be no
military solution. Only political dialogue between the
parties can lead to a satisfactory solution to the problem
of Croatian territories inhabited by the Serbian
community. The words "confrontation", "victory",
"conquest" and "re-conquest" must be replaced by words

such as "dialogue , negotiation" and "compromise"; only
thus will we see an end to this very long crisis.

A political solution, of course, must respect the
principle, reaffirmed by the Security Council on several
occasions, of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Croatia, and the principle of the need to
come to agreements on suitable formulas for autonomy
that allow the Serbian people full enjoyment of their
rights.

