Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation believes that
it is now timely for the Council to adopt the draft resolution
that is before it. The people of East Timor have clearly
expressed their wish to begin a new chapter in their
history and this has been accepted in good faith by
Indonesia, as expressed by the recent decision of the
People's Consultative Assembly of that country, which is
welcomed by the international community. With the
adoption of this draft resolution today, the United Nations
will begin the process of assuming responsibility for the
transitional administration of East Timor, which will
prepare the people there for independence within a few
years' time.

We believe that the successful implementation of
this draft resolution will require the assistance of States
Members of the Organization and the full cooperation of
the parties concerned, including Indonesia, whose
cooperation in the process thus far has been given
recognition and appreciation. The fact that the whole
exercise was completed in a relatively short time from the
signing of the 5 May Agreement, in spite of the many
domestic constraints faced by Indonesia, is testimony to
the commitment of the Indonesian leadership under
former President Habibie, to whom a special tribute is
due, as well as that of the current Government under
President Abdurrahman Wahid and the Parliament of
Indonesia.

The role of Indonesia, along with that of Portugal, is
duly recognized in the draft resolution as an important
element in the successful implementation of the draft
resolution and the smooth functioning of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). In reshaping the future of East Timor, due
recognition should be given to the unique role that these
two countries played in the context of history and, in the
case of Indonesia, also in the geopolitical context. As
neither history nor geography can be denied, it is
important that a future East Timor Government come to
terms with these realities and begin the process of forging
constructive and mutually beneficial relationships with
them, especially with its important neighbour. We believe
that this relationship is also the wish and desire of both
countries, particularly Indonesia, which is physically
inseparable from East Timor, with which it shares both
land and sea boundaries. UNTAET can assist in laying
the groundwork for such cooperation.
As a regional neighbour, Malaysia looks forward to
a future independent East Timor's playing a full and
constructive role in regional affairs and to its integration
with the region. Geography dictates that East Timor is
part of either South-East Asia or the South Pacific, or of

 

both. It is, of course, entirely up to the future Government
of East Timor to determine its foreign policies predicated
on what would best serve its interests. Being in close
proximity to both subregions, it may well be impossible for
East Timor to isolate itself from either of them, but
necessary for it to be close to both.

The rebuilding and reconstruction of East Timor will
require the necessary conditions of peace and stability. To
this end, my delegation has stressed the importance of
reconciliation among the East Timorese people as a
prerequisite and therefore welcomes the inclusion of this
essential element in the draft resolution. We believe that all
East Timorese, of whatever political background and
persuasion, have a place in a future independent East
Timor. We would therefore urge UNTAET to pave the
way, in close consultation with the East Timorese
leadership, for a process of early reconciliation among
them. We are encouraged by the initial reconciliatory
remarks by Mr. Xanana Gusmao in this regard, reflecting
his own statesmanlike predisposition on this matter, which,
if pursued as a matter of policy by the East Timorese
leadership, would augur well for the future of East Timor.
The East Timorese leaders would do well to learn from the
lessons of others who have been torn by internal conflict
but have rebuilt their countries on the foundations of
national reconciliation.

My delegation supports the earliest possible phasing in
of the military component of UNTAET with the
introduction of a properly constituted United Nations
peacekeeping force and the phasing out of the International
Force, East Timor (INTERFET), consistent with Security
Council resolution 1264 (1999) and the provisions of the 5
May Agreement. Malaysia supports the Secretary-General' s
proposal to deploy a United Nations peacekeeping force of
up to 8,950 troops and up to 200 military observers as
appropriate and adequate.

Malaysia has expressed the strong wish to contribute
substantially to such a force as a demonstration of its
continuing strong support for United Nations peacekeeping,
in which it has participated actively over the years and
garnered the plaudits of the United Nations for the high
professionalism of its soldiers and police. It is also a
reflection of Malaysia's strong desire to assist East Timor,
a regional neighbour, as it finds its feet as a new player in
the community of nations, towards which process Malaysia
and other regional neighbours are eager to contribute. We
therefore deeply regret the doubts that have been raised in
some quarters as to the appropriateness and reliability of
Malaysian troops' performing a major peacekeeping role
in East Timor. Our record speaks for itself.

Notwithstanding a few remaining reservations we
have on the draft resolution, my delegation will vote in
favour of it. We trust that its unanimous adoption by the
Council will facilitate its smooth and successful
implementation.

