Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Liberian peace process is now at a crucial
juncture. We are pleased to note that the parties in Liberia
signed the Accra Agreement on 21 December 1994 and
thereafter entered into a comprehensive cease-fire. By no
means an easy achievement, this has laid a solid
foundation for the advancement of the peace process in
Liberia.

The reality in Liberia has once again demonstrated
that peace cannot be achieved by military means.
Persistent, patient and sincere negotiation and dialogue are
the only ways to a political solution acceptable to all the
parties to a conflict. What is important in this regard is
the political will of the parties to commit themselves to a
peaceful settlement. A conflict in a country must, in the
final analysis, be settled by its own people. The
international community, including the United Nations,
can play only a supplementary and promotive role in this
respect. We hope and believe that the Liberian parties,
acting in their national interests, will strictly implement
the provisions and the timetable set forth in the Accra
Agreement and abide by the cease-fire agreement so as to
create the conditions for the restoration of peace in
Liberia.

The Chinese delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative and the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
for their unremitting efforts to promote a political
settlement in Liberia. We are also highly appreciative of
the contributions made to the Liberian peace process by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and particularly by its current Chairman,
His Excellency President Rawlings of Ghana, and by the

 

Military Observer Group. They have set an example for
joint efforts by the United Nations and regional
organizations in settling conflicts.

The Chinese delegation is deeply concerned at the
continued massive flow of arms into Liberia, which could
undermine the cease-fire agreement reached by the Liberian
parties and hamper the successful implementation of the
Accra Agreement. The Chinese delegation hopes that the
provisions related to the arms embargo will be strictly
observed.

The Chinese delegation has all along supported the
peace process in Liberia and the efforts by the international
community and the relevant regional organizations to bring
lasting peace to that country. It is based on this position
that we will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

