Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, and wishes to make the following
remarks in its national capacity.

We would like to thank the Venezuelan presidency
of the Security Council for giving Member States
the opportunity to exchange views on the Charter of
the United Nations 70 years after the Organization's
foundation. Cyprus attaches the utmost importance to
the Charter of the United Nations and considers it to be
the cornerstone of international law.
In the concept paper (S/2016/103, annex), the
Council presidency recalls some of the significant
achievements of the Organization, most notably
regarding the promotion of human rights, decolonization
and economic and social development. It also stresses,
however, that at certain times the United Nations has
failed to live up to the expectations of the world's
peoples. We fully share that assessment, based on my
country's experience. Previous speakers have referred
to several examples of violations of the Charter of the
United Nations in today's world. I will therefore take
this opportunity to briefly reflect on the case of Cyprus,
which is among the oldest issues on this organ's agenda.

Cyprus joined the United Nations immediately
after gaining its independence from British colonial
rule in 1960. It has since remained a steadfast
supporter of the Organization and of the international
legal framework it provides, despite having witnessed
first-hand, from the standpoint of the victim, several
violations of the Charter involving international peace
and security and regarding its sovereignty and the
non-use of force. There are several Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions validating those
violations. Notwithstanding the numerous resolutions
and repeated efforts to resolve the Cyprus question
over the years, the situation has remained unchanged
since 1974, with 37 per cent of the island's territory still
under foreign occupation by Turkey.

We acknowledge the need to look to the future.
In that regard, we remain cautiously optimistic that
the current negotiation process under the auspices of
the good offices mission of the Secretary-General will
finally lead to a successful outcome on the basis of
the relevant Security Council resolutions and in line
with the principles of the European Union, of which
Cyprus is a member. If that successful outcome is to
materialize, however, all parties involved, in particular
those that constitute the source of the problem, need
to acknowledge and assume their responsibilities and
refrain from actions that constitute further violations of
international law. They must realize that unproductive
insistence on colonial era attitudes has no place in
today's world.

The Charter of the United Nations calls, inter alia,
for saving succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, reaffirming fundamental human rights, justice
and respect for international law, promoting better
standards of living and living together in peace. Those
principles should serve as our torch everywhere in the
world where problems continue to exist.

