Mr. Mardini: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to address the Security Council today.
We also thank Kuwait for its efforts to ensure that the
issue of missing persons is a topic of importance in
the Council, as well as in drafting the first resolution
on missing persons in armed conflict, adopted in June
(resolution 2474 (2019)).

The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) has chaired the Tripartite Commission since its
founding in 1991. Following the end of the Gulf War,
Iraq, Kuwait and coalition members Saudi Arabia,
France, the United Kingdom and the United States
created the Commission to search for missing persons.
Today the Commission and its Technical Subcommittee,
with the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
serving as an observer and the ICRC as the Chair,
aim to trace persons still unaccounted for and provide
answers for families.

Just over a year ago the ICRC provided the Council
with an update on the workings of the Tripartite
Commission and the Technical Subcommittee (see S/PV.8324). We reported that, since the founding of the
Tripartite Commission, we had helped repatriate more
than 75,000 citizens, civilian internees and prisoners of
war. Since 2003, once the search for burial sites began
in Iraq, and later in Kuwait, the remains of 275 persons
in Iraq and 98 persons in Kuwait have been recovered.
A total of 1,080 cases of missing persons remain open
to date within the framework of the mechanism. Of
those cases 371 were reported missing by Kuwait, 700
by Iraq and nine by Saudi Arabia.

Today I am pleased to confirm that, for the first
time in 14 years, Kuwaiti remains were recovered.
Those remains were recovered in Al-Muthanna, Iraq,
in March. The members of the mechanism, with the
support of the ICRC, have been conducting excavations
since 2003 in both Iraq and Kuwait. Prior to this year,
the latest successful exhumation of human remains
took place in 2011, which were Iraqi remains found in
Kuwait. No remains or burials sites were found for eight
years, and it has been 14 years since the most recent
recovery of Kuwaiti remains.

We had a breakthrough early this year with new
information leading to the identification of two mass
graves of alleged Kuwaiti citizens. That breakthrough
came about in part due to the recommendations and
findings from the ICRC's review project that was
completed in July 2017. The project took stock of the
situation, involved experts and forensic specialists
and proposed recommendations for future work. The
review project report and its recommendations were
adopted by the Tripartite Commission in December
2018 and have since been used to guide desk- and field-
based work deployed to make progress in the search
and recovery of further remains of missing persons.

Witness information, analysis of satellite imagery
and several previous exploration missions led us to
Samawah in Al-Muthanna governorate. That is where
the breakthrough happened and where human remains
were exhumed in March. In August the Iraqi authorities
handed over 46 boxes and two bags containing those
remains, which are currently being processed by
the Kuwaiti authorities at their national forensic
laboratories. It is a time-consuming process that is
expected to last into next year. If a match is found, the
remains will be returned to their families.

This year, with the support of the ICRC, the human
rights directorate of the Iraqi Ministry of Defence
carried out further extensive exploration and excavation
missions across the southern deserts of Iraq. Based
on new and previously available witness information,
comparisons with archival records and analyses of
satellite imagery, several exploration and excavation
missions were carried out in the governorates of
Karbala, Dhi Qar and Al-Anbar, in addition to those in
Al-Muthanna. Unfortunately, no human remains were
found in the former three locations.

There is a lesson to be learned in this breakthrough.
The wounds of the missing are deep and long-lasting.
When persons go missing, their absence affects the
family, the community and the society as a whole. To
solve these cases takes time, patience and cooperation
among Governments, humanitarian organizations
and the families of the missing. But, most important,
work on missing persons requires perseverance and
determination. It can take years of work to uncover
answers and address the cases of the missing. Each one
of those individuals is important. We have to stay the
course on each one, no matter the time or commitment
it might take.

The Tripartite Mechanism hopes to continue
identifying further remains in future. The members of
the Mechanism agreed to update existing protocols for
the transfer of human remains between Iraq and Kuwait
to bring them in line with the respective domestic legal

frameworks and best practices. Field missions are being
organized by Iraq regularly to explore and excavate
sites of interest. Other members of the Mechanism,
namely, the United Kingdom, France and the United
States, have made significant efforts to provide relevant
information in the hope that further research will help
identify more grave sites in Iraq and Kuwait.

As Chair of the Tripartite Commission, the ICRC is
committed to upholding the right of families to receive
answers about the fate of their missing loved ones. To
that end, we shall spare no effort in searching for and
recovering human remains wherever conflict or other
situations of violence might have left an open wound.
We hope that Member States willjoin us on this mission
by upholding their obligation under international law to
prevent people from going missing in the first place and
by clarifying the fates of those who have.

