Mr. Nambiar (India): Mr. President, at the
outset, I would like to congratulate you for your
initiative in holding this open meeting on the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait. We have just concluded a
lengthy debate in the General Assembly on the issue of
the Security Council's report and on its reform and
restructuring. One of the issues raised by a large
number of speakers at that debate pertained to the
desire to see greater transparency in the functioning of
the Council and in the relationship between the Council
and the general membership of the Organization. The
decision to hold an open meeting to discuss an issue of
considerable import to the larger membership of this
Organization addresses this concern directly and is
therefore both opportune and timely.

India has a vital interest and high stakes in the
peace and prosperity of the Gulf region. Our relations
with this region have developed as a result of centuries
of deep historical, cultural, religious and economic
contacts. Today, approximately 4 million Indians reside
in the Gulf region. In Iraq itself, we had substantial
trade interests and projects which were affected after
1991. Under the "oil-for-food" programme, India is a
significant exporter. Developments in the region thus
affect India.

India had welcomed the remarks made by the
President of the United States during the debate in the
General Assembly on 12 September 2002 indicating
that the United States would work with the Security
Council for the necessary resolutions on Iraq. We had
also welcomed the resumption of diplomatic efforts
under the auspices of the United Nations to try to end
the impasse on inspections.

During the debate in the General Assembly, many
leaders emphasized that adherence to the multilateral
system is an indispensable imperative for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Secretary-General, too, in his address to the General
Assembly, had stressed this point and had conveyed
that, while Article 51 of the Charter provides States the
right of self-defence, if attacked, when it came to
addressing the broader threats to international peace
and security, there was no substitute for the unique
legitimacy provided by the United Nations. In
contemplating the use of force, the question of
legitimacy and the international rule of law are
important. Twelve years ago, faced with a case of
aggression, the Member States showed their
willingness to authorize action under the authority of
the Security Council. These were reflected in Security
Council resolutions 686 (1991) and 687 (1991) of
1991. Without such authority, any support for a
campaign would not be forthcoming.

India recognizes the desire of the international
community to see full compliance by Iraq with all
relevant United Nations resolutions, including those
relating to the repatriation of Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and to the return of all Kuwaiti property.
Such a desire cannot, however, justify any unilateral
action against Iraq without the agreement of the United
Nations. We are of the View that given the current
configuration of circumstances, any undermining of the
territorial integrity of Iraq could have unforeseen and
destructive geopolitical implications that could extend
even beyond the region.

While saying that, we recognize that it has been
four years since the most recent United Nations
inspections in Iraq took place. The need for an update
to tighten the inspection regime and sort out "loose
ends" was recently elucidated by the Executive
Director of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission, Mr. Hans Blix. If the
Security Council were to see the need to review the
situation and lay down fresh guidelines for the
weapons inspectors to go into Iraq, India would be
supportive of that process. However, before deciding
on a new mandate it would be important for the
Council to reflect on the objective of such an exercise.
The purpose of any such action should be to achieve
disarmament in Iraq as laid down in the relevant
resolutions.

In ensuring this objective, the proposals
concerning the inspection regime have to be
commensurate with the task at hand - that is,
inspections must be designed to enforce the elimination
of weapons of mass destruction in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the Council. Some of the
proposals being advanced pertaining to the role and
presence of particular Council members in inspections,
extra-territorial interviews of Iraqi nationals and the
use of United Nations armed guards to accompany
inspectors would seem unprecedented and could attract
adverse public attention internationally. We believe that
the conditions attached to any new resolutions, and the
modalities of their implementation, should not be such
as to make them unworkable or effectively to invite
their rejection.

Some speakers in the General Assembly debate
on the Security Council have made reference to the
exclusivity claimed by the five permanent members in
the context of recent deliberations and contemplated
actions with respect to Iraq. Our View is that such a
narrow base for decision-making can only detract from
the unity and cohesion that must be generated and
sustained on an issue so grave in nature and of such
magnitude.

India believes that while there may be a rationale
for a tightened inspections regime, there is an equally
compelling case for the creation of an enabling
environment for compliance with the relevant
resolutions. Such a step has been envisaged in Security
Council resolutions themselves - and I refer in this
context to section D of resolution 1284 (1999). We
believe that sanctions against Iraq should be lifted in
tandem with full and effective compliance by Iraq with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We also
believe that sanctions should not have an adverse
humanitarian impact on the lives of ordinary Iraqi
citizens.

In conclusion, I wish to join a large number of
other delegations that have expressed themselves on
this subject, and to reiterate that the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a State are inviolable. Any action
to limit these attributes can be taken only under the
express provisions enshrined in Chapter VII of the
Charter.

It is therefore of the utmost importance that all
possible alternatives that can help avoid recourse to
military action be actively explored under United
Nations auspices. Every effort must be made to ensure
that peace and stability are maintained in the region,
for what we do could well represent a defining moment
in the way relations among States are ordered. There
should be no precipitate action that adversely affects
the interests of the countries of the region or of
countries which have vital stakes in the region. The
action of the Council must not only possess legitimacy;
it must also be seen to possess legitimacy. For our part,
we believe that the urgent task as a first step is to
facilitate the return of inspectors to Iraq. The Council
should fashion its approach with this basic task in
mind.

