Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate the Netherlands on its successful
presidency of the Security Council this month.

I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect, which consists of 50 member States and the
European Union and is co-chaired this year by Italy, in
the framework of a split term with the Netherlands and
the State of Qatar.

The Group would like to thank the Kingdom of
the Netherlands for bringing the very important issue
of peacekeeping to the forefront of discussions in the
Council. I would also like to express my gratitude
to the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Director of the
non-governmental organization Groupe de recherche,
d'etude et de formation femme-action for their very
useful and important briefings.

This is the first time that the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect has made a statement in an
open debate in the Security Council. While it is clear
that protecting civilians is the primary responsibility
of Governments, the protection of civilians has
become a central element of many peacekeeping
missions' mandates, as we have heard. United Nations
peacekeeping missions often have a broad range
of mechanisms aimed at supporting and assisting
States in strengthening the protection of civilians,
rebuilding communities and creating the conditions
for sustainable peace. Many missions have been given
mandates pertaining to the rule of law in order to help
ensure accountability for atrocity crimes, including
by strengthening national capacities and supporting
national, hybrid and international courts and justice
mechanisms. Against that backdrop, the Group of
Friends would like to stress the following three points.

First, threats of violence against civilians should
inform planning and decision-making in peacekeeping
operations. Strengthening the links between threat-
based assessments, planning and decision-making can
enable stronger mandate implementation and strengthen
the protection of civilians.

Secondly, the States Members of the United Nations
and the Secretariat should enable United Nations
peacekeeping operations to improve their analytical
skills by providing them with adequate tools that can
help identify threats as they emerge. Better awareness
of emerging threats can result in an improved ability to
respond effectively before a situation escalates. In that
context, tools such as the United Nations Framework
of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes can help to analyse
conditions that may increase the likelihood of atroUnited
Nations Logocities or trigger their commission. We
recognize and encourage the important role of women
generally and female peacekeepers in particular in
the prevention of atrocity crimes, as active actors in
the areas of early warning, promoting cooperation,
capacity-building and creating more cohesive and
inclusive societies.

Lastly, the effective implementation of
peacekeeping mandates requires a shared responsibility
among all stakeholders to support efforts to deliver
peace and security, including partnerships with regional
organizations and arrangements, as appropriate, and
enhanced partnerships among United Nations entities.
As we have seen all over the world, regional and
subregional arrangements can play a key role in leading
international responses to mass atrocities. We hope that
through this forum we can identify strategies that can
protect men, women and children more effectively and
help implement our joint commitment to protecting and
promoting human rights, including as embodied in the
concept of the responsibility to protect.

I would now like to make some additional remarks
in my national capacity.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the European Union and the statement made
earlier by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security.

I would once again like to emphasize that
the protection of civilians, conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace have become
the fundamental concepts for peacekeeping today,
and they represent the way forward. The Kigali and
Vancouver Principles should be fully implemented
by peace operations, particularly with regard to child
protection. We also encourage the Secretary-General to
advance his vision of a peace continuum in which our
primary goal must be the quest for political solutions.
And we support an enhanced role for the Peacebuilding
Support Office in integrating peace and security with
development and human rights. In that regard, we
believe that the police component can play a crucial
role in facilitating the transition from peacekeeping to
more robust development assistance and peacebuilding,
as is noted in resolution 2382 (2017), which we helped
to adopt last year.

The African Union Mission in Somalia and the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel are successful
examples of cooperation with regional organizations.
They also confirm that we need enhanced strategic
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in order to ensure effective and cost-
efficient peace operations and strengthen African
capabilities in that area. We are in favour of the use of
United Nations-assessed contributions for African-led
peace operations, provided that appropriate standards
for troop quality, financial transparency, human rights
compliance, conduct and discipline are met.

Italy is one of the most generous contributors to
the peacekeeping budget and the leading contributor
of Blue Helmets in the Group of Western and other
States. As a troop-contributing country, we are very
concerned about peacekeepers' safety and security.
We consider the report of Lieutenant General Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz, and its action plan, as well
as the independent mission reviews, to be timely and
helpful measures.

Technology is key to increasing the safety and
security of peacekeepers. The use of unmanned
aerial vehicles in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has provided the Mission with enhanced
situational awareness and played a key role in providing
safety and security for peacekeepers as well as
protection for civilians and humanitarian actors.

Training is also crucial to the effective
implementation of mandates. Peacekeepers need
specific training in order to do their job better. That
is why the pledges for peacekeeping that Italy has
made this year include a series of training courses
developed by the Security Force Assistance Centre
and Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units
in Vicenza. I would also like to briefly mention Italy
and Bangladesh's creation of the Group of Friends of
the Management of the Environmental Impact of Field
Missions Throughout Their Life Cycle. Nor should we
forget logistics. Peacekeeping operations' capacity to
deliver on and fulfil their mandates is closely related
to the speed of their deployment and the operational
effectiveness of field missions. Italy fully supports
the United Nations Global Service Centre in Brindisi.
It is an essential hub providing logistical support to
peacekeeping missions around the world.

Lastly, ensuring a more inclusive involvement of
troop- and police-contributing countries when the
Security Council is reviewing mandates is key to
reviving a sense of shared responsibility. The Council
should always remember to give due consideration to
the views of those countries, whose men and women are
risking their lives on the ground and to whom I would
like to pay the most respectful tribute, especially those
who have lost their lives over the years.

