Mr. Eteffa (Ethiopia): Allow me first to
congratulate you most warmly, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of March. Your proven wisdom and rich
diplomatic experience are great assets which the Council
is privileged to enjoy under your leadership.

It is also my privilege and duty, as the representative
of the current Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), to pay a special tribute to you for your
well-known contributions to the alleviation of the social,
economic and political problems affecting our continent.
The initiative you took to bring the situation of Somalia
to the Council's attention, making the present debate on
Somalia possible, will undoubtedly have a significant
impact on efforts to mitigate the suffering of the Somali
people and to resolve the crisis in that troubled land.

I also pay a special tribute, Mr.President, to your
predecessor, Ambassador Albright of the United States,
for her excellent leadership last month.

The United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM. II) was withdrawn from Somalia one year
ago. At that time, the Security Council issued a
presidential statement expressing its conviction that only
a genuinely representative and broad-based approach to
reconciliation would bring about a lasting political
settlement and allow for the re-emergence of civil society
in Somalia. The Council also supported the View of the
Secretary-General that Somalia should not be abandoned
by the United Nations, which is continuing to help the
Somali people achieve a political settlement to the
conflict in their country and at the same time provide
humanitarian and other support.

We thank the Secretary-General for his continued
interest in the people of Somalia and for his efforts to
make a difference. Today, five years after the crisis in
Somalia began, and one year after the withdrawal of
UNOSOM. II, the situation in Somalia still remains a
matter of grave concern. The country is without a central
government, and hostility among the various factions
continues. The humanitarian situation has also become an
additional source of frustration and anxiety as a result of
the uncompromising attitude of Somali faction leaders and
increasing insecurity in the country.
 

This rather unfortunate state of affairs has undoubtedly
hindered progress towards achieving lasting peace and
national reconciliation - and the formation of a broad-
based government at the national and regional levels. The
prevalence of peace and stability in Somalia depends solely
on the willingness and determination of all the warring
factions and their leaders to pursue an all-encompassing
national reconciliation process leading to the establishment
of a broad-based government.

In spite of the widely felt and urgent need for a broad-
based government, Somalia is far from achieving that goal.
The obstacles are clear. They are essentially those people
whose role is crucial for peace in the country, who claim
that there is already a broad-based government in Somalia
and that the national reconciliation process has been
completed. To say the least, this attitude does not help the
process of moving towards peace and stability in Somalia.

It has been and continues to be our View that the
Somali people and the various factions should assume the
primary responsibility for resolving the crisis in their
country through peaceful means. It is our hope that the
Somali faction leaders will assume this task in a responsible
manner so as to ensure the re-emergence of civil society in
Somalia. Notwithstanding the primary responsibility of the
Somali people and their leaders in deciding the fate and the
future of their country, the international community should
closely monitor the situation in Somalia and contribute its
share in assisting and encouraging all-inclusive national
reconciliation that would eventually lead to the formation
of a broad-based national government.

We note that many Somali leaders have requested the
United Nations to support their peace initiatives financially
and logistically. It was pointed out in the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia, submitted to the Security
Council on 19 January 1996, that the United Nations has no
resources for such support. While we understand the
frustration and disappointment of the international
community over the lack of progress in the process of
national reconciliation, we also wish to stress that every
opportunity must be seized to encourage and promote
dialogue and to maintain contact with all Somali factions to
this end.

At the regional level, in spite of the many challenges
and difficulties, the Organization of African Unity has
continued to closely monitor developments in Somalia. In
May 1995 the OAU dispatched a Tripartite Mission to
assess the situation and to encourage dialogue and direct
contact with the various factions in that country.

The current Chairman of the OAU, the Prime
Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia,
His Excellency Mr. Meles Zenawi - who also has a
special OAU mandate on Somalia - and the Secretary-
General of the OAU have continued their efforts aimed at
finding a lasting solution to the crisis in Somalia. The
sixty-third session of the OAU Council of Ministers, held
in Addis Ababa from 26 to 28 February 1996, also
considered the report of the OAU Secretary-General on
Somalia and adopted a resolution, in which it, inter alia,
expressed concern over the situation in Somalia and over
the stalemate in the process of national reconciliation and
the establishment of a broad-based national authority. It
called upon the Somali leaders to recognize the need to
act urgently to promote dialogue aimed at the
establishment of a broad-based national government and
at the pursuit of national reconciliation. Furthermore, the
OAU Council of Ministers appealed to OAU member
States and the international community as a whole to
provide humanitarian assistance in view of the worsening
humanitarian situation in Somalia.

As noted repeatedly, there is no doubt that the
solution of the persistent crisis in Somalia lies in the
hands of Somalia's own people and leaders. However,
much to our disappointment, no progress has been made
thus far in ending the crisis in that country; the latest
reports even suggest the possibility of a further
deterioration of the security and humanitarian situation.
One of the things we should recognize is the fact that the
bulk of the people of Somalia share the frustration of the
international community. The tormented and victimized
Somalis want peace and stability more than anything else.
It is only those who benefit from the miseries of the
people of Somalia that reap the fruit of the Violence and
the constant instability. This is why Somalia should not
be abandoned.

In these circumstances it has become ever more
evident that the international community should closely
monitor the situation in Somalia. For understandable
reasons, the international community cannot be as
passionate as it was two or three years ago. It seems that
we are getting used to the agony of the people.
Unfortunately, this only worsens the plight of the
Somalis. We should never get used to the suffering of
children, women and the elderly or to the degradation of
any human being anywhere or at any time. The Somali
people need and deserve peace with justice. It goes
without saying that we should not run out of passion and
compassion. In spite of our disappointments, we should
not conclude that the conflict in Somalia is the sole

 

business of the Somali people. Every effort should be made
to help them achieve national reconciliation and lasting
peace.

In this context, we wish to emphasize the important
role that the United Nations and the OAU and other
regional organizations can play in the search for a solution
to the conflict in Somalia. It also goes without saying that
the efforts of these organizations should be coordinated.

Serious attention should also be given to the
humanitarian situation in Somalia, to mitigate the suffering
of the people and prevent another major humanitarian crisis
like those we have witnessed in the past. In this respect, we
note with appreciation the efforts made thus far by United
Nations agencies and their international and Somali partners
to deliver substantial emergency and rehabilitation
assistance, and we urge them to continue and expand their
humanitarian activities in Somalia.

Finally, we would like to reiterate that humanitarian
intervention should continue to alleviate the plight of the
Somalis. But a lasting solution will be found only if we are
able to address the root causes of the conflict in a holistic
way which will enable us to break the vicious circle.

