Mr. Baali (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
Allow me first, Sir, to convey the warm fraternal
congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. I am especially pleased that a worthy son of
Africa has the honour of guiding the work of the Security
Council at a time when, more than ever before, it is seized
with questions of great importance for our continent. I am
convinced that the Council will benefit greatly from your
experience and from your wise and enlightened guidance.
Might I also express the gratitude of my delegation to
the Permanent Representative of Japan, who led the Council
with competence and wisdom last month. At the same time
I would like to convey to the Chinese delegation all our
sympathy, our deep feelings and our solidarity in the wake
of the passing of Mr. Deng Xiaoping, who has left his mark
on the history of China and of all the world's peoples.
Finally, I should like to bid welcome to Vice-Minister
Carneiro of Angola and to tell him how much we
appreciated the important statement he made this morning.

The peace process in Angola is once again
deadlocked. The indications provided by the Secretary-
General in his recent report on the situation in Angola do
not, unfortunately, inspire optimism, because of the great
uncertainty for the future for peace in that brotherly
country.

Encouraging progress in the implementation of the
military aspects of the Lusaka accords, rather than
clearing the way for irreversible progress towards national
reconciliation, has, unfortunately, been somewhat eroded,
as is shown by the ever-increasing number of UNITA
soldiers deserting the quartering areas. This is a
disquieting phenomenon, and a source of serious concern
for the international community and for the Angolan
people, who have a legitimate aspiration to live in peace
and stability and to devote their energy to the tasks of
development and nation-building.

The Secretary-General in his latest report to the
Security Council, and the Security Council in its
presidential statement of 30 January, clearly identify
UNITA and its leadership as being responsible for the
difficulties encountered in the process to implement all
aspects of the Lusaka accords. The UNITA leadership is,
without question, responsible before history, before the
international community and before the Angolan people,
for sabotaging the peace process, in which the
international community has invested considerable effort,
and for which it has made enormous sacrifices. In this
context I should like to pay sincere tribute to the work
and devotion of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III), in which my country has the
honour to participate.

The obstructionist attitude and the delaying tactics of
the UNITA leadership have clearly prevented the peace
process from making new progress towards national
reconciliation, in particular with regard to the
establishment of a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation and the conclusion of an arrangement
relating to the status of the leader of UNITA in keeping
with the conclusions of the Lusaka accords. I should like
here to welcome the positive attitude, open-mindedness
and spirit of national understanding of the Angolan
Government, which have made possible the progress that
we have seen to date.

Recent developments in the peace process in Angola
require the international community to treat the matter
with a greater sense of urgency. The Security Council in
particular must not allow the peace process to become
hostage to the delaying tactics of the UNITA leadership.
It is clear that, rather than merely sending a political
message to the UNITA leaders, the Council must shoulder
its responsibilities by taking the necessary steps to make
them adopt a more constructive attitude and honour the
commitments they undertook in the framework of the
Lusaka accords and the arrangements that they concluded

 

with the Angolan Government, with the assistance and
backing of UNAVEM.

In renewing the mandate of UNAVEM. III for a final
period, the Security Council is counting on the sincerity,
political will and good faith of UNITA. Events have shown
that the UNITA leadership seems to be gambling on
wearing down the international community to make it
disengage, either to shatter the dynamic for peace in the
country or to obtain extravagant advantages with regard to
arrangements already concluded.

At this crucial time for peace in Angola, the
international community and the Security Council are called
on to demonstrate, on the one hand, their solidarity with the
people of Angola, and, on the other, a firm attitude towards
UNITA. The international community cannot and must not
become discouraged. Peace must be given another chance,
because the future of the Angolan people is at stake, and,
indeed, the security and peace of the continent of Africa.

