Mr. Al-Hamadi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to commend your efforts, Sir, as
President of the Security Council for this month. We
do appreciate your convening of this important open
debate. We also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and his efforts.

The ongoing participation of the State of Qatar in
this open debate reflects its desire to establish peace and
stability in the Middle East, not only because it belongs
to that important region, but also because it believes
in peaceful solutions to crises, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. We
also believe in the important role that could be played by
the Security Council in addressing the various serious
challenges in the region. The existing challenges and
crises cast their shadows first and foremost over the
peoples and States of the region. However, they have
consequences that spill over. Therefore, it is important
to pool the efforts of the international community to
achieve security, stability and crises settlement in
the region. The Middle East issue is paramount in
that regard.

The concerning and escalating events in the Gaza
Strip remind the international community of the
urgent importance of finding a permanent, fair and
comprehensive settlement to the Palestinian question, as
that is the only guarantee against the recurrence of such
crises and their serious humanitarian consequences.
The general framework of this settlement is very well
known to all. It should take place according to the
agreed criteria and the Arab Peace Initiative, which
ensure the peaceful coexistence of both parties based
on the two-State solution and the establishment of a
viable Palestinian State within the 1967 borders and
East Jerusalem as its capital. It is also important to
respect the legal status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, pursuant
to relevant Council resolutions, and to put an end to
the Israeli occupation of all occupied Arab territories,
including the Syrian Golan and occupied Lebanese
territories. Moreover, all settlement activities must
immediately cease, refugees should be allowed the right
of return and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people must be restored.

The State of Qatar reaffirms its support for any
course that would contribute to relaunching negotiations
between the Palestinians and the Israelis that might
lead to the desired peace. The State of Qatar has always
lived up to its responsibilities and will continue to
make every effort to achieve peace in the Middle East
and create an environment conducive to such peace.
We call for everyone to make sincere efforts to that
end. We must also ensure that no actions are taken to
undermine such efforts. In that regard, we strongly
condemn the nation-State law enacted by Israel, as well
as the provocative actions taken against religious holy
places, including breaking into the Al-Aqsa Mosque. It
goes without saying that the deteriorating humanitarian
situation, due to the ongoing siege of the Gaza Strip,
undermines all international efforts for peace.

The Syrian crisis still casts its serious consequences
on peace and security in the region and worldwide,
because it is one ofthe biggest humanitarian catastrophes
with the refugee crisis in modern history. That is why
the State of Qatar reiterates that there is no alternative
to a political solution for the Syrian crisis, based on
Geneva communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) and relevant Council resolutions that respond to
the legitimate aspirations for security and stability of
the brotherly Syrian people and preserve the national
and regional integrity of Syria.

More than one year has elapsed since the artificial
Gulf crisis, not to mention the unfair blockade and
the unilateral arbitrary measures imposed on the
State of Qatar, which run counter to the fundamental
principles of international law and international
instruments pertaining to human rights, as well as
the rules of international relations. I also note the
adverse consequences it may yet have on regional and
international cooperation for maintaining international
peace and security.

The State of Qatar has always adopted a policy of
maintaining peace and security, along with dialogue
and the peaceful resolution of disputes and differences,
as well as constructive collective efforts and good-
neighbourly relations. That is why we reiterate our call
for finding an end to this crisis through the mediation
of His Highness the Amir of our sisterly Kuwait.

Since the onset of the crisis, the State of Qatar has
reiterated that it is committed to addressing it within
the framework of international law and the relevant
bilateral and international conventions and mechanisms.

In this regard, we welcome yesterday's decision of the
International Court of Justice approving the request
by the State of Qatar to take interim measures against
the United Arab Emirates in a case related to the
discriminatory and illegal treatment of Qatari citizens
by the United Arab Emirates. The Court's decision
involves a request to the United Arab Emirates to
guarantee the reunification of Qatari families, grant
affected Qatari students an opportunity to finish
their studies in the United Arab Emirates or get their
educational records, and ensure access by affected
Qataris to courts and judicial bodies in the United
Arab Emirates.

The perilous repercussions of this artificial crisis
and its direct impact on international peace and security
call for the immediate lifting of the unilateral, arbitrary
and illegal procedures and unfair blockade against the
State of Qatar and for maintaining dialogue as a means
to put an end to any dispute.

In conclusion, we reiterate that the State of Qatar
will continue to be an effective and supportive partner
of the international efforts aimed at bringing peace
to the Middle East through the peaceful settlement
of disputes, which would contribute to fulfilling the
Security Council's objectives in terms of maintaining
international peace and security.

