Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): 1 would like to thank the
Japanese presidency for organizing this important open
debate on addressing complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security. We should also
commend you, Mr. President, for the very useful
concept note you have made available to help us frame
the debate (S/2017/1016, annex). The note points to the
need to focus not only on the root causes of conflict,
but also on the drivers of those conflicts, despite the
fact that it is often difficult to pinpoint how climate
change, for example, represents a root cause or driver
of conflict. All the same, Ijust wanted to underscore
how useful we found the concept note.

We all know that some of the challenges and threats
to international peace and security that we face today
are not only different from those that we have faced in
the past, they have also become much more complex
and difficult. The Secretary-General mentioned many
of them in his statement today. That is why we cannot
address these contemporary challenges with old ways of
thinking and tools designed for different challenges and
threats at a different time. There is a need for new ways

of thinking and innovative tools to respond to emerging
challenges to international peace and security.

There can be no doubt that these challenges require
States to strengthen their cooperation with one another
more than ever before. The various recent studies
and reviews have made valuable recommendations
in that regard. What has emerged clearly from them
is the importance of adopting a comprehensive,
holistic approach to addressing the peace and security
challenges of our time, not only by promoting greater
coherence in the United Nations system, but also by
strengthening key strategic partnerships with regional
organizations to prevent, manage and resolve conflict
and crisis situations in different parts of the world.
The partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union is a good example of that. We can hope
that cooperation between the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council can be
strengthened far more.

We understand, of course, that the relevant
recommendations of the studies and reviews will
have a meaningful impact only if they are translated
into concrete action. That cannot happen without
comprehensive reform, which is why we support the
ongoing reform process that the Secretary-General
has embarked on to make the United Nations fit for
purpose. The fact that the proposed reform of the United
Nations peace and security pillar prioritizes prevention
and sustaining peace as its overarching goals is very
welcome. We believe that it will give the Organization
the framework it needs to organize a more coordinated,
coherent response to the root causes of violence and
conflict in various States of conflict.

We hope that the results of the reforms will enable
the United Nations to develop an integrated capability
for comprehensively tackling contemporary security
challenges such as the Organization's fragmentation
by minimizing overlapping structures and mandates,
ensuring greater transparency and accountability and
improving the planning and budgetary processes.
We believe that this will ultimately strengthen the
Organization's ability to deliver effective and efficient
operational support in the field, including on complex
security terrains where peacekeeping and special
political missions are deployed.

Considering the strong links between the security,
development and human rights pillars of the United
Nations, there is no question that ensuring an
integrated, coherent and cross-pillar approach within
the Organization is critical to addressing the factors
driving conflicts. However, that should not necessarily
mean that we should change the established mandates,
functions and funding sources of the various United
Nations entities. That is particularly relevant in the
light of the clear division oflabour between the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, as stipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations, and we note the assurances given by
the Secretary-General in that regard.

We believe that the Security Council is not best
suited to discussing matters that fall under the Charter-
mandated responsibilities of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. Nor does
it have the relevant expertise to make appropriate
recommendations and decisions on issues related to
social, economic and environmental matters. It should
therefore deal only with issues that come directly under
its mandate. Indeed, there are a great many critical
issues in today's world that do not receive the attention
they should from the Council. One clear example is
respect for the principles of international law governing
relations between States, since so many conflicts have
resulted from a failure to respect them.

In conclusion, to go back to the essential issue of
United Nations reform in the area of peace and security,
I should stress that the most important task at hand is to
avoid fragmentation within the United Nations system
and to promote the synergy and complementarity of the
three pillars of the United Nations, in order to ensure
a continuum in its policies so that they are relevant
and effective in addressing the challenges of our
times. That is what the ongoing reform process should
be all about. We very much hope that it will help to
reorient the restructuring of the Organization towards
that objective.

