The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Kuwait, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion
Without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Otaibi
(Kuwait) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
fourteenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 14 of resolution 1284 (1999) in document
S/2003/1161.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council today heard a
briefing from Ambassador Yuri Vorontsov, the
Secretary-General's High-Level Coordinator, on
the fourteenth report of the Secretary-General in
accordance with paragraph 14 of Security Council
resolution 1284 (1999).

"The Security Council expressed its full
support towards Ambassador Vorontsov and for
his tireless efforts on the issues of Kuwaiti and
third country nationals and the return of all
Kuwaiti property. The Security Council agreed
that his mandate should continue in accordance
with paragraph 14 of resolution 1284 (1999).
"The Security Council shared the views
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report.
The Security Council has strongly condemned the
killing of Kuwaiti and third country nationals by
the previous Iraqi regime in violation of
international law, especially the removal from
Kuwait of civilian men and women, their
execution in cold blood in remote sites in Iraq
and a decade long cover-up of the truth. The
Security Council expressed its strong hope that
those responsible for these horrendous crimes
should be brought to justice.

"The Security Council expressed its deep
condolences to all of the families of the Kuwaiti
and third country nationals. The Security Council
expressed its continuing concern for the plight of
the families of those persons whose whereabouts
are still unknown.

"The Security Council stressed the
importance of the work of the Coalition
Provisional Authority, International Committee of
the Red Cross, the Tripartite Commission and its
Technical Subcommittee and called on all parties
concerned to continue to work towards a
satisfactory solution to all of the outstanding
humanitarian aspects covered by Ambassador
Vorontsov's mandate.

"The Security Council expressed its deep
regret that Kuwaiti property, including its
national archives, has not yet been returned to
Kuwait and encouraged the Coalition Provisional
Authority and other parties concerned to continue
their commitment to the search for, and return of,
all Kuwaiti properties and archives, in accordance
with paragraph 6 of resolution 1483 (2003). The
Security Council agreed to continue to keep
Ambassador Vorontsov's mandate under review
and looked forward to receiving his next report."

This statement will be published as a Security
Council document under the symbol S/PRST/2003/28.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at I p.m.

