Mr. Verbeke (Belgium): For the sake of brevity, I
would like only to highlight the main elements
contained in the comprehensive briefing that the
2
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) has prepared for the Council, which is annexed
to my statement and will be posted on the Committee's
website.

At the outset, I would like to recall the two
important resolutions for the work of the 1267
Committee that the Council adopted at the end of
December 2006.

First, we have resolution 1730 (2006), requesting
the Secretary-General to establish a focal point within
the Secretariat to receive delisting requests. Petitioners
seeking to submit requests for delisting can now do so,
either through this focal point or through their State of
residence or citizenship. The focal point has been
operational since 29 March 2007.

Secondly, we have resolution 1735 (2006), which
reiterates the existing mandatory measures: an assets
freeze, a travel ban and an arms embargo. In addition,
it extends the period for the consideration of
notifications of humanitarian exemptions to the assets
freeze and renews the mandate of the Monitoring
Team. When I took over the chairmanship of the
Committee last January from Ambassador Mayoral of
Argentina, the first task was to incorporate these new
provisions into the guidelines. We did that on
12 February.

I would like, in that respect, to inform the
Council that in July, the Committee intends to conduct
a stocktaking exercise and evaluate the implementation
of both resolution 1730 (2006) and resolution 1735
(2006).

Improving the quality of the Consolidated List is
a core assignment of our Committee, as both the
completeness and the accuracy of the List are essential
for effective implementation of the sanctions measures.
As requested by the Council, the Committee pays
particular attention to the Taliban section of the List,
but we are nonetheless always looking to improve the
entire List. In that regard, States are encouraged to
submit the names of individuals and entities that
should be included on the List because of their
association with Al-Qaida and/or the Taliban, as well
as additional and updated information relating to the
names already figuring on the List.

In the context of last November's thorough
revision of the guidelines on listing, a new mechanism
was created to allow for a review of listed individuals
07-35274
or entities. As this is a novel area in our work, the
Committee first had to agree on a procedure to govern
the new review mechanism, reflected in the well-
known paragraph 6 (i) of the guidelines. That issue was
discussed in March, agreement was reached, and the
review process is already under way.

Improvement of the Committee's guidelines is
another area that the Committee is exploring in order to
make its working methods and procedures as
transparent as possible. In particular, the Committee
plans to consider the provisions related to basic
expenses under paragraph 1 (a) of resolution 1452
(2002), on humanitarian exemptions to the assets-
freeze measure.

Visits to States, principally by the Monitoring
Team, are a very important means of dialogue with
States with a view to effective implementation of the
sanctions measures. Since the 28 September 2006
briefing, the experts of the Monitoring Team have
travelled to no fewer than 16 countries, including two
joint visits with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and have participated
in several international conferences. As Chairman, I am
planning to make two trips this year, as is the custom:
one in early July and the other during the fall. I would
like to take this opportunity to renew the outstanding
invitation to Member States to come to the Committee
and have more in-depth discussions on sanctions-
related issues.

Cooperation with international and regional
organizations, including Interpol, has continued to be
very beneficial for our work, and the Monitoring Team
is encouraged to carry on its efforts in that regard. It
goes without saying that the fact of this continued joint
briefing to the Council with the Chairs of the other two
Committees highlights the 1267 Committee's strong
partnership and coordination with those Committees
and their group of experts.

Before concluding, I would like to say that the
Committee is currently working intensively on further
improving its website in order to enhance its
communication and outreach with the broader
membership. In the coming weeks, the Committee will
also discuss issues such as the criminal misuse of the
Internet, the involvement of the private sector in the
implementation of sanctions - especially as regards
the freezing of assets - and possible instances of
non-compliance.
07-35274

Let me close my remarks by thanking the
Monitoring Team for its excellent work and highly
professional assistance, as well as all the members of
the Committee for their very constructive cooperation.

