Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to congratulate South Africa on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.

The Charter of the United Nations assigns
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security to the Security
Council. In Chapter VIII of the Charter, the founding
Members of the United Nations, with great vision, also
encouraged the development of pacific settlement of
local disputes through regional arrangements. World
peace and development are now faced with many
difficulties and challenges, and it is imperative to
respond to them forcefully and collectively at the
national, regional and international levels. In a rapidly
changing world, strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations will both
promote multilateralism and boost the international
collective security mechanism.

Without stability and development in Africa,
global peace and prosperity are out of the question.
The African Union is Africa's largest and most
representative regional organization, and it has gained
widespread international recognition for the
increasingly important role it plays in maintaining
peace and stability and resolving conflicts in Africa.
The good cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union over the past few years has become
a model for observing the United Nations Charter.
China salutes the determination, courage and
dedication of African countries and of the African
Union.

The twenty-first century should witness the end
of disturbances and poverty in Africa. It should be a
century in which Africa fully controls its own destiny
and attains peace, stability and development.
Achieving that goal requires a common effort by the
international community and Africa and a closer
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union.

China supports the forging of a stable partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
The Security Council bears a responsibility it cannot
shirk regarding the maintenance of peace and security
in Africa, while the African Union has a deep grasp of
African issues. The two should strengthen their
coordination and form synergies on the basis of
equality, mutual respect, complementarity and mutual
benefit, drawing on each other's strengths. In our View,
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union should be based on a predictable,
sustainable and flexible framework. While maintaining
its authority, the Security Council should give priority
to supporting the key role of the African Union in
resolving regional conflicts and should give full
consideration to the views of the African Union.

We hope that the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur will complete its
deployment at an early date and will begin operations.
We also support the United Nations taking over the
African Union peacekeeping operation in Somalia.

China holds the View that the United Nations
should engage in multifaceted cooperation with the
African Union in wide-ranging areas. Such cooperation
should encompass the three pillars of security,
development and human rights. It should be pursued
throughout the process of confidence-building, conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
sustainable development. Promoting a culture of
reconciliation and attaining the Millennium
Development Goals will not only help eradicate the
root causes of conflict, but also provide a solid basis
for ensuring peace in Africa. We support the United
Nations and its Security Council, Peacebuilding
Commission, Secretariat and other organs in building
and strengthening coordination and consultation
mechanisms with the African Union at various levels.

China calls for high priority to be given to
capacity-building in pursuing cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. The African
Union's efforts to make peace are constrained by a lack
of human resources, material supplies and funding. The
United Nations and the international community should
respond positively to the African Union's legitimate
requests and should work creatively to deliver on their
promises and translate their pledges into action. We
hope that the United Nations will strengthen its
cooperation with the African Union in personnel
training, institution-building, the sharing of
information and experience, resource management and
logistical assistance; these are fields in which the
United Nations has rich experience.

The Declaration on Enhancing UN-AU
Cooperation: Framework for the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme for the African Union (A/61/630, annex) should be fully implemented, and the United
Nations should play a key role in pooling other
international assistance.

Finally, I wish to thank South Africa for
preparing a draft Security Council resolution on the
issue we are discussing today. China fully supports the
draft resolution.

