Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): In January 1997, thanks to African mediation led
by the President of Gabon, El Hadj Omar Bongo, the
Bangui Agreements were signed. These Agreements put
an end to the turmoil which had swept the Central
African Republic in 1996 and laid the foundation for
national reconciliation. So that the Agreements would not
be a dead letter, six African countries, with the approval
of all parties in the Central African Republic and the
support of France, deployed the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB). This force was entrusted with ensuring security
in Bangui and supervising the collection of weapons that
had been dispersed during the three rebellions of 1996.
This presence in the field was supplemented by the
continued and effective action of the International Follow-
up Committee, presided over by General Toure, former
President of the Republic of Mali, which was mandated
at the political level with following up and assisting in the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements.

In August 1997, the Security Council endorsed the
conduct of operations performed by MISAB. On three
occasions since, it has extended that endorsement as an
expression of its appreciation of MISAB's work. After 14
months, MISAB had, in everyone's opinion, done
tremendous work. Today, it has almost completed its
mandate. Calm reigns in Bangui and the greater share of
weapons has been recovered. As the Secretary-General
notes in his report, "significant progress has been made"
[S/1998/148, para. 15] in the political and economic
spheres and in security.

However, according to the Secretary-General,

"much remains to be done to ensure a lasting peace
in the Central African Republic". [ibid., para. 16]

The situation is not yet irreversible. That is why the
intervention of the United Nations will make it possible
to maintain security and stability in Bangui and to
consolidate the progress achieved by MISAB and the
International Follow-up Committee. The mandate which
the Security Council is entrusting to the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA) and
to the Secretary-General's Special Representative, who
will lead it, is an appropriate response to this need. This
mandate goes beyond MISAB's capabilities. It involves
continuing to monitor and promote the implementation of
reforms and of commitments made by the Central African
authorities, including those related to the country's
economic recovery. It involves contributing to ensuring

 

security and stability in Bangui, strengthening the capacity
of the Central African police force to maintain order,
assisting in the preparation of legislative elections scheduled
for August/September 1998 and, finally, encouraging and
coordinating the action of United Nations agencies and
programmes. The achievement of these objectives well
justifies recourse to the competence and authority of a
United Nations operation headed by a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

The draft resolution to be adopted by the Council, the
initiative for which came from the African members of the
Council, particularly Kenya, defines an initial mandate of
three months. This mandate could be extended if it appears
that the efforts made by the United Nations are met by the
efforts the Central African authorities will have to make in
order to fully implement the Bangui Agreements and the
National Reconciliation Pact and to undertake the necessary
reforms to improve the political, economic, financial and
social situation of the country. The authorities of the
Central African Republic have already made a commitment
in that regard, as was stated by the representative of Kenya,
and we welcome this.

At a time when the Secretary-General is preparing to
submit his report on Africa requested by the Security
Council in a ministerial meeting in September 1997, the
establishment of MINURCA seems to us to illustrate the
desire of the United Nations to maintain a presence in
Africa in the service of peace and security. This United
Nations operation is naturally, and as a priority, an African
operation.

The six countries participating in MISAB will keep
their contingents in MINURCA, and two other African
States, Cote d'Ivoire and Ghana, will join them; I think they
deserve our appreciation. This demonstrates that there is no
need to distinguish between the necessary strengthening of
African peacekeeping capacity, in which we are all
interested, and the role of the United Nations: they
complement and reinforce each other. Similarly, the
legitimate commitment of African countries to the
maintenance of peace in Africa does not exclude the
support that States from outside the region or outside the
continent can render in their desire also to contribute, in the
field, to peace and stability in Africa. In this spirit, my
country, for its part, will continue, as it has for more than
a year in the case of MISAB, to provide logistical and
medical support to MINURCA.

MINURCA, finally, is a good example of preventive
diplomacy. These days - when preventive diplomacy is a
subject of much debate, and quite rightly so; when it is
lamented, sometimes very solemnly and emotionally that
the community of nations has not intervened quickly
enough in the past to quell conflicts - we should rejoice
in the fact that after MISAB has done its job, MINURCA
will come, in turn, to offer the Central African Republic
and the subregion the opportunity to make solid and
lasting their refound peace and security.

