Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting of the
Security Council and for everything that Italy does
so effectively in tackling the security challenges in
the Mediterranean region. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing on this complex set
of issues before us.

It is all too often that we discuss the consequences
of instability in the Council, and thpse consequences
form some of the biggest threats that we all face:
terrorism, modern slavery, disorderly mass migration
and so on. I welcome this opportunity today to dig
beneath the surface and to consider the root causes, as
previous speakers have done.

In many cases, it is a Government's lack of
respect for human rights - whether through inability
or unwillingness - that leads to conflict, mass
displacement and abuses. Terrorists and armed criminal
groups have exploited the breakdown of State authority
in parts of the Sahel and in Libya to exploit people. They
use their profits from smuggling, human trafficking
and modern slavery to fuel even more instability,
which in turn damages the economic opportunities
that Governments should be offering their citizens.
That then further fuels displacement, terrorism and
modern slavery. Today I want to set out what the United
Kingdom is doing to address those root causes.

First of all, we are totally committed to the
Secretary-General's agenda of preventing conflict.
We are substantially increasing our investments in
fragile States to strengthen their resilience; we have
implemented new early-warning and early action
systems that help prevent, mitigate and resolve conflict.
And we will continue to help the United Nations to
strengthen its conflict prevention, mediation and
peacebuilding capacity.

The United Kingdom is proud to be the largest
donor to the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund and,
in the Security Council, as penholder on Libya, we are
at the forefront of international efforts to help Libya
overcome the political and security challenges that it
faces. As we discussed yesterday (see S/PV.8104), an
inclusive political deal negotiated within the framework
of the Libyan Political Agreement is the best way of
stabilizing Libya and tackling the criminal networks
that make it a transit route for illegal migration.
It is also the best way of developing Libya's huge
economic potential.

We recognize that we need to reduce the space in
which terrorists and people traffickers thrive across the
region. It is those groups that too often also cause, or
exploit, instability and conflict. We therefore encourage
all Member States to work with the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Security Council-
mandated Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to
develop their capabilities to counter terrorism and to
prevent violent extremism.

Secondly, the United Kingdom recognizes that,
when crises become protracted, refugees who have
no choice but to flee their homes cannot return. It
is therefore vital that education and employment
opportunities and support be available to displaced
people and to the communities that host them. We are
proud to give 0.7 per cent of our gross national income
to development. Over half of all the spending of the
Department for International Development is to fragile
States and regions. In addition, we have helped to
secure new World Bank funding for countries that host
refugees. At the London conference on Syria in 2016,
the United Kingdom pioneered, and secured agreement
for, historic compacts between Governments of the
region and the international community to deliver
education, create jobs and provide opportunities for
refugees and local people.

Thirdly, the United Kingdom is stepping up its
efforts to combat the criminal networks that profit from
modern slavery: for instance, we are developing an
ambitious programme in Nigeria, from where so many
migrants across the Mediterranean flow. We all have a
role to play to rid the world of this terrible scourge. Let
us all invest in livelihoods and development in source
countries, and let us all work with border authorities
and intelligence agencies to tackle human trafficking
and smuggling networks.

In conclusion, our ultimate goal is a well-governed,
stable region where human rights are respected.
That will ensure we have a stronger platform to fight
international terrorism, to end modern slavery and to
achieve safe and well-managed migration, bringing
value to the destination country and country of origin
while also ensuring the safety of those travelling.
Given the scale of the challenges ahead, we owe it to
all involved to work together and address all of those
issues simultaneously.

