Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to warmly welcome you, Under Secretary
Simmonds, and congratulate you and your delegation
on the United Kingdom's presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to welcome the
other ministers present here today and the Special
Representative and Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General. I thank His Excellency Mr. Goncalves
Lourenco, Minister of Defence of Angola; Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
and Mrs. Mary Robinson, former Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to the Great Lakes Region, for their
statements.

Chad welcomes the consensus achieved by
Congolese political leaders that enabled the Government
to implement certain commitments it had undertaken
vis-a-vis the international community, namely, the
establishment of an inclusive national political dialogue,
the establishment of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, the publication of a partial election
calendar and the application of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.

We would also like to congratulate the Government
for the efforts it has made to implement the
decentralization policy requested by the United Nations.
The Administration now has a presence throughout
the eastern provinces of the country, which had long
been occupied by armed groups. The Administration's
presence in the eastern provinces is not only tangible
proof of the effective restoration of State authority in
that part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but
has also brought about a climate of peace and trust with
positive results, in particular the voluntary and gradual
return of refugees and displaced persons in accordance
with international humanitarian law and international
refugee law. Its presence also serves to guarantee the
protection of civilians, the fight against sexual violence
and the strengthening of infrastructure development,
agricultural activities and rural access to electricity
to promote microindustry, microfinance, professional
training and regional integration.

However, we condemn the delays that can be seen
in terms of security-sector reform, even if significant
progress has been made in training and providing
equipment to the police. In that regard, we encourage the
Government to pursue the processes of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security-sector
reform in order to ensure sustainable peace and security
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We welcome the cooperation between the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO) and the
Government that enabled the weakening and elimination
of several armed groups, namely, the Mouvement du 23
mars (M-23), the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda (FDLR), the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF)
and the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et
souverain (APCLS).

Furthermore, we are concerned by the activities
of certain armed elements, who continue to foster a
climate of insecurity in the eastern part of the country
and in Katanga. The threats against the headquarters
of the United Nations country team and MONUSCO in
North Kivu are a perfect example of that.

Chad welcomes the initiative by the Congolese
Government to uphold human dignity and justice
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to
fight effectively against impunity. In that vein, three
laws that would create specialized mixed chambers to
adjudicate cases relating to crimes of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes are currently being
examined by the National Assembly. Dozens of court
registrars and judicial clerks have also been deployed
in the military and peace tribunals.

Chad is pleased by the progress made by
MONUSCO in implementing its mandate and with
respect to its own reconfiguration and the handover
of its tasks to the United Nations country team. We
welcome the contribution made by MONUSCO to the
release of 21 children, including four girls, from armed
groups and their return to their respective families.
Chad urges the United Nations, the African Union, the
countries of the Great Lakes region and other partners
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to support the
Congolese Government in completing the process of
normalization and peacebuilding in that country.
To conclude, allow me to pay well-deserved tribute
to Mrs. Mary Robinson for the excellent work she
has carried out during her mission and to wish every
success to her successor, Mr. Said Djinnit.

