Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to welcome the
opportunity to express, under your presidency, Japan's
view on the situation in Afghanistan. First of all, we
listened with concern to the useful update on the situation
by Mr. Prendergast this morning. Japan shares deep
concern over the latest developments in Afghanistan,
where fighting among the factions has intensified. Many
innocent people have been forcibly displaced from their
homes. The suffering of the civilian population is
increasing, and there is concern among neighbouring
countries about the influx of refugees.

Japan supports the valuable efforts being made by
the Secretary-General and particularly by his Special
Envoy, Ambassador Brahimi, and also at the field level
by the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan to
restore peace to Afghanistan. We recognize that they are
working under extremely difficult conditions, and we
encourage them to continue their worthy endeavours.

Japan also supports efforts made by the "six plus
two" group, composed of six States bordering on
Afghanistan as well as the Russian Federation and the
United States. Japan wishes to assure this group of its
support and hopes that their work will complement that of
the United Nations and will promote an early settlement
of the conflict.

Today, I would like to highlight four elements that
are essential for the achievement of a peaceful settlement
of this prolonged conflict.

First, the Taliban and the other Afghan warring
factions should immediately cease fighting and resume
their dialogue. A durable peace can be achieved only
through peaceful means. The ultimate objective of such
dialogue should be to establish a broad-based,
multi-ethnic and representative government, which will
ensure a durable peace throughout the country. Japan, for
its part, stands ready to have a meeting among the
Afghan factions in which they can engage in dialogue in
neutral surroundings, with the aim of finding a way
towards achieving national reconciliation.

Secondly, the countries concerned, and neighbouring
countries in particular, should not interfere in the conflict,
but rather should use their influence on the warring
factions to bring the fighting to an end. It is especially

 

important that all concerned stop extending military
assistance or supplying arms to the warring factions, and
that they refrain from any other measures that could
prolong the hostilities.

Thirdly, in view of the tremendous human suffering of
the Afghan people, the international community should
continue to provide humanitarian assistance in Afghanistan.
The Afghan support group is performing a crucial service
by exploring ways to ensure the effective and efficient
implementation of such assistance. Recognizing the need to
strengthen the work of the Afghan support group, Japan
hosted its fourth meeting in Tokyo last December.

In the past ten years Japan has provided humanitarian
assistance amounting to $400 million through United
Nations agencies and programmes. Most recently, Japan
funded the Afghan refugee repatriation programme in the
Azra and Tizin districts which contributed to the
repatriation of 20,000 refugees. We will continue to commit
ourselves to extending such support in the future.

Fourthly, the international community should convey
to the leaders of the Afghan factions and people a clear
message of the commitment of the international
community to extend assistance for their efforts to
reconstruct the country once the fighting ceases, peace is
restored and a broad-based, multi-ethnic and representative
Government is formed. The establishment of such a
Government is indispensable for the provision of assistance
by the international community for the reconstruction of the
country.

We hope that such a strong commitment by the
international community will encourage the factions to
come to the negotiating table and settle the dispute
peacefully. Japan, for its part, renews its own commitment
and readiness to contribute to the reconstruction of
Afghanistan once peace has been restored.

The path to peace in Afghanistan is a long and
arduous one. I believe, however, that the international
community must continue to strive to convince the parties
to the conflict that the achievement of a durable peace will
be to their benefit, and Japan will continue to play an active
role in this endeavour.

