The President (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative
of Tunisia.

I wish to welcome once again Mr. Joao Bernardo
de Miranda, Minister for External Relations of Angola,
and express our happiness at having him among us,
especially since I met him several times before in the
context of the excellent bilateral relations between our
two countries.

I wish to express my delegation's appreciation to
Ambassador Ryan, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864
(1993) concerning Angola, for his commendable efforts
to secure effective sanctions against UNITA. We also
welcome Ambassador Larrain and the other members
of the Monitoring Mechanism, and we commend the
efforts Ambassador Larrain is deploying as Chairman
of the Monitoring Mechanism established pursuant to
resolution 1295 (2000).

The armed conflict in Angola, which has gone on
for a long time, is a source of grave concern to the
entire international community. We emphasize once
again that the responsibility for the continuation ofthis
conflict in Angola lies squarely with UNITA and its
leader, Mr. Jonas Savimbi, who refuses to fulfil his
commitments and obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol and to comply with Security Council
demands. The effective implementation of the
sanctions imposed on UNITA is one of the most
important means of deterring UNITA and forcing it to
desist from threatening peace and security in Angola
and the entire region. Indeed, the efforts deployed by
the Monitoring Mechanism enriched the first report
submitted by the Panel of Experts to the Security
Council on 15 March 2000, particularly because of its
depth, solid arguments and compelling evidence of
sanctions violations. The Monitoring Mechanism, in
our view, whose mandate is set forth in relevant
Security Council resolutions, supports the objective
that the international community is seeking in this
regard.

In this regard, we welcome the emphasis placed
by the Mechanism on important aspects related to the
comprehensive strategy to destroy UNITA supply
sources, to limit its movements through its
representation abroad and its network of officials and
associates, to put an end to its acquisition of illicit arms
and to pursue and dismantle all the international
networks that, directly or indirectly, support UNITA
efforts.

Regarding illicit trade in diamonds, one of the
primary sources of funds for the rebel movements in
Africa in general and in Angola, Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular, we
welcome the Monitoring Mechanism's
recommendations relative to strengthening the
certificate-of-origin system, which could focus on all
international dealers in this field, emphasizing not only
the secondary channels, which are no less dangerous in
this respect, but also the States and the transnational
corporations that deal in this commodity and that we
think stand to benefit most from the illicit trade in
diamonds.
The sensitive nature of the Monitoring
Mechanism mandate obliges the Mechanism to
carefully analyse and sift the information it receives,
especially information related to the imposition of
sanctions on States. In this respect, we believe it is
essential to fully investigate and consider the principle
of premeditation in the violation of sanctions imposed
against UNITA. This, in our view, is important,
particularly since most of the African countries cited in
the report lack adequate means to monitor diamonds
and arms in transit to UNITA.

Therefore, even though these countries remain
fully committed to abiding by the sanctions imposed
against UNITA, they may find themselves technically
unequipped to deal with the diamond and weapon
smugglers, whose capabilities exceed those of many
countries, particularly African countries. It therefore
becomes essential that we initiate dialogue with these
countries to help them develop their monitoring
capabilities so that we can limit UNITA's activity. This
is a collective responsibility and a primary objective.

My delegation expresses its hope that the
publication of some elements contained in the report
will raise the awareness of the international community
so that it will fully comply with the sanctions,
implement them effectively and deploy all efforts to
close all loopholes and to break supply lines to UNITA,
in order to force it to fulfil its commitments.

In conclusion, on behalf of my country, I wish to
welcome the Mechanism's recommendation that the
Security Council consider the establishment of a
system that will enable the continuation of sanctions
monitoring. We also welcome the extension of the
mandate ofthe Mechanism for three more months.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list, whom I
welcome once more on behalf of the members of the
Security Council, is Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda,
Minister for External Relations of Angola.

