President Abbas (spoke in Arabic): Seventy
years have passed since Palestine's Nakba took place
and resulted in 6 million Palestinian refugees who
continue to suffer from the cruelty of their exile and
loss of human security and to wander the world after
losing their peaceful, stable lives in their towns and
villages. They are part of the 13 million Palestinians
whose country has not yet been recognized as a full
State Member of the United Nations, despite numerous
international resolutions affirming their right to self-
determination and to statehood in their national lands.

We are the heirs of the Canaanites who lived
in Palestine more than 5,000 years ago and whose
descendants have remained there to this day. Our great
people remain rooted in their land. The Palestinian
people have built their own cities and homeland and
made contributions to humankind and civilization that
the whole world has witnessed. They have established
institutions, schools, hospitals, cultural institutions,
theatres, libraries, publishing houses, newspapers,
economic institutions, businesses and banks with wide
regional and international influence. All of that existed
before and after the Balfour Declaration, issued by the
British Government in 1917, according to which people
who had no ownership in Palestine gave it away to people
who had no right to it. The British Government bears
responsibility for the disastrous consequences inflicted
on our Palestinian people as a result of the Declaration.

Since then, and despite the fact that our people
have remained under occupation, they have continued
their journey, building and developing their country
after the establishment of the Palestinian Authority
in 1994. Their national institutions are recognized by
international bodies for their merit and their work,
which is founded on the principles of the rule of law,
transparency and accountability, and the empowerment
of women and young people in an environment of
tolerance, cultural coexistence and non-discrimination.
We have continued to strive to unite our people and
our land, and to ensure that we are ruled by a single
authority with a single body of law and united armed
forces, and we are determined to ensure that we convene
parliamentary and presidential elections.

Our belief is deeply rooted and our position on the
use of arms of any kind is clear. Not only do we call
for all nuclear weapons to be dismantled, we are also
opposed to conventional weapons, which have caused
such terrible destruction in many States in our region
and all over the world. That is why we are committed
to fostering a culture of peace, rejecting violence,
pursuing sustainable development and building schools,
hospitals, industrial zones, farms and technological
production rather than establishing arms factories and
buying tanks and fighter jets. We want our people to
be able to live in freedom and dignity, far from wars
and destruction. For the price of one tank we can build
a school and provide protection for a generation. For
the price of one fighterjet we can build a hospital and
provide health protection for a generation much better
than all weapons, conventional or otherwise.

What we really want for our people is a life of
freedom and dignity, far from wars and destruction and
from terrorism and extremism, which we are working
relentlessly to combat all over the globe. Because of
this, we signed 83 security agreements with 83 States
around the world, including the United States, Russia
and other countries of Europe and elsewhere. We have
only one goal in signing these agreements, and that is
fighting terrorism regardless of its grounds or origin.

Why are we here today? After a long journey and
tremendous efforts to establish a political path based
on negotiations that could lead to a comprehensive
and just peace, we participated, as everyone knows,
in the Madrid Conference in 1991 and signed the Oslo
Accords in 1993. We were alone there with the Israelis
and the Norwegians. The Oslo Accords affirmed the
importance of arriving at a settlement of final-status
issues before 1999. Unfortunately, that has not yet come
to pass. We must therefore ask why it has still not been
achieved although it is stipulated in the Accords.

Despite this, we have persisted in our efforts to
achieve peace. We engaged in dialogue at Wye River
and Camp David. We participated in the Annapolis
Conference. We held talks with the former Israeli
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert for eight months. We met
with Prime Minister Netanyahu in the presence of the
former United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
and George Mitchell. We also accepted President
Putin's invitation to meet with Mr. Netanyahu in
Moscow, but he has regrettably evaded participating in
such a meeting. We further engaged in all earnest with
former Secretary of State John Kerry, but the Israeli
Government's intransigence resulted in the failure of
all of those efforts. After that, how can it be said that
it is we who reject negotiations? We have never refused
any invitation to participate in negotiations. We believe
that negotiations are the only path towards peace. How
then could we reject them? Believe me, that it is untrue.

Confronted with deadlock, we have neither given
up nor lost hope. We have come to the United Nations
believing in the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, which affirm, inter alia, the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
force, as well as a people's right to self-determination.
Article 40 and 41 reaffirm that. Nobody has held
Israel accountable for occupying our territories in
1948. The Charter affirms the right of people to self-
determination, which is among the issues the Council
will address tomorrow. We continue to engage with all
of its bodies in our quest to end the occupation of our
land and people. Yet, in spite of all of that, the United
Nations has failed to implement its relevant resolutions
to date. Is that possible? Is it logical that despite the
adoption of 705 General Assembly resolutions since
1948 and 86 Security Council resolutions in our
favour, none of them have been implemented? Where
are those resolutions that the Council has adopted?
There are 86 Security Council resolutions, with no
result whatsoever.

Is it logical for Israel to neglect its obligation to
implement General Assembly resolutions 181 (II) and
194 (III)? As members of the Council may recall,
those two resolutions were sine qua non for Israel to be
accepted to the United Nations. Moshe Sharett wrote a
letter indicating that he was ready to implement them.
Owing to that commitment, Israel was accepted at the
United Nations. However, up to this very day, those two
resolutions have yet to be implemented.

Israel is acting as a State above the law. It has
transformed the occupation from a temporary situation,
as per international law, into a situation of a permanent
colonization of territories that it has occupied since
1967. It was supposed to be temporary; however, it
has become permanent. It colonized all the areas that
it wanted, including Jerusalem, which the Council
considers an occupied territory. How can that happen?
Israel has shut all doors on the two-State solution on
the basis of the 1967 borders. Here, we reaffirm, as we
have done in the past, that our problem is not with the
followers ofJudaism. Judaism is a monotheistic religion,
as are Christianity and Islam. Our problem is only
with the occupiers of our land and those denying our
independence and freedom, regardless of their religion.

We met with the President of the United States,
Mr. Donald Trump, four times in 2017. We expressed
our absolute readiness to reach a historic peace
agreement. We repeatedly reaffirmed our position,
in accordance with international law, relevant United
Nations resolutions and the two-State solution on the
basis of the 1967 borders. Yet that Administration has
not clarified its position. Is it for the two-State solution
or the one-State solution?

Subsequently, in a dangerous and unprecedented
manner, the United States Administration made
an unlawful decision, which was rejected by the
international community, that resulted in taking the
issue of Jerusalem off the table, without reason. It
decided to recognize the city of Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel and transfer its Embassy there. It did
so ignoring that East Jerusalem is part of Palestinian
territory. It has been occupied since 1967, and it is our
capital, which we wish to be a city that is open to all
the faithful of the monotheistic religions, especially
Christianity, Judaism and Islam.

It is also strange that the United States still includes
the Palestine Liberation Organization on its terrorist
list and imposes restrictions on the work of our Mission
in Washington, DC, under the pretext of congressional
decisions since 1987. Despite our bilateral relations
with the United States, including assistance, visits and
broad relations, we come to discover that the United
States Congress believes we are terrorists. If the
Congress believes we are terrorists, how is it that the
Administration has relations with us? How is it visiting
us? How is it providing assistance to us? How can it
help terrorists?

Most recently, the United States has decided to
punish Palestinian refugees by reducing its contributions
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, in spite of the facts
that it supported the Agency's establishment and that
it endorsed the Arab Peace Initiative, which calls for a
just and agreed solution for the plight ofthe refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

The United States has contradicted itself. It
has contradicted its own commitments and violated
international law and relevant resolutions with its
decision regarding Jerusalem. No country alone can
resolve a regional or international conflict without
the participation of other international partners.
Therefore, it is our view and position that in order to
solve the Palestinian question it is essential to establish
a multilateral international mechanism that emanates
from an international conference and is in line with
international law and relevant resolutions.

Faced with Israel's policies and practices in
violation of international law and its non-compliance
and non-implementation of agreements signed, the
Palestinian Central Council - the highest Palestinian
parliamentary body - decided several weeks ago to
re-evaluate the relationship with Israel. Indeed, we will
review the relationship, given that we have become
an Authority without authority and the occupation
has come at a great cost. We are even working for the
occupation as its employees. We say that Israel must
uphold its obligations as an occupying Power.

We do not oppose Israel shouldering its
responsibility in the West Bank and Gaza because the
situation is unbearable and unacceptable. In spite of
that, before the Council I reaffirm our commitment to
maintaining our institutions and achievements, which
we have carried out on the ground in Palestine and
in the international arena, thanks to the assistance of
those present. We are determined to remain committed
to the political, diplomatic and legal path, rejecting
all violence and through political negotiations which
we have never rejected. We will continue to extend
our hands to make peace and work to end the Israeli
occupation, based on the two-State solution along 1967
borders - two States recognized by the international
community - pursuant to the relevant resolutions.

We want to realize our national aspirations, but at
the same time we will continue to oppose any attempt
from any side to impose solutions undermining that
legitimacy. We will reject with all our capabilities
any solution that violates that legitimacy. We have
been granted the status of non-member observer State
by the General Assembly, based upon which we have
become State party to 105 international institutions,
organizations and treaties. We have been recognized
by 138 States. All of that has further strengthened the
status of the State of Palestine, which continues to seek
other recognition by the remaining States in the world,
including States Members on the Council that have
yet to recognize the State of Palestine despite the fact
that the recognition of the State of Palestine does not
negate negotiations. Recognition does not run contrary
to negotiations, but rather promotes them. I therefore
call on members that have yet to recognize the State
of Palestine to do so. In the future, we will intensify
our work to achieve admission as a full Member to
the United Nations. We came to the Council once with
that proposition and were rejected. We will come again
and ensure international protection for our people. We
will come to the Council and appeal for international
protection for our people.

The situation is no longer tolerable. Members
have listened to the Special Coordinator's briefing and
we hope that they will support our efforts to secure
the rights of 13 million Palestinians yearning for an
independent homeland, just like every people in the
world, and for their State to assume its rightful place
within the international community. I say 13 million
Palestinians, and others say that that is not true. But
we are 13 million Palestinians whether we live within
Palestine or in other countries.

I have come here before the Council in the middle
of the deadlock in the peace process caused by the
decision of the United States regarding Jerusalem,
Israel's ongoing illegal settlement activities, its failure
to respect signed agreements and its violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the latest of which
is resolution 2334 (2016). We are here because of the
Palestinians' desire to continue working constructively
and courageously. We have the full courage to say yes
and the full courage to say no, based on international
law and our interests. We are here to build a culture of
peace, reject violence, save the principle of two-States,
obtain security and stability for all, restore hope to
our people and the peoples of the region, and find a
way out of the impasse which we face. We believe in
comprehensive, lasting andjust peace that is a strategic
choice for the sake of future generations in our region,
Palestinians and Israelis. I will therefore inform the
Council about our plan.

First, we call for the convening of an international
peace conference by mid-2018, predicated upon
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, with broad international participation,
including the two parties concerned and regional and
international stakeholders, foremost among them the
permanent members of the Security Council and the
Quartet in the same framework as the Paris conference
for peace in the Middle East and the conference to be
held in Moscow in line with resolution 1850 (2009).
We have accordingly called for the convening of an
international peace conference. The conference in
Paris was attended by representatives of 74 States.
The outcome of the proposed conference should be
as follows.

First, during its initial phase, it should result in the
admission of the State of Palestine as a full Member to
the United Nations, and that is what we deserve. Does
not everyone here believe that we deserve to become
a full Member? Why not? We call on the Security
Council to realize that goal. We will come to the
Council in line with General Assembly resolution 67/19
of 29 November 2012, adopted by 138 votes in favour
to 9 votes against, which supported our non-member
observer status and guaranteed international protection
for our people based on the 1967 borders and the
exchange of recognition between the State of Palestine
and the State of Israel along the 1967 borders.

During its second phase, it should result in
the establishment of an international multilateral
mechanism that will facilitate negotiations between
the two parties to resolve all permanent status issues
as defined by the Oslo Accords, including the issues
of Jerusalem, borders, security, settlements, refugees,
water and prisoners, which are to be resolved through
an agreement by both parties. Negotiations leading up
to that mechanism must be based on international law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions, and their
outcome must be implemented within a corresponding
time frame with assurances for that implementation.
Negotiations are to be defined by a timeline at the end
of which the agreement must be implemented. That is
the only way to resolve this long-standing conflict in
the Middle East.

Secondly, during negotiations all parties must
refrain from unilateral actions, in particular any
that would prejudice the outcome of final-status
negotiations, as set forth in the Oslo Accords of
1993. The Oslo Accords stipulate that all parties must
refrain from unilateral actions, and, above all, any
solution must be based on the cessation of settlement
activities in territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, and the suspension of the decision
concerning Jerusalem and the transfer of the United
States embassy there, as that hinders negotiations. The
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980), mustbe respected.
At the same time, the State of Palestine would refrain
from joining other organizations, as we have already
committed ourselves to 22 international organizations
out of 500 organizations and treaties. We have
committed and we continue to be committed, although
unfortunately the United States Administration did not
fulfil its commitment.

Thirdly, the Arab Peace Initiative must be
implemented, as adopted from A to Z, and not from
Z to A. According to the Initiative, the Palestinian
question must be resolved first, before regional issues.
That was affirmed by the Initiative and all Arabs and
Muslims who have adopted it. When the Initiative is
implemented and the State of Palestine is recognized
within the 1967 borders and the problem is resolved,
all Arabs and Muslims will be ready to recognize the
State of Israel - all Arabs and Muslims. All 57 Arab
and Muslim countries will recognize the State ofIsrael
and normalize relations with it, as stipulated in several
Arab summit agreements. In that regard, we reiterate
the terms of reference for any upcoming negotiations,
including, first, respect for international law.

We are a State, but that has not yet been recognized.
Nevertheless, we affirm respect for international law
and relevant resolutions. First, all resolutions must be
respected, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
through to resolution 2334 (2016), and the Arab Peace
Initiative, along with signed agreements. Secondly,
we affirm the preservation of the principle of the two-
State solution, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the
State of Palestine, living side by side with the State of
Israel in peace and security on the basis of4 June 1967
borders. We reject partial solutions and a State that has
provisional borders. Thirdly, we call for the acceptance
of minimal land swaps that are equal in value and size
in accordance with an agreement between the two
parties. Fourthly, East Jerusalem is the capital of the
State of Palestine, open to the members of the three
religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam. Fifthly,
we must ensure the security of the two States, without
undermining their independence and sovereignty, by
the presence on the borders of a third party to protect
Israel and Palestine. Sovereignty is key and cannot
be preserved by hegemony and control. Sixthly, there
must be a just and agreed upon solution for Palestine
refugees on the basis of resolution 194 (III) and in
accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative. Pending
a just solution for the refugees' issue, there must be
ongoing international commitment and support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Who will take
care of the 6 million educated refugees if assistance
for them is halted? If assistance is stopped, they will
become terrorists or refugees in Europe. That is the

alternative unless the Council continues to support
UNWRA until the crisis ends.

We stand ready to embark on the longest journey
to the farthest places in the world in order to enjoy our
rights but we will not move one inch if we are asked
to forsake those rights. We will present any agreement
reached with Israel to a general referendum among
our people so as to respect democracy and strengthen
legitimacy. We believe we are a democratic and civilized
people. Therefore we will call a general referendum.

We knocked on your door today, Mr. President,
as you preside over the highest international body
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace
and security. We have presented our vision for peace.
It is hoped that it will be received with wisdom and
justice. We are ready to begin negotiations immediately
in order to achieve the freedom and independence of
our people - just like all other nations - as well as
peace and security for everyone in our region and the
world, so that future generations can enjoy the benefits
of that peace, following the enormous sacrifices made
by our people. We recognize our martyrs, the wounded
and the prisoners.

The Security Council is the highest world body.
After the Council, we leave our issue in the hands of the
Almighty, until Judgment Day. Ifjustice for all people
cannot be attained here, where should we go? Please
help us. We call upon the Council to help us so that we
do not commit acts that are at variance with our beliefs,
those of the Council and the world.

