Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
abstained in the voting on resolution 2449 (2018), on
renewing the measures for cross-border humanitarian
assistance to Syria. China is of the view that the
international community's humanitarian operations in
Syria should abide by the principles that guide United
Nations humanitarian work, as well as the relevant
provisions of international law, and scrupulously
observe the principles of neutrality, impartiality and
non-politicization, while ensuring that all areas in
Syria and all the populations in need receive timely
assistance.

Cross-border humanitarian assistance is a special
modality in response to a set of specific circumstances.
It must fully respect the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and proceed in
strict compliance with Council resolutions. Actions in
that regard should be place under the oversight of the
United Nations, throughout the process, with greater
transparency. Due attention should be accorded to
better coordination with the Syrian Government and
practical measures should be put in place to prevent aid
supplies from falling into the hands of terrorist groups.

China commends Kuwait and Sweden in their
roles as co-penholders for taking on board proposals
from Member States regarding, inter alia, facilitating
the return of Syrian refugees, improving humanitarian
operations and adjusting the frequency of the reports
of the Secretary-General over the course of the
consultations on the resolution. Nevertheless, some
legitimate concerns raised by members of the Council,
including China, were not fully taken on board. There
was still room for improvement. We are of the view
that members of the Council should continue to engage
on that in order to maximize consensus. I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for
his briefing. I also commend the efforts of the United
Nations and other actors concerned to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria. China would like
to share its perspective on the current humanitarian
situation in Syria,
First, the humanitarian situation in Syria on the
whole remains grim. Many years of conflict have
left Syria with a large number of people in need of
assistance, crumbling infrastructure, food insecurity
and a lack of medical care and medicines. The situation
in northern and eastern Syria remains fragile. Civilian
casualties persist, as does the risk of a deterioration of
the humanitarian situation.

Secondly, the security situation in Syria is stable on
the whole. Conflict has eased throughout the country,
which provides a more favourable environment for
improving the humanitarian situation. Although the
implementation of the memorandum on the stabilization
of the situation in the Idlib de-escalation zone has
encountered some obstacles, the implementation process
is by and large under way. The Astana dialogue at the
end of November continues to play an important role
in the continued improvement of the Syrian situation
and in consolidating the cessation of hostilities and
violence.

Thirdly, Syria's humanitarian assistance needs
have recently changed. As the situation in some parts
of Syria improves, the number of Syrian refugees
returning from neighbouring countries such as Jordan
and Lebanon is on the rise. The projections of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees put this number at a quarter of a million in
2019. The number of internally displaced persons
returning to their homes has also steadily increased.
The restoration or reconstruction of housing and of
water, electricity, medical and educational facilities is a
basic requirement, and the removal of mines and other
explosive remnants of war is now a top priority.

In view of the current situation, the Syrian parties
should put the greater good of national destiny and
people's well-being first, respect the relevant Council
resolutions, resolve differences through dialogue and
consultation, work together to keep Syria stable, prevent
an escalation ofconflict, and continue to create enabling
conditions to ease the country's humanitarian situation.
It is incumbent upon the international community to
further increase its assistance - financial and in
kind - to the Syrian people and intensify support for the
host countries of Syrian refugees, including Lebanon,
Jordan and Turkey. At the same time, the international
community should step up its efforts to improve the
humanitarian condition of returning Syrian refugees
and internally displaced persons and create supportive
conditions, whereby they can live and work happily
in peace. Part of this process is the reconstruction of
infrastructure.

The current situation in Syria is offering a window
of opportunity for the political settlement process.
The international community should firmly support
the role of the United Nations as the main channel
of mediation and push the Syrian parties to come to
a solution that addresses the concerns of all parties
through negotiations, based on the principle that the
process should be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned and in
accordance with Council resolution 2254 (2015). Only
by so doing can we truly ease the humanitarian woes
facing Syria once and for all, leading to a comprehensive,
just and proper settlement of the Syrian issue.

