Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. John Ging for
their briefings. Through them, allow me once again to
thank their teams on the ground, which are doing good
work in very difficult circumstances.

As there was positive news on the political front
and as we do not often have such news, I would like
to start by talking about that. We are very grateful to
Mr. De Mistura for his leadership and everything that
he has done to drive the political process forward. I
think that the recent meetings of the Astana guarantors
and the Small Group of the Global Coalition in Geneva
underline the centrality and primacy of the United
Nations Geneva process. I fully agree with the French
Ambassador about the United Nations being the
best placed to decide how to take the constitutional
committee forward and to ensure that Syrians from the
full range of political perspectives and civil society are
represented on that committee. It was very welcome to
hear what Mr. De Mistura had to say about women's
participation in particular. I thank him for referring to
the 30-per-cent minimum that we had put in our letter
with our Peruvian and Swedish colleagues. When I was
posted to the United Nations in Geneva, I in fact met
some ofthose Syrian women. They are very impressive,
energetic and, for the most part, secular, and they have

a contribution to make. That is therefore extremely
good to hear. I think that the committee represents an
important step forward in the political process.

However, as well as addressing fundamental
constitutional questions, we also believe that the process
needs to make real progress towards creating a calm,
safe and neutral environment. That will ultimately be
essential if there are ever to be free and fair elections.
We believe that we should build on emerging areas of
common ground between key international actors. For
our part, we, the United Kingdom, remain committed
to supporting the political process and a pragmatic
political settlement that brings an end to the conflict
and that also ensures regional stability. However, we
are concerned about the fact that developments such
as the recent Law Number 10 casts some doubt on
the willingness of the Syrian authorities to engage
meaningfully. When he speaks, I would be very grateful
to hear an assurance from the Syrian Ambassador about
the commitment to the political process.

I said that the political process had made some
positive steps forward recently. As the two previous
speakers pointed out, that cannot in any way be said of
the situation on the ground or of what Mr. De Mistura
calls battlefield developments and humanitarian access.
We also remain deeply concerned about the escalating
attacks by the Syrian forces, backed by Russian air
strikes, against the de-escalation zone in south-western
Syria. I completely endorse what the United States and
French representatives said about not only the risks
to life inherent in such action but also the significant
risk that it poses to regional stability and security. The
attacks are in flagrant violation of the de-escalation
agreement that was reached between Presidents Trump
and Putin in November 2017. It is disappointing for very
many reasons, but not least because it casts doubt on
the willingness of Russia to abide by its international
commitments. Ijoin France and the United States in
urging Russia to uphold the commitments under that
agreement and to ensure that the Syrian Government
abides by the ceasefire so that we can avert a further
humanitarian crisis and can make a contribution to
regional stability.

Turning to humanitarian access, we also welcome
the thorough report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/617). It is clear that the geographical space for
cross-border operations has shrunk, particularly to the
south-east of Idlib. As areas have transitioned to the
control of the Government of Syria, if I have understood
correctly, humanitarian access has decreased. Actually,
the reverse ought to be true. The fact that the areas
have come under the control of the Syrian authorities
ought to make humanitarian access easier and more
comprehensive. Again, I would therefore be very
grateful if the Syrian Ambassador, and perhaps the
Russian Ambassador, can address some of that in their
remarks, because I would really like to understand
why it is so difficult to allow humanitarian access. We
talked about that in our last round of consultations. It
is still not clear to me why there is an erratic pattern
of some United Nations personnel being allowed in but
not others and some convoys being allowed through
but not others. I therefore really hope that the Security
Council can have some more information about that so
that we can make some proper decisions about how best
we can contribute to the situation on the ground.

In that respect, I would just like to recall that
there are still 2 million Syrians living in hard-to-reach
locations across the country. "Hard to reach" makes it
sound as if one has to forge rivers or climb mountains. It
is not that sort of "hard to reach". As far as I understand
it, it is an access point. We are therefore back to the
point of needing to understand why access is quite
so difficult.

I would also like to echo what Mr. Ging said about
the attacks on health-care facilities. Those are also
unjustifiable. They are outlawed under international
law. We call for them to stop. It is not right that aid
workers should suffer in that way or that the people
of Syria should be denied the opportunity to access
medical facilities.

In sum, there are three things that the United
Kingdom wishes to call for today. We would like to hear
directly from the Syrians and the Russians about their
sincerity in engaging in the political process. We would
like to hear about the southern de-escalation zone and
what can be done to restore the ceasefire and to grant
humanitarian access. We would like to hear about the
Syrian Government's policies and practices that are
creating obstacles for vulnerable displaced people to
receive services, food and aid, return home and rebuild
their lives.

