Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My delegation would like to thank you,
Madam, for having organized this important meeting,
which is undoubtedly one of the most anticipated
events of your presidency. Your personal presence at
this meeting reaffirms your country's commitment to
the systematic management of acute international
cr1ses.

In the same vein, my delegation wishes to pay
tribute to the Secretary-General for his tireless
involvement in seeking a resolution to the Iraqi crisis,
including in this sensitive post-conflict phase. In
clearly setting the course in his very wise opening
statement this morning, he paved the way for our work
this morning. Let us recall his closing remarks:

"The challenges that await us in Iraq are
enormous. Let us all do our utmost to rise to meet
them." (S/PV.4791)

Cameroon welcomes the historic attendance at
our meeting today of representatives of the new Iraqi
interim administration. We warmly welcome them. The
establishment of the Governing Council on 13 July
marked in itself a crucial stage in Iraq's irreversible
march towards a normal political and economic
constitutional order grounded in freedom, democracy,
pluralism, reciprocal tolerance and mutual respect.

I also wish warmly to welcome the return to the
Council of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello in his capacity
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq. His appointment to that post on 27 May was a
sign of the times. It is a herald of the Security
Council's ever stronger and broader involvement in
post-conflict management.

How could it be otherwise? The situation in Iraq
remains a cause of major concern for international
peace and security, for it is still explosive domestically
and disturbing to the region. It is having an adverse
effect on the world economy and on anti-terrorism
activities. Indeed, the harmonious functioning of the
Security Council itself has been touched by it.

Cameroon wishes to congratulate the Secretary-
General on his report, submitted pursuant to paragraph
24 of resolution 1483 (2003). The report is particularly
meaningful and evocative of the Iraqi people's desires
and of what needs to be done in Iraq.

My country expresses its great appreciation to
Mr. Vieira de Mello for the high quality, detail and
lucidity of his briefing.

The report of the Secretary-General has just
reminded us that the situation in Iraq is fraught with
real challenges for all of us: the international
community, here and now; the coalition; and, above all,
the people of Iraq themselves. As the Secretary-
General notes in his report, it is up to the people of
Iraq, more than anyone else, to build their future.

My delegation welcomes the multidirectional
dialogue that the Special Representative has begun
with all the protagonists on the political, social and
economic spheres in Iraq, including the officials of the
Coalition Provisional Authority. At the very least, that
consultation will guarantee that the end of the oil-for-
food programme, on 21 November 2003, will take
place in a smooth and coherent manner, even though
the plan outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
for future United Nations projects in the northern
provinces in that regard contains some undefined
aspects.

The Secretary-General devotes a good deal of
space in his report to the prevailing insecurity in Iraq.
On behalf of the three members of the Governing
Council's delegation, Mr. Adnan Pachachi has
described in great detail the detrimental impact of
insecurity with regard to restoring essential basic
services - including water, electricity, fuel and health
and hospital infrastructure. The lack of security also
has a negative impact on the humanitarian situation, on
the distribution of food and medicines and on the
return of boys and girls to school.

A few weeks ago, during one of our recurring
discussions on Iraq, my delegation noted the close and
indisputable links that exist between taking charge of
security and managing the humanitarian situation and
Iraq's political future. We believe that it is clear that
the pretexts employed by some to spread terror, death
and desolation will simply vanish as issues of survival
are resolved. That will especially be true if we are able
to accelerate the process of having the Iraqi people
resume responsibility for the conduct of the their
affairs in the administrative, political, judicial and
economic areas. The latter aspect - namely, the
economy, which also encompasses reconstruction,
economic reform and a recovery in productive
activities, and therefore the creation of jobs - remains
the necessary precondition to any security solution or
lasting policy. The administration, the army, the police,
the oil sector and major construction projects all
represent springboards to the rapid creation of jobs.

My delegation notes the fact that the recruitment
campaign for the army began last weekend. If it is to be
effective and credible, that effort should very soon be
supplemented with a broad demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration programme. The
positive impact of such a programme on security and
economic activity is unquestionable.

Generally speaking, Cameroon agrees with the
suggestions contained in the report of the Secretary-
General regarding the urgent measures to be taken in
Iraq, as well as with the short- and medium-term
objectives to restore peace in, and sovereignty to, Iraq
so that it may be able to take charge of its own future,
in particular by managing its huge resources for the
benefit of its people, and by freely choosing its own
leaders and form of Government. The measures
envisaged pertain to transitional justice, respect for
human rights and a heightened role for women in the
political and development processes. Those seem to us
to be key concerns that deserve the full support of the
international community. With regard to the issues of
transitional justice and human rights in particular, we
believe these are key areas in which the United Nations
should play a coordinating role, given the relevant
experience it has acquired throughout the years. The
contribution of civil society organizations in that
regard would also be appropriate.

In that connection, I would like to commend Mr.
Vieira de Mello for his initiative to hold a workshop in
Baghdad three weeks ago on the subject of transitional
justice. We were pleased to note the participation in the
seminar of international experts and of representatives
of humanitarian organizations and organizations
promoting human rights. In addition, the workshop
included the participation of many Iraqis.

The Governing Council's creation of a judicial
commission was a notable decision. One wonders,
however, what will distinguish that commission from
the one created by the Coalition Provisional Authority.

My delegation would like to express its support
for the mandate and format suggested by the Secretary-
General for the future United Nations assistance
mission in Iraq. Its size of 300 persons seems to us to
be suited to the tasks envisaged. It is particularly
important that over half its personnel be drawn from
national human resources available in Iraq. That would
be a good approach to ensuring an alternative, easier
and faster takeover by Iraqis of the management of the
areas covered by the United Nations Assistance
Mission forIraq.

Nevertheless, it is clear to us that the Security
Council will first have to undertake informal
discussions about the best way for the United Nations
to make a decisive contribution to solving the thorny
issue of insecurity, which is currently having a critical
impact on everything else in Iraq. Although, as
currently projected, the Assistance Mission will not
have a military or police component, it would be
desirable for the approach selected not to close the
door to such a possibility.

We have listened attentively to the members of
the interim Governing Council through the statement
delivered by Mr. Adnan Pachachi. They have come to
thank the Security Council for its sustained and active
support in recent decades, which represent the most
difficult and trying period of their country's recent
history. Above all, they have come to the Council to
voice the hopes and expectations of the Iraqi people, as
well as to ask the Council to help the Iraqi people to
turn the page of their history prior to 8 April and to
begin a new chapter of Iraqi history in which that
country is democratic, prosperous and united in its
diversity. May their appeal be heard.

Cameroon, for its part, reaffirms its full support
for the Iraqi people. We encourage them to make Iraq
what it once was, and should never have ceased to be.
The world Iraq means water; thus Iraq is the country of
water, and therefore of life.

