Mr. Takasu (Japan): I wish to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. My thanks go as well to your
predecessor, Ambassador Amorim, for his excellent
leadership of the work of the Council last month.

I should like to express my deep appreciation for the
opportunity to present Japan's views on this important
issue. The protection of civilians in armed conflict is an
issue that transcends humanitarian concerns and
encompasses security and development problems.

As we approach the end of this century, which has
seen unprecedented levels of brutality, it is essential that the
international community strive to ensure that innocent men,
women and children are protected and do not become
victims of conflict. We must not allow ourselves to
succumb to resignation in the face of the enormity of the
problem.

The Council's deliberations on the issue of protection
of civilians in conflict situations so far demonstrate clearly
the shared recognition that the nature of armed conflict is
changing. Conflicts are taking place increasingly within
States rather than between them; it is getting more and
more difficult to draw a line between military personnel
and civilians; and more and more women and
children are becoming victims of hostilities. It is thus
imperative that effective and urgent action be taken.

My delegation listened with great interest to
suggestions made in the course of the Security Council's
deliberations and found many of them to be worthy of
further consideration. Indeed, there was a broad
convergence of views on a number of measures to be taken:
on strengthening enforcement of international humanitarian
law; on policy measures against internally displaced persons
and child soldiers; on restricting small arms and light
weapons; effective measures on mine action; and on
protection of humanitarian personnel. Some of the measures
are already starting to be implemented, but much more
needs to be done.

Japan has been contributing actively and will continue
to do so in many of these areas. To cite some examples,
Japan was the second party to ratify the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,
which finally came into force last month. Japan is a party
to the Ottawa Convention and one of the most active
partners in mine action. Japan intends to contribute about
10 billion yen, around $80 million, in five years, starting
from 1998, for mine action around the world. Japan has
been playing an active role in collaborative efforts for the
restriction of small arms and light weapons, and also for
the early establishment of the International Criminal
Court.

The basic thinking behind this approach is the
importance that Japan attaches to human security
concerns. As Prime Minister Obuchi stated recently,
human security should be ensured against menaces that
threaten the survival, daily life and dignity of human
beings. Thus, measures to protect civilians in conflict
situations are important and integral elements of human
security concerns. Japan is about to make a financial
contribution to the United Nations to support activities in
this area.

Let me now refer to some of the particularly
important points which I believe should be highlighted.

My first point relates to the importance of preserving
traditional humanitarian norms of behaviour, together with
full compliance with relevant international humanitarian
and human rights instruments. Mr. Olara Otunnu
acknowledged that every civilization is grounded upon
certain humanitarian values, and that

"there are norms that have germinated in the local
soil, that speak to the protection of civilian
populations, and especially of women, children and
the elderly." (S/PV.3977, p. IO)

As we witness the breakdown of such traditional norms
of behaviour, which leads to unspeakable brutality against
vulnerable members of the population, it is essential that
we take pains to preserve and restore those norms to
avoid further tragedy and additional humanitarian
disasters.

In the face of proliferating and recurring conflicts, it
is also necessary to rethink our approach in dealing with
the linkage between conflicts and post-conflict situations.
As the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
has been stressing, it is necessary, even before a conflict
has been resolved, to consider providing not only
humanitarian assistance but also assistance for the

 

reconstruction of the society, giving people sufficient hope
for a stable and prosperous future. And, along with basic
necessities, from drinking water to mine-free lands, it is of
utmost importance that people waging conflicts, in
particular, will come to be convinced that lasting peace is
the only answer to their problems.

In this respect, we agree with Ms. Carol Bellamy that
the importance of education cannot be exaggerated. The
description of her visits to classes held outdoors under the
trees in Tanzania's refugee camps for children from
Rwanda, Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is an eloquent testimony to the efforts that are under
way to re-establish orderly life even in the midst of crisis.
Japan, as a top donor, intends to pursue the strengthening
of close linkage between humanitarian and development
assistance, and between conflict prevention and
development, while paying due respect to the intangible
values and traditions of the local peoples concerned.

Another point I should like to emphasize is the
importance of following up on decisions the Council
adopted on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa (S/1998/318).
The Security Council adopted last November two important
resolutions which are of special relevance to the issue of
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts: one on the
neutrality and security of refugee camps, and the other on
the question, in which my delegation played a coordinating
role, of illicit arms flows. The Council's recent presidential
statement on children and armed conflict is also of great
importance.

Furthermore, the Council has this time requested the
Secretary-General to submit to it a report containing
concrete recommendations to the Council on ways the
Council, within its sphere of responsibility, can improve
physical and legal measures for the protection of civilians
in situations of conflict. Obviously, the responsibility to
carry out actual measures to protect civilians is not
confined to the Council. Japan strongly hopes that the
Security Council, in collaboration with other United Nations
bodies and organizations, will institute appropriate and
effective measures so that a safer and better world can be
our legacy for the new millennium.

