Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of President Ismail Omar Guelleh
of the Republic of Djibouti. We welcome his initiative
to address the Security Council. We feel that it is
extremely valuable for the Security Council to obtain
directly from the region's leaders the information and
inputs it needs to shape its views and properly assess
situations as complicated as the one that the Horn of
Africa is facing. That has been the case today with the
analysis presented by President Guelleh.

My delegation will closely follow the development
of the situation in the region, because we are convinced
that the only viable option for resolving the various
current crises and disputes is dialogue and cooperation
between the countries of the region with the
international community, as well as through respect for
the efforts of the United Nations and the decisions of
the Security Council.

On the specific issue of the territorial dispute
between Djibouti and Eritrea, we believe that efforts
should be pursued to open a constructive dialogue
between the parties and to facilitate the work and good
offices of the Secretary-General. We appreciate the
parties' continued avoidance of the use of force. We
urge Eritrean Government authorities to send clear
signals of their willingness to cooperate on this issue,
bearing in mind Eritrea's obligation as a Member of the
United Nations to comply with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council.

Moreover, we View as positive the willingness of
Eritrean officials to engage in more constructive
communication, as demonstrated during my visit to
that country at the helm of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009), on Somalia and Eritrea. We trust that the
Eritrean Government will take concrete steps in the
framework of the dialogue begun with the Committee,
and that the Council and the relevant regional
stakeholders will take advantage of the new conditions
to promote and facilitate a substantial convergence that
will facilitate the peaceful resolution of the current
dispute with Djibouti. We hope that the Government of
Eritrea will meet the expectations that have been raised
and seize the opportunity to commit itself to a
constructive relationship with the international
community.

In addition, given the complex situation of
instability in the region, my delegation reiterates the
need for a coherent and comprehensive approach to the
situation on the Horn of Africa. In its deliberations on
the issue, the Council must take into account any factor
that could have a negative impact on regional peace
efforts. Although some situations are more pressing
than others, the Council and the international
community should address the various elements of the
crisis in the region with equal attention.

Lastly, we reiterate our gratitude to the
Government of Djibouti for its unflagging spirit of
cooperation and openness, as well as for its decisive
contribution to efforts to establish stability and lasting
peace in Somalia and the region.

