Mrs. Smith (Norway): Let me first express our
sincere support for Special Representative De Mistura,
his efforts to implement the newly refocused mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and his commitments to
Afghan ownership. In a time of transition towards such
ownership, the role of UNAMA is critical, particularly
because it is the international guarantor for the
integrity of the transition to greater Afghan leadership.

The Kabul Conference was an important step
towards greater Afghan ownership. It mobilized broad
international support and demonstrated clear
commitments by the Afghan Government towards its
own people. However, concrete implementation of the
commitments at the Conference is key, and donors
should start aligning their support with Afghan
priorities.

Norway is already contributing its part towards
alignment and coherence. Furthermore, a successful
Kabul process requires a more robust Afghan
leadership. The new national programmes presented at
the Conference need to be implemented soon and in a
sequenced way through clear targets and priority areas.

Afghan leadership and accountability are
paramount for the Kabul process to succeed. Such
leadership, in truth, must enable political processes that
are inclusive and truly national in their nature.
Otherwise, public support for Afghan ownership will
decrease.

The recent renewed attention on corruption and
administrative misruling also highlight the need for the
Afghanistan Government to show stronger political
will to combat corruption and to reform State
institutions, both of which are prerequisites for a
sustainable State-building agenda based on a contract
between the Afghan people and their Government.

Furthermore, the Kabul process can only be
successful if it really delivers at the provincial and
district levels, countrywide. Efforts towards transition,
as well as bringing the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy to bear throughout the country,
point to a more urgent need to enact a viable Afghan
subnational governance policy.

As we have emphasized several times before in
this Chamber, peace and reintegration in Afghanistan

should not only be Afghan-led but must also be based
on the principle of inclusiveness and conducted in
conformity with the Constitution and international
human rights. Norway supports an Afghan-led
reconciliation process, including talks with those from
the armed opposition who have renounced violence and
resumed a civilian life, as parts of a viable broader
Afghan political settlement. But this process has to be
inclusive, transparent and truly national. Reconciliation
requires broad representation of religious, ethnic and
civil society groups, including women.

In this regard, we are concerned about the narrow
composition of the High Peace Council which was
announced by President Karzai yesterday. Many
relevant groups from the Afghan community have been
left out, including civil society. We are in particular
concerned about the limited number of female
members of the Council. The participation of women is
key to any durable peace process. As next month marks
the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security, we reiterate the importance
of its implementation in this regard.

Furthermore, it is important throughout
reintegration and reconciliation efforts not to preclude
transitional justice. Addressing issues of transitional
justice and human rights in a context of ongoing
conflict is challenging, but the Afghan people need to
be included in a meaningful way and have their rights
protected in the context of a peace process. Injustice is
no less a strategic concern than corruption or weak
governance.

Norway welcomes the establishment today of the
Human Rights Support Unit in the Ministry of Justice
and has high expectations of its role in advancing the
capacity of the Afghan Government to fulfil its
international human rights obligations in a coordinated
manner.

It is still early to judge the outcome of the recent
parliamentary elections, where preliminary results are
expected early next month. The real test will be if the
electoral institutions, the Independent Electoral
Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission, are able to address complaints and
irregularities systematically and impartially. It is not
too early, however, to determine the need for long-term
electoral reform and increased capacity-building of the
Afghan electoral institutions.
Recommendations from Afghan and international
observer missions are key in this respect. Such a
process must include expanding and strengthening
civic education efforts on elections, with the particular
aim of including women and civil society groups in the
political process.

