Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic): Ms. Pierce is leaving us, but not before having left a deep mark on the Council. As a woman ambassador, she has shown what is possible to the many women out there who sometimes do not believe that there is a space for them in politics and diplomacy. She has increased the visibility of women in international affairs and provided an example of bridging the gender gap and the empowerment of women. We appreciate that, during her tenure, she has strived to ensure that women's rights and gender equality were on the table and that our societies are more inclusive and just. For that, we are grateful. I congratulate her once again on her appointment as the Ambassador of the United Kingdom to the United States, the first woman to hold that position. Her voice has always been an inspiration. It has been courageous and has driven many of our decisions in the Security Council, and I know that it will continue to do so in her future endeavours. I wish her all the best. (spoke in Spanish) We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their contributions. We reiterate our appreciation of their efforts, in their respective fields, under the complex circumstances described in their presentations. I would like to highlight a few points. First, we remain concerned about the increase in hostilities that began at the beginning of the year and which seems to be continuing unabated. In particular, military engagements are on the rise, putting at risk the political progress that has been so painstakingly achieved. Tensions in southern Yemen are also a cause for concern. The devastating impact of the situation on the civilian population makes an immediate nationwide ceasefire more urgent and the need for justice and accountability more pressing. We are greatly concerned about the growing lack of institutions and condemn the arbitrary actions committed against civilians in Houthi-controlled areas. We reiterate that the parties to conflict have an obligation to respect international law, including international humanitarian and human rights law. Secondly, the deterioration of the humanitarian situation, with the associated risks on the ground for an already highly vulnerable population, compels us to reiterate, once again, that all parties to the conflict have an obligation to allow safe, unrestricted humanitarianaccess. The situation of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, for example, is truly untenable. As we had warned, there has been an unprecedented outbreak of desert locust swarms in recent weeks, including in areas that are rarely affected by that phenomenon. The Yemeni Government has requested a rapid intervention to support efforts to combat what it considers to be a serious pest threatening food security in the country. We call for support from the international community in that matter. Yemen, as we know, was on the brink of famine in 2018. If we do not take immediate action now to counter that scourge, we could find ourselves in a similar situation. The parties must facilitate access to relevant organizations in order to avoid an even more catastrophic situation. Thirdly, with regard to the economic situation, the Director of the Yemeni Banking Association has indicated that banks cannot provide the population with sufficient cash. He stressed that the problems faced by the banks relates to the duplication of banking and financial regulations between two central banks in Sana'a and Aden, between which there is no coordination. A solution needs to be found to alleviate the economic situation in the country and avoid an economic collapse. The statistics that continue to come out of Yemen about people who depend on humanitarian assistance for their livelihoods, which Mr. Rajasingham has already mentioned, are terrifying. We are talking about real people. It is on their behalf, now more than ever, that we must reach a broad and inclusive political agreement based on mutual respect and full compliance with the commitments undertaken. We reiterate that only an inclusive, sustainable and credible peace process can definitively open the door to avenues for development and prosperity for the Yemeni people. We reiterate our readiness to support Yemen and its people in achieving that fundamental goal.
