The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of New Zealand.

As our colleague from Senegal reminded us, it
is only four days since my Prime Minister convened
a meeting in this Chamber (see S/PV.774), at which
leaders agreed upon several points. They agreed that
there can be no military solution to the Syrian conflict.
They agreed on the urgent need to stop the fighting
and to put our combined efforts behind ensuring the
arrangement between the United States and Russia to
restore the cessation of hostilities. They agreed that the
Syrian people had suffered far too much and that full,
unhindered humanitarian assistance for those in need
was essential, and they agreed on the need to create the
conditions for the resumption of political talks.

Our leaders did not agree on everything pretend
there were any easy solutions, but they did agree, at
least, on this much. It is therefore with utter dismay
that we find ourselves back in this Chamber as Syrian
planes, reportedly with Russian support, inflict carnage
on eastern Aleppo. These actions, which reportedly
include the use of incendiary and other indiscriminate
weapons, are disturbing and demonstrate total disregard
for their devastating impact on civilians. But what is
most appalling is that these actions are shattering any
remaining hopes we had for maintaining the cessation
of hostilities and getting the peace processes back on
track.

As my Prime Minister made clear in this
Chamber a few days ago, words are not enough. All
those who claim to support peace must back words
with action. My delegation demands that the Syrian
Government immediately ceases bombing of civilians
and demonstrates genuine commitment to achieving a
negotiated peace, and we appeal to all those genuinely
committed to a political solution to do the same,
especially those with the greatest influence on the
Syrian Government.

I speak in particular to those whose political and
material support is making the Syrian Government's
current actions possible. That support is undermining
any remaining prospects for the peace process and
it is destroying innocent lives under the guise of
countering terrorism. The Syrian Government needs to
ground its planes, hold back its armies, and honour its
commitments under resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268
(2016). New Zealand appeals to the Government of
Russia and to Iran, too. If they are serious about peace,
they should do everything in their power in the coming
days to halt the fighting and give the United States-
Russia arrangement a chance. We recognize that the
opposition, too, has responsibilities.

All those with influence over the opposition must
encourage it to respect the ceasefire and disassociate
itself from terrorist groups. However, what the Syrian
Government and its allies are doing is making that
disassociation harder and prolonging the war. All those
involved in Syria need to take a hard look at themselves
and ask whether they intend to be genuine collaborators
in the search for peace. So, we too join other Council
members in putting our full support behind Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria Staffan de
Mistura's request and calls on the Council - his call for
the support, his call for the cessation of hostilitiesand
putting protection of civilians as a priority, the 48-hour
pauses and medical evacuations.

We admire Mr. De Mistura's determination and his
belief that the current course of events can be turned.
For New Zealand's part, we will do what we can to find
a common cause in the Council for action to enforce the
cessation of hostilities in Syria, as he has asked of us. A

continuation of this conflict benefits no one, certainly
not Syrian civilians.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

