Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): On this occasion, as President
Evo Morales Ayma said in yesterday's meeting (see S/PV.8362), the issue of the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons is one of the most important on the Security
Council's agenda, and therefore of special importance
for my country. Bolivia is part of the first densely
populated region in the world to declare itself free of
nuclear weapons, just over 50 years ago, through the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America - the Treaty of Tlatelolco, Moreover, Bolivia
has enshrined in its Constitution the prohibition of
the manufacture and use of chemical, biological and
nuclear weapons on the Bolivian territory, as well as
the internment, transit and deposit of nuclear and toxic
waste. In that regard, we have signed the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. For that reason, we
reiterate our call on all States that have not yet done
so, in particular the so-called nuclear-weapon States,
to sign that important Treaty, because the best way
to fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is by guaranteeing their total prohibition by
all State and non-State actors.

Bolivia once again calls on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to stop and dismantle its programme
for the development of nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles, with the ultimate goal of achieving complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of the entire
Korean peninsula.

The year 2017 was one of the most intense
years in the Security Council regarding the issue of
non-proliferation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. After the nuclear test in September of that year
and multiple ballistic missile tests, the Security Council
unanimously adopted three resolutions, which not only
imposed increasingly harsh sanctions on that country
but also expressed the prevailing need for peaceful
solutions to the conflict on the Korean peninsula. In that
context, we consider that the imposition of sanctions is
fulfilling part of its objectives to create opportunities
to bring the parties to the negotiating table in order to
resume the dialogue to reach a peaceful, diplomatic and
political solution that leads to the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. Bolivia reiterates its commitment to

comply with those resolutions and all resolutions issued
by this organ.

Since the beginning of 2018, and thanks to the
political will of the different parties involved, the
situation in the Korean peninsula has undergone positive
changes. Bolivia, as a pacifist state, promoter of the
culture of dialogue and peaceful settlement of disputes,
welcomes the strengthening of the inter-Korean
dialogue, which so far this year has already had three
high-level meetings between Presidents Moon Jae-in
and Kim Jong Un. The result of those meetings, which
were based on sincere dialogue based on mutual respect,
were very remarkable. For example, the Panmunjom
Declaration for Peace, Prosperity and Unification of
the Korean Peninsula, which calls to suspend all hostile
acts in all areas, is a very powerful manifestation of
the will of the parties in building mutual trust and
in strengthening relations that seek peace, harmony
and prosperity.

We must point out that those conversations had
more concrete results, such as the halting of ballistic
missile tests, the dismantling ofthe Punggye-ri Nuclear
Test Site and the reunification of families separated for
more than 60 years as a result of conflict, among others.
More recently, at the Pyongyang summit, they agreed
to permanently dismantle the Tongchang-ri ballistic
missile engine and launch-test site, and the Yongbyon
Nuclear Scientific Research Center. That opened up the
possibility of a fourth meeting between both leaders in
the city of Seoul, which would be quite an event and a
clear sign of the strengthening of mutual trust.

We highlight the holding of the summit between
the Chairman of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and the President of the United States last June in
Singapore. I reiterate that such rapprochement should
serve to build mutual trust between the parties with
the ultimate goal of achieving the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula and building a lasting and stable
peace regime, to which the suspension of military
exercises will contribute.

With regard to sanctions, we insist that they should
not be an end in themselves; in that respect, we express
our concern about the possible adverse effect that they
could have on the population of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Any action by the Council must not

diminish the living conditions of local populations,
while highlighting the important work done by the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) and facilitating exceptions for
the importation of products for humanitarian purposes.
Likewise, we reiterate our rejection of any unilateral
action and any type ofimposition ofunilateral sanctions.

In conclusion, we emphasize again that there is
no military solution to this conflict; only a diplomatic
solution based on dialogue and consultations will
allow us to achieve the complete and verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and allow us
to build a sustainable peace regime in that region.

