Mr. Ahsan (Bangladesh): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We, too,
would like to express appreciation for the three
briefings today by Under-Secretary-General Guehenno,
Assistant Secretary-General Fall and the Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. McAskie, which
complement each other and highlight the essential
contours of the problems.

We acknowledge with satisfaction the excellent
report on the Inter-Agency Mission led by Mr. Fall. We
agree that without an integrated region-wide approach
to the problems in the Mano River Union countries,
sustainable peace and economic and social
development cannot be achieved. Dialogue is essential
to this process. At the same time we think the military
pressure, particularly on the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF), has to be continued to achieve the
ultimate objective of sustainable peace in the region.

On Sierra Leone we note that while endorsing the
results of the Abuja ceasefire review Meeting of 2
May, RUF agreed to withdraw all of its combatants
from Kambia, release at least 200 child soldiers by 26
May and return all weapons and equipment seized from
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) by 30 May. We have to be watchful that
RUF makes good on this promise because their past
record is not very straight.

We are concerned that fighting continues in the
border areas, destabilizing the entire region. Various
armed groups are receiving support and continuing to
fight. This has to stop. We are also concerned that
reports of ceasefire violations are continuing.

We are satisfied that UNAMSIL continues to be
deployed in areas of Sierra Leone that had been
dominated by the rebels. We note the enormity of the
tasks that the Government of Sierra Leone has ahead of
it in that regard. That has been referred to in all three
of today's briefings. Clearly, the Government of Sierra
Leone needs to be assisted in accomplishing those
tasks.

The countries of the Mano River Union also need
to remain engaged in order to achieve sustainable
peace in the region. All countries in the region should
take action to prevent armed individuals and groups
from using their territory to prepare and commit attacks
on neighbouring countries and refrain from any action
that might contribute to further destabilization of the
situation on their borders, as the Security Council
demanded in resolution 1343 (2001) of7 March.

We greatly appreciate the role played by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and its Chairman, President Konare of
Mali, in promoting peace and stability in the region, as
well as the role it played in the recent meeting in
Abuja. We support the proposal of ECOWAS to deploy
international monitors in the border region and we call
on the United Nations and donors to support that
initiative by providing ECOWAS with the necessary
financial resources and technical assistance.

Despite the recent efforts of the Abuja Summit
and the formation of the mediation committee, we
regret to note that the leaders of the three countries
concerned have so far failed to meet.

During the briefings made today we were also
reminded of the importance of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process in
sustaining peace and security. We cannot
overemphasize the role of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants. Specific
actions need to be taken, both by the countries
concerned and by donors, to achieve successful DDR.
The Sierra Leone Government in particular has to take
decisions to ensure the success of the DDR programme
and has to be in a position to extend its authority as the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) withdraws from
areas it dominates. At the same time, donors must
assist the Government in that regard, as that will be
critical to the Government's ability to provide former
fighters with alternate livelihoods. We particularly
emphasize the need to address the issue of reintegrating
child combatants with enough care.

We are concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the region. We appreciate that the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) continues to help trapped refugees,
especially those in the "parrot's beak" region of south-
east Guinea, by transferring them from insecure border
areas to camps in the interior. It is also useful that the
capacity of the new sites has regularly increased to
keep up with the pace of the relocation exercise. We
fully support the two-track approach taken by UNHCR
with regard to refugees in Guinea, as Ms. McAskie has
mentioned. We recognize that the response to
consolidated appeals has to be greatly improved.

We are encouraged by the information regarding
the release of children abducted by the RUF. We, too,
place great stress on ending the plight of girls who
were abducted and whose human rights were violated.
We also see hope in the role of the Mano River Union's
Women's Peace Network in the Union's countries and
we call for assistance for their efforts.

The human rights situation in the region
continues to concern us. The recent fighting in the
border areas claimed civilian casualties and displaced
thousands. All parties must abide by international
humanitarian and human rights law and end abuses,
including killings and abductions of civilians in areas
affected by fighting. In this situation, we note with
satisfaction the opening of the human rights office in
Kenema.

Today's briefings have made it clear that
enhanced focus on post-conflict reconstruction and
economic regeneration is absolutely vital. The United
Nations system and the international community should
support long-term development in Sierra Leone and
assist the Government in gradually expanding its
administration and services throughout Sierra Leone
and in creating opportunities for former combatants to
find alternate sources of livelihood.

Before concluding, we would like to note that
given the importance of a subregional approach, we
would favour the recommendation to set up a United
Nations office in West Africa. We will be open to
further discussion of this matter.

