Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): Allow me, at
the outset, Mr. President, to express my sincere
congratulations on your delegation's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January, which also coincides with the beginning of
your country's tenure in this organ. My congratulations
also go to the other new members - Egypt, Senegal,
Ukraine and Japan - to which I wish every success.
I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Oxfam Advisor for their briefings.
This debate on the theme of the protection civilians
in armed conflict is a timely one. As we look at the
theatres of armed conflict today and the recent
developments there, we are reminded of the harsh
reality facing civilians, who continue to be number
among the first victims in armed conflicts. The
indiscriminate and often deliberate attacks against
civilians and humanitarian aid workers have become
increasingly frequent in the past decade, as stated in
the Secretary-General's June 2015 report (S/2015/453)
on the protection of civilians. That harsh reality has
become commonplace and has reached unacceptable
levels in terms of the numbers and the degree of
atrocities, notwithstanding the international legal
framework that sanctifies human life. It is therefore
evident that the problem is not due to any lack of an
international framework for the protection of civilians;
rather, it is due to the absence of implementation,
including in those areas controlled by armed non-State
actors or terrorist groups.

Terrorist organizations such as Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab, the Islamic
State in Iraq and Sham and other opposing forces that
are challenging all fundamental rights are primarily
responsible for the violence committed against civilians
in Africa. Moreover, peacekeeping operations, which
are the primary instrument of the United Nations to
ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
are facing increasingly complex challenges, which
has weakened their capacity to fulfil their protection
mandates. The emergence of non-State armed actors
and the increase in terrorism and violent extremism, as
well as other related threats, serve rightly to underscore
the need to adapt the concept of peacekeeping to those
new realities while moving towards greater flexibility
in the interpretation of traditional principles that have
guided United Nations work in this area.

Such an approach will mean that we must find
a balance between, on the one hand, maintaining
important aspects of the traditional principles of
peacekeeping and, on the other hand, the utilization
of force by operations that are deployed, particularly
in Africa. The recent experience in Somalia and the
Sahel demonstrates that it is timely and viable to use
peacekeeping when it is a matter of combating such
terrorist groups.

The resolute political will and sustained
commitment of the African Union leaders with regard
to the protection of civilian populations from the
horrors of war has made non-indifference to human
suffering a fundamental principle. The African Union
approach in terms ofpeacekeeping, which is essentially
based on that cardinal principle, has demonstrated
our continental organization's capacity to adapt and
respond to new challenges, particularly through the
following means.

First, we are involved in the deployment of
peacekeeping operations in extremely hostile and
unstable environments where no other organization is
ready to venture.

Secondly, we have put in place robust mandates
for African Union operations, which, in most cases,
have among their main missions to protect civilians, to
neutralize armed groups and terrorists and to promote
the authority of the State.

It should be emphasized that the practices of
the African Union in the area of peacekeeping mark
an advance when compared to those of the United
Nations. They therefore prompt us to rethink the
model of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations pursuant to Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. The model adapted to
the circumstances I have described must also take into
account how African Union operations are financed
through contributions to the regular budget of the
United Nations.

Along with its operations on the ground, the
African Union is investing in finding political solutions,
as evidenced by our recent involvement in efforts to
conclude peace agreements in Mali and in the Central
African Republic, among places. In other situations,
including in Somalia, the African Union continues
to seek to reduce violence in order to encourage all
stakeholders to relaunch the political process. As the
Secretary-General highlights in his report (S/2015/682)
on the implementation of recommendations of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, political
solutions must be at the heart of all strategies that
seek to ensure lasting protection for civilians. In that
context, the African Union, faithful to its tradition of
the peaceful resolution of conflicts, remains convinced
that negotiation and mediation are the main tools that
should be more encouraged and explored in finding
political solutions to conflicts.

