Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the delegation of the State of
Palestine, allow me to thank you, Your Excellency
Mr. Nasser Judeh, Deputy Prime Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, for
presiding over this important meeting of the Security
Council. We also congratulate Jordan on its presidency.
We very much appreciate the Jordanian delegation's
efforts to address the many critical issues on the
Security Council's agenda, including its principled,
unwavering support for the just cause of Palestine.

(spoke in English)

We also express our appreciation to the delegation
of France for its skilled leadership of the Security
Council during the month of March. We thank His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing and his unrelenting calls and efforts for peace,
humanity and justice. We congratulate his new Special
Representative and Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, on his appointment, and we wish him
success and affirm our readiness to cooperate with
his efforts. We also reiterate our deep appreciatcion to
Mr. Robert Serry for his years of service. We recognize
his efforts in support of the Palestinian people and
Government through many critical periods during his
tenure, including three brutal Israeli wars against Gaza,
as well as his constant efforts to advance solutions to
emerging problems and to promote peace, including his
impassioned entreaties to the Council to act to bring an
end to this devastating conflict, which remains a threat
to international peace and security.

Regrettably, our collective appeals to the Security
Council have been unanswered, with all initiatives for
serious action thwarted, the latest on 30 December 2014.
The failure to act has greatly fostered Israel's impunity
and compounded the conflict, with the heaviest price
paid in human suffering and in the credibility of the
international system.

As we mark next month 67 years since the Al-Nakba
of 1948, and mark in June 48 years since the 1967 Israeli
occupation began, the tragic irony of those dates should
not go unnoticed. The Palestinian people are enduring
the longest occupation in modern history, and over
5 million Palestine refugees have been enduring nearly
seven decades of exile. They are a people struggling
to preserve their national identity and existence in the
face of overwhelming challenges in their ongoing quest
for liberation. Their crisis has become untenable; it has
become existential.

When Palestinians in Gaza are mercilessly
slaughtered and maimed by the Israeli occupying forces
in their homes, United Nations schools, playgrounds
and hospitals; when mothers and fathers are killed
and 1,500 children are orphaned in the course of 51
days; when destruction and humanitarian disaster are
wantonly inflicted on them; when they are subjugated
to a dehumanizing, suffocating blockade, crippling
their society, forcing them to live in poverty in the
ruins oftheir communities, and isolating them from the
entire world - the crisis is existential.

When they are killed or injured by Israeli
occupying forces in peaceful protests for simply
demanding freedom and an end to occupation; when
their land is stolen and colonized; when their homes are
demolished and they are dispossessed, impoverished
and forcibly displaced; when they are terrorized by
extremist settlers; when their religions are insulted and
their religious sites, including mosques and churches
in their Holy City of Jerusalem, are desecrated; when
thousands of civilians, including children, are detained
and imprisoned, their minds and bodies tortured, their
families broken - the crisis is existential.

When the State of Israel legislates more than 50
discriminatory and racist laws against its Palestinian
Arab citizens, and constantly attempts to negate their
identity and history; when that State's political, religious
and military leaders voice threatening diatribes against
them, including calls to "chop off heads with axes" of
those who oppose their extremist policies, and calls
for the transfer of Palestinian Arabs - the crisis is
existential.

When a refugee camp in Syria, where Palestine
refugees have peaceably resided for more than 60 years
awaiting a solution to their plight, is ravaged by war
and siege, comes under barbaric assault of terrorists of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, and is described
by the Secretary-General as "the deepest circle of
hell", with children, women and men forced to flee
for their lives, dispersed and traumatized once again;
when Palestinians, whose resilience is legendary, are
drowning in the waters of the Mediterranean Sea, along
with others attempting to escape war and poverty - the
crisis is existential.

How many indignities, injustices and tragedies
must one people endure? How far must the situation
deteriorate before the Security Council upholds its
Charter duties and its own resolutions to contribute
to a just and lasting solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict and to peace and security in our region? How
long will Israel, the occupying Power, be permitted to
deny the Palestinian people their rights and freedom
without consequence? How long will Israel ignore the
bold Arab Peace Initiative, insisting instead to impose
endless conflict?

When we have reached this point the depths of
crisis so grave - the Security Council's deliberations
on the question of Palestine should be anything but
routine, and the sense of urgency should be great.

 
There is unanimity that the situation is unsustainable
and that a solution must be achieved without delay.
The exception is Israel, which remains intransigent,
continuing to believe it is a State above the law that
can perpetrate crimes and obstruct peace with zero
accountability, while falsely believing that the conflict
can be managed and that the occupation can continue
indefinitely. This was starkly reaffirmed last month
when the two-State solution, enshrined in Council
resolutions from 242 (1967) onward, was openly
ridiculed and tossed aside by the Israeli Prime Minister
during the elections, further proving Israel's deceit
throughout years of negotiations.

Faced with this situation, will the Council work to
salvagethatsolution,or allow itto disintegrate,triggering
a frantic drive for alternative solutions f foremost the
one-State - and guaranteeing many more years of
violent conflict and suffering?

We believe it is time for leadership by the Council.
The fundamental parameters of the two-State solution
have long been clear and globally endorsed. It must be
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. It must
be based on the 4 June 1967 borders. Israel must fully
withdraw from the Palestinian territory occupied in
1967, including East Jerusalem, and end its occupation
in all manifestations, including the illegal settlement
enterprise. A just solution must be found for the status
of Jerusalem as the capital of two States. And a just
solution must be achieved to the Palestine refugee
question based on resolution 194 (III) and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

There is also broad agreement that creating a
credible political horizon requires setting a time
frame to end to the Israeli occupation. The Palestinian
people need to believe - and be given hope - that the
occupation will end. And, admitting the failure of more
than 20 years of negotiations, it is widely agreed that
the political process should not be reincarnated and that

an international conference and framework of support
for negotiations would be a more rational, viable path
towards a solution. Moreover, there is agreement that
the critical situation in Gaza cannot be ignored in any
attempts to move a political process forward.

As we consider that consensus, we recall that
there was no actual consensus in 1947, and yet the
international community somehow found the political
will to act, adopting General Assembly resolution
181 (II), which partitioned Mandate Palestine and
created the State of Israel. In 2015, however, there is
an international consensus. Based on that consensus,
in which 135 countries recognize the State of Palestine
and European Parliaments call on their Governments to
accord official recognition as an investment in saving
and actualizing the two-State solution, we believe it is
high time for the international community to exert the
political will necessary to make the two-State solution
a reality, to achieve the independence of the State of
Palestine, to rectify the historic injustice inflicted
on the Palestinian people and to establish genuine
Palestinian-Israeli peace and coexistence.

We therefore appeal to the Security Council to
seriously respond to this crisis and to assist the parties
to overcome the dangerous impasse. A meaningful
draft resolution must be adopted and, more important,
the determination must be found to implement the
international will for the achievement of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace, whereby the State
of Palestine and the State of Israel can live in peace
and security within internationally recognized borders.
We commend France's initiative in that regard, in
close coordination with the Arab Ministerial Follow-
up Committee, and the widespread calls by Member
States for the Council to uphold its duties and its
clear, principled expressions of support and readiness
to contribute to creating a credible political horizon.
Palestine stands ready to cooperate with those efforts.
We we reaffirm our commitment to pursuing a peaceful,
political, diplomatic and legal path to the realization
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, a
just, comprehensive peace that fulfills that people's
legitimate national aspirations to live in freedom and
dignity in their State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, as well as a just solution for the Palestine
refugees.

Beyond a political process, the situation on the
ground must change. Immediate efforts are needed
to stem the deterioration of the situation before the
situation completely destabilizes and slips beyond
our reach. The international community must act
urgently to compel Israel to cease its illegal policies
and practices in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, which, in 2014, witnessed the
highest civilian death toll since the occupation began
in 1967. Hollow words and promises will not suffice.
The international community must demand that the
new Israeli Government demonstrate its intentions and
commitment to peace and respect for international law.
Israel must cease its settlement activities in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. We cannot have a
two-State solution while Israel continues to actively
and illegally alter the demographic and physical
situation, and entrench the occupation. It must cease
the confiscation of Palestinian land, the construction
of settlements and the wall, the demolition of homes
and the forced displacement of civilians. It must bring a
halt to the terror, violence, provocations and incitement
by its settlers, including in occupied East Jerusalem
and towards the Al-Aqsa Mosque - a toxic situation
that could erupt at any moment, including in a religious
conflict. Israel must end the arrest and detention of
Palestinians, including children, and stop its abuse of
prisoners and detainees and act forthwith to release
them. It must cease its constant attempts to undermine
the Palestinian Government and institutions.

In the Gaza Strip, the scars of war must be
healed. Emergency efforts are needed to alleviate the
humanitarian disaster wrought by the Israeli war. Recent
reports, including by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), UNICEF, and the Association
of International Development Agencies, attest to the
dangers of this festering crisis, and we must heed
the warnings. The illegal Israeli blockade must end,
and Gaza's crossings must be opened for unimpeded
humanitarian access, the sustained movement of
persons and goods into and out of Gaza and a link with
the West Bank. Reconstruction is imperative, as more
than 110,000 people remain internally displaced. The
fuel and water crises must also be addressed.

We appeal to donors to honour reconstruction
pledges, and we recognize the generosity of donors who
have done so. We also appeal for continued support to the
Palestinian Government of National Consensus, under
the leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime
Minister Rami Hamdallah, to empower it to assume full
responsibility in Gaza and play its role in addressing the

many challenges. All of that is essential for rebuilding
Gaza, reviving its destroyed economy and giving hope
to our people. The alternative is allowing desperation,
anger and radicalization to increase, especially among
our large youth population, making inevitable another
implosion, which must be averted at all costs.

We also reiterate our call for protection for the
Palestinian people. They are a defenceless civilian
population entitled to protection under international
humanitarian law and to avail themselves of all the
protections of international law. That is the primary
reason for our accession to the Geneva Conventions,
core human rights instruments and other international
treaties, including the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. We will not cease calling, and working,
for the protection of our people, accountability for all
the Israeli war crimes perpetrated against them, and
justice for the victims.

Before concluding, I must add a few words about
the crisis of Palestine refugees in Syria, particularly in
the Yarmouk refugee camp. The conflict in Syria has
rendered their situation precarious, and their needs for
assistance and protection are immense. We welcome
the press statement issued yesterday by the Council,
as well as the press elements of 6 April focusing on
Yarmouk. We recall resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014) and 2191 (2014). We urge full compliance with
their provisions. The obligation to protect civilians
in situations of armed conflict must be respected by
all parties. We reiterate the call for unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access and assistance to the
camp's residents and those displaced from Yarmouk,
and for the safe temporary relocation of any civilians
seeking refuge from the violence. We recognize the
efforts of UNRWA Commissioner-General Pierre
Krahenbiihl during this crisis, including his important
Council briefings and visits to Yarmouk, and are
grateful for the valiant efforts of UNRWA staff, along
with partners in the field, in providing support to the
Palestine refugees in Syria and in the neighboring
countries of Lebanon and Jordan, despite extremely
difficult and unstable circumstances. We urge donors
to respond to UNRWA emergency appeals as swiftly
and generously as possible, while fully recognizing the
long-standing support of the international community
and host Governments over the decades. Today, we also
reaffirm the official position of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to maintain the neutrality of the Palestine
refugee camps in Syria and the refusal to be drawn
into the conflict. The Palestinian leadership also fully
shares the international community's hopes for a
political solution to end the horrific conflict in Syria.

In conclusion, we stress that this tragic crisis
reconfirms the real vulnerability of the Palestine
refugees and the need for a just solution to their plight
in the context of the Palestinian-Israeli and Arab-Israeli
peace that we continue to seek. Although hopes for
peace have diminished, our conviction in the justness
of our cause and our commitment to peace remain
resolute. We respectfully implore all the members of
the Security Council seated at this table to demonstrate
the responsibility and leadership needed to open the
doors for peace, to revive hope and to advance these
goals as both a matter of urgency and necessity for our
region and our world.

