I thank the German presidency for organizing this virtual high-level open debate. I also express my sincere appreciation to Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Mr. David Shearer and the representative of civil society for their insightful remarks. The protection and promotion of human rights are an essential prerequisite for achieving sustained peace. It is particularly important in the context of conflict and post-conflict situations, where nascent local and national institutions lack the resources and capacity to address gross human rights violations and where societies often run the persistent risk of relapsing into violence. As a State party to all major international human rights instruments, including the two Covenants and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Bangladesh is deeply committed to the cause of human rights. Bangladeshi peacekeepers have a proven track record of upholding human rights in their areas of operation. We have made human rights a mandatory component of our peacekeepers' professional training. In addition, the Bangladesh Institute of Peace Support Operations and Training has developed extensive curricula on the protection of civilians mandate as part of predeployment training courses. And the impact is quite visible. In South Sudan, for instance, Bangladeshi peacekeepers have been providing security for people living at protection of civilian sites and protecting humanitarian convoys while on route and during distribution of humanitarian services. They are providing a variety of health and social services, with their own funding, including free basic medical and veterinary treatment, the distribution of textbooks to schools and the training of women in various income- generating skills. The formed police unit of Bangladesh deployed in Darfur has received special recognition for its work, which includes providing security to the camps, capacity-building for Sudan police, free medical camps and the distribution of schoolbooks. Bangladeshi peacekeepers also protect people from various forms of conflict- related sexual violence and violence against children. Our women peacekeepers have been playing a critical role in providing courage and comfort to the victims of sexual violence. The experience of Bangladeshi peacekeepers in interacting with victims of human rights violations in conflict settings proved to be of great use in providing critical, life-saving services to the traumatized Rohingyas who had fled persecution in Myanmar. We recognize that the protection of human rights is a key component of the protection of civilian mandate for peacekeepers. Yet we are worried that peacekeepers often lack the wherewithal to deal with such complex and politically sensitive domestic issues. In that regard, we would like to share some of our observations. Peacekeepers are already overstretched with their ever-expanding mandates and limited resources. Therefore, any new mandate should be accompanied by corresponding resource allocations. Likewise, the human rights mandate should be met with adequate and appropriate resources based on the specific needs of the mission. For instance, more female peacekeepers need to be deployed in situations where there is higher risk of conflict-related sexual violence against women and children. In order to improve the human rights readiness of peace operations, there should be adequate emphasis on the training and capacity-building of peacekeepers in the United Nations human rights regime. Given that the quality of predeployment training may vary from one country to another and that some of the training may also prove non-operational in the specific mission environment, arrangements should be made for in-mission training based on needs on the ground. Furthermore, the host Government and local authorities have to be adequately sensitized about their human rights obligations, as well as their responsibility to protect. Otherwise, there is the potential to create mistrust between the peacekeepers and the host authorities, eventually adding to the existing challenges for peacekeepers. To address gross violations of human rights or curb imminent atrocity crimes, peacekeepers need to have access to credible threat assessments conducted in real time by various United Nations mechanisms, such as mission-specific human rights monitoring mechanisms, United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanisms on grave violations of children's rights and monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence. The civilian component of peace operations needs to be strengthened to ensure greater United Nations engagement with the host Government, local authorities and, wherever applicable, civil society organizations. Such collaboration can help immensely with national capacity-building in the areas of prevention, protection and prosecution of human rights violations, as well as with building trust. Adequate emphasis should be placed on the issues of safety and security of peacekeepers and on accountability for crimes committed against the United Nations personnel, including peacekeepers. Peacekeepers alone cannot fulfil their human rights mandate in situations where the political process for conflict resolution and sustaining peace has not taken root. The Security Council has the responsibility to constantly support peace operations. It has to use its authority to urge the host country to find a sustainable political solution and foster institution-building. It also needs to address the ongoing cases of human rights violations in an objective and non-selective manner as part of its responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations. Only then can the State itself gradually take over from peace operations the responsibility of protecting its nationals' human rights. The Council has to prevent or address ongoing atrocity crimes and end the culture of impunity which, otherwise, will only embolden perpetrators and make peace operations more difficult. For example, removing Myanmar's Tatmadaw from the category "violation of recruitment and use" in the latest report of Secretary- General on children in armed conflict (S/2020/525), despite a threefold increase in violence against children there, sends the wrong message. With such contradictions, it will not be easy to integrate human rights in peace operations. The coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated many conflicts and the human rights situations in those countries. It has further reduced the already fragile capacity of conflict-ridden States to promote and protect human rights. This is making peace operations more challenging. In that context, the implementation of the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire and the Security Council's recent resolution 2532 (2020) hold the key to successful peace operations.
