Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French): The
Romanian delegation wishes at the outset to associate
itself fully with the statement to be made later by the
Irish presidency of the European Union. I wish,
through you, Madam Minister, to express our gratitude
to the Chilean presidency for having inscribed this
item, which is of a universal character, on the Council's
agenda.

The Council is an organ that is essential to
international stability and security. However, we often
find ourselves running from pillar to post, trying to
manage the consequences of conflict, with no time to
think about ways of increasing the effectiveness of the
solutions we are proposing. In that regard, today's
debate can add real value to our thinking about the best
means to guarantee lasting solutions to conflicts, most
of which, regrettably, have been on the Council's
agenda for far too long.

Let us recall that all conflicts destroy not only
lives and economies, but also the social fabric that is
essential to a functioning society. To make peace
prevail and to rebuild infrastructures are vital
activities, but they cannot guarantee a permanent end
to a conflict. Here we see the need for an integrated
approach - political, even military, economic and
social - that is present from the very beginning of the
Council's reflection on means of restoring stability to
crisis areas.

Above all, let us make no mistake; there can be
no lasting solution without reconciliation. The
persistence of hatred and resentment means, at best, a
paralysed society that is incapable of working for its
own progress. At worst, it means the probability of a
relapse into murderous folly.

Allow me to touch briefly on a subject that is of
great importance to the Council: peacekeeping
operations. Peacekeeping forces are doing excellent
work, interposing themselves, often at the risk of their
lives, between rival factions. We must ensure that such
missions are put together and equipped in such a way
that their action of separating rival parties is
supplemented by efforts to bring them together. United
Nations forces must not prolong situations of division;
they must contribute to the political and social
reunification of areas in crisis.

We must not overlook the fact that to speak of
reconciliation means taking into account complex
disputes that are often difficult to overcome. That
means that we must be able not only to contain such
disputes to prevent them from recurring, but also to
identify, if possible, the principal parties involved.
There are no societies in which reconciliation can be
based on individual forgiveness and on forgetting past
injuries. To think otherwise would be to labour under a
dangerous illusion.

Romania recognizes the unquestionable
contribution made to reconciliation by justice in
general and in particular by the establishment of
international or national ad hoc courts for the most
serious crimes. Impunity cannot be accepted as a basis
for building a society, because it will permanently
undermine confidence in the legal system and
encourage future atrocities.

We would mention also the need, in order to
strike a balance, to recognize the important role played
by amnesties, which, if wisely managed, can contribute
greatly to reconciliation. There are, of course, myriad
other areas that can contribute to the success or failure
of a reconciliation process. We believe that nothing can
argue more convincingly in favour of reconciliation
than the promise of a decent and stable life.

Another very important element is political
reform and the rule of law. In that regard, the role and
capacities of the United Nations are invaluable. Good
guidance in the context of reform processes is vital,
because such processes, if correctly managed, can lead
to a moral dynamic, social cohesion and the good will
that is necessary to achieve true reconciliation.

The first example that comes to mind in this
regard is that of Georgia, where, we believe, a sound
programme of economic and political reforms, assisted
by a resolute fight against corruption, can have a
positive impact on the peace process.

However, United Nations representatives must
pay attention to the real political conditions on the
ground. They have the support of this delegation for a
pragmatic approach, because sometimes a political
reform that is too rapid, or inadequate, can be
counterproductive to international efforts.

Romania does not wish to let this opportunity go
by without touching on some specific aspects relating
to the Council's aims with regard to the process of
national reconciliation.

For that reason, we would appeal, in the context
of resolution 1244 (1999), to the population of Kosovo
and to its leaders - Albanian Kosovars and Serb
Kosovars alike - to commit to a true reconciliation.
Absolute priorities at this time are participation in the
drafting and implementation of a plan of application of
the standards for Kosovo, and in particular
participation in the direct dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, which, indeed, is one of those standards.

Allow me to close my statement on this complex
subject with a few comments on the role that the
Council can play.

National reconciliation cannot be achieved
overnight. It is a complex and very delicate
psychological process that requires several generations
to come to full fruition. For that to happen, there must
be a sound initial framework and constant
encouragement for the parties in the initial post-
conflict stages.

There is no single solution for all conflicts and all
parties involved in conflicts throughout the world. For
that reason, we are convinced that the Council must
have a firm grasp of the political dynamics on the
ground and a clear picture of the broader regional or
subregional context. It is also important for
peacekeeping missions and representatives of the
international community and of the United Nations to
have a clear mandate and be vested with an authority
that is fully supported by the Council in order to make
progress in very difficult political and security
conditions.

The meeting was suspended at 1.30 p.m.
