Mr. De Mistura: I am delighted to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over this meeting. I am lucky
enough be in the Council in person and not Via video-
teleconference, owing to the overlap with the recent
General Assembly meetings.

Let me update the Council first on the most recent
developments, which I am supposed to do, and then
move on to the way ahead on the political track and
the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). First,
with regard to what is happening on the ground, the
Amman discussions and the meetings that have taken
place very effectively in Astana have created four
zones of de-escalation: in the south, in eastern Ghouta,
north of Horns, and Idlib province. We also now have
two other so-called deconfliction zones, which are
being brokered by the Russian Federation in Afrin and
eastern Qalamun.

However, the situation remains fragile because we
are concerned by the Al-Nusra offensive in Idlib and
Hama provinces following the Astana meeting and
the heavy fighting that has been taking place there.
This includes also, for the first time since April, some
air strikes, some of which allegedly hit civilians and
civilian infrastructure, including health facilities, as
well as heavy opposition shelling on civilian towns and
the Government controlling Hama and Latakia. We are
also concerned at heavy fighting in other places too.
So the situation is far from perfect. Nevertheless, we
have to admit and we want to reaffirm in this Chamber
that the creation of the de-escalation zones is a very
important step in the effort to de-escalate the Violence
throughout the country. We are seeing the results of it.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is
being beaten back. Government forces have advanced in
the eastern countryside of Hama and Horns and broken
the so-called three-year siege, which has been taking
place de facto around Deir ez-Zor city. The Government
and allies also recently crossed the Euphrates river.
Meanwhile, the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), with
the backing of the International Coalition, have made
further advances against ISIL, taking control of most
of the city of Raqqa, while the SDF-led Deir ez-Zor
military council has made advances against ISIL on the
eastern banks of the Euphrates. The Government and
its allies have reportedly increased their strikes on SDF
positions. Armed opposition groups are also involved in
battle against ISIL in Dar'a. I wish to recall the United
Nations calls for the protection of civilians - and this
is the right place to do it - in Idlib, Deir ez-Zor, Raqqa
and elsewhere where fighting is still going on.

In the midst of this intensive military activity,
while we all recognize that the fighting against ISIL
is crucial, we need to remember that civilians cannot
be punished twice. They have already been punished
because they have been under the rule of ISIL and, if
they happen to be unlucky enough to be there when the
fighting is taking place, they are punished a second
time. More needs to be done in the field ofthe protection
of civilians. More needs to be done to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure from military assault and
to ensure safe, sustained and unimpeded access to
all civilians in need in Syria, wherever they are. I am
sure the Council will hear more on that point from my
colleague and friend Mark Lowcock.

Allow me nevertheless to specifically underline
the issue of detainees, abductees and missing persons.
Thousands of them, according to their own families,
are still missing, abducted or detained. We have not
seen any progress on this issue - neither in Astana,
despite several attempts to do so, nor in Geneva. A very
large number of Syrian families are suffering from the
absence of their own detained or missing relatives and
lack, above all, information on their fate. They do not
even know ifthey are alive or not. The time has come to
address this issue now as a major priority, particularly
in this case when we see a de-escalation taking place.

I also hope that concrete results can be achieved
in the near future on the issue of humanitarian mine
action. I hate mines. I have had three of my colleagues
killed by mines in Afghanistan and Iraq. I have
seen mines in action. This would constitute another
important confidence-building measure. I note with
interest the ongoing dialogue between the United
Nations Mine Action Service and the Government of
Syria in this regard.

There is a wide consensus that de-escalation
arrangements must not lead to a soft partition of Syria,
and that Syria's unity and territorial integrity must be
fully upheld. I have found many common perspectives
through the hundreds of Syrians we are meeting
regularly. Syrians of all backgrounds have voiced their
own strong rejection of any partitioning of Syria - its
territory and its people.

That is why de-escalation should be basically
a precursor to a truly nationwide ceasefire and to
action on the humanitarian and confidence-building
fronts - issues which are covered in paragraphs 12
to 14 of resolution 2254 (2015). The Astana effort
and the effort in Amman should be seen as laying the
basis for a renewed Geneva process - one that moves
from preparatory talks to genuine negotiations on the
political future of Syria, as envisaged in resolution
2254 (2015), tackling all four baskets of the agenda, and
as welcomed by the Council.

I have engaged both sides, as well as all those who
have influence on them, during the opening of the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly, which
has been as usual very useful. I have attended a number
of multilateral meetings in its margins, including one
convened by the European Union - and I want to
thank the European Union for that initiative - with
a wide cross section of international actors. I also had
the opportunity to visit Washington, DC, on Monday,
while my Deputy, Ambassador Ramzy, visited Moscow
yesterday and is still there today. I intend to maintain a
high level of engagement with all concerned countries
and Syrian parties in the weeks ahead.

We will continue to engage with all participants
in the Civil Society Support Room and to draw on the
insights of the Women's Advisory Board. Participants
from both have strongly underscored to me the
expectations of a broad cross section of Syrians for an
inclusive political solution reflecting the interests of all
Syrians and grounded in human rights, equality and
justice. They continue to call attention to the voices
missing from the political process, including women
who are half of the population, if not more. They should
have an equal voice in the decisions shaping the future
of their own country.

I wish to confirm today my intention to convene
the eighth round of the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva,
which I discussed yesterday with the Secretary-
General, about a month from now. The precise date is
to be determined. It should not be any later than the end
of October or early November. I am reaffirming this
time frame in order to allow all concerned to use the
crucial month from now until then to create conditions
for those talks to be meaningful. And I am calling on
both sides - both sides ~ to assess the situation with
realism and responsibility towards the people of Syria
and to seriously prepare for participation in the Geneva
talks without preconditions. I would like to explain
exactly what we may mean by that.

First, I believe hat the Government has an interest
in and indeed a duty now to genuinely negotiate with
an opposition that the Council identified by name in
resolution 2254 (2015). Until now, the Government
has conditioned its readiness to move from talks to
real negotiations on the issue of opposition unity and
a commitment to certain essential principles. I also
know how important the issue of counter-terrorism is
for the Government. But it is precisely at this time, as
terrorism is starting to be defeated in Syria - and we
are watching it with our own eyes - that we need to
preserve those gains on the ground and sustain them
through a real and inclusive political process, guided by
resolution 2254 (2015).

The Government should therefore be urged to
show by word and action that it genuinely wants to
have negotiations on key issues - credible, inclusive
governance, locally and centrally; a schedule and
process for creating a new constitution; and United
Nations-supervised elections - while the sovereignty,
unity, and territorial integrity of Syria is reaffirmed
and while terrorism is being combatted and defeated.
It is important that those States that are friends of the
Syrian Government encourage it to show its readiness to
move forward, including on the substance of resolution
2254 (2015), the agenda of the baskets, notjust in broad
terms but in specifics, with details, sequencing and
implementation modalities. We know that this will
not be easy, but the process has to be started, and the
United Nations will be more than willing to be a broker
in enabling real negotiations with the opposition.

For its part, the opposition, we believe, also has an
interest in and a duty now to signal that it does want to
speak with one voice and with a common platform in
genuine negotiations with the Government on the four
baskets and on the implementation of resolution 2254
(2015). No one is asking the opposition to suddenly stop
being the opposition, but we are urging the opposition
to realize that it is most credible and effective when it
stands together and shows readiness to negotiate, which
means give and take.

In that regard, there has frankly been a lot of hard
work up until now in our Office. We facilitated valuable
technical work on the three opposition platforms from
May to July. The opposition should be urged now to
take the opportunity presented by the efforts of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to convene what they call
an inclusive Riyadh 2 conference, which we hope and
trust will take place in October, before the Geneva talks
and before Astana. That conference should be the time
and place for the opposition, with the encouragement
of those who have influence over it - some of Whom
are in the Chamber - to ensure that it comes together
and presents a strategic approach to the negotiation
process towards realizing the vision, which remains the
same, contained in resolution 2254 (2015). The United
Nations is ready to support this vision and approach in
any way it can.

I would like to caution all sides against illusions of
victory or dreams of shortcuts. There is no substitute
for an United Nations, internationally supported
process based in Geneva on a comprehensive and
inclusive approach that also helps Syrians to rediscover
a modicum of trust and social cohesion after this
bitter conflict. We need to remember that hundreds of
thousands are dead and that millions carry the physical
or psychological wounds of a brutal conflict. Millions
have been displaced, either within Syria or beyond, even
as some - and we are glad to see this - are trying to
return home. Thousands have been detained, thousands
have disappeared - many without a trace, and with no
progress on the revelation of their fate.

Infrastructure, particularly civilian infrastructure,
has been destroyed on an unimaginable scale, and
internationally proscribed terrorists groups, even if they
are on the back foot today - and they are - have shown
their resilience in other places of the world in surviving
battlefield reverses and thriving again - which they
will or could - if there is no new political compact that
enables society to make the transition towards a shared,
inclusive and democratic future. The need to address
the unmet grievances that exist in Syria is apparent to
me from the range of Syrian voices who are aligned
neither with Government nor with the opposition but
who say that they do have grievances.

That is why the time has come for the focus to return
to Geneva, and for the intra-Syrian talks to take place
under the auspices of the United Nations, specifically
the Security Council. This is the only forum in which
the transitional political process envisaged by the
Council in resolution 2254 (2015) can be developed
with the Syrian parties themselves, with the full
legitimacy, which is what the United Nations provides,
and the backing of the international community. We
have a month until those talks, and we want everyone
to work during that month. Let us use it to prepare well
for the upcoming talks.

