My delegation would like to thank the Russian Federation, President of the Security Council for the month of October 2020, for organizing this open debate on a very important question of women and peace and security, to mark the twentieth anniversary of the milestone resolution 1325 (2000). As the international community celebrates this year the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) 20 years ago, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the visionary Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, with its promise of gender equality enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, and the fifth year of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Agenda, these anniversaries will, unfortunately, not sound like a triumph as long as the progress achieved so far is called into question by the succession of crises and emergencies, of which women are often the first victims. These commemorations should be an opportunity for all of us to reflect on what can be done to further translate the commitments made into concrete actions. The normative framework is already there; what remains is to fully implement it. The full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda requires full respect of the four pillars on which resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent resolutions are based, in particular the participation of women in decision-making and in the consolidation of peace; the protection of women's rights before, during and after conflicts; the role of women in conflict prevention; and the inclusion of women in the resolution and recovery phase, taking into account their specific needs during repatriation, resettlement, reintegration and reconstruction. Convinced of the crucial contribution of women as essential early-warning mechanisms, their awareness of threats to local security and their role in mediation, Morocco actively participates in a number of initiatives, namely, the promotion of mediation in the Mediterranean; launched by Morocco and Spain, the Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network, created by Spain; and the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network, launched by Italy. Moreover, Morocco, as an active member of the African Women Leaders Network, launched, in December 2019, in Casablanca, the Moroccan chapter of this network, with the objective of creating a joint movement aimed at strengthening the leadership of women at all levels of decision-making in political, economic and public spheres. The Moroccan chapter of the African Women Leaders Network focuses on several components, such as the empowerment of rural women, political participation, peace and security, the leadership of young women, financial inclusion and social mobilization. Furthermore, Morocco is at a very advanced stage of putting in place its national action plan on women and peace and security. Article 19 of the Constitution of the Kingdom of Morocco underlines that men and women enjoy, on an equal basis, civil, political, economic, social, cultural and environmental rights and freedoms. This principle is also stated in the other provisions of the Constitution, as well as in international conventions and covenants duly ratified by the Kingdom. The question of promoting gender equality and women's autonomy is concretized through the elaboration and implementation of a wide range of strategies, policies and laws, put in place by the various ministerial departments and by civil society, with the objective to mainstream the gender approach in all spheres. The place of women in the Royal Armed Forces is no exception. Indeed, the feminization of the army is an important development by the Royal Armed Forces. Based on the principle that the defence of the national territory is incumbent on women as well as on men, the integration of women into the Royal Armed Forces is in line with the aspirations of the Kingdom of Morocco. The new provisions of Dahir number 1-12-50, of 10 May 2013, providing for a special status for officers of the Royal Armed Forces, upholds the right of women executive officers to access higher military education, in particular to the advanced defence course, staff officer course and the senior officer course. The Kingdom of Morocco, as a major contributor of troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations since the 1960s, attaches particular importance to the participation of Moroccan women as United Nations peacekeeping troops. The Moroccan Royal Armed Forces are engaged in a global strategy that includes, in particular, the adaptation of existing infrastructure to accommodate the specific needs of women; financial and professional incentives for recruitment as well as deployment in peacekeeping mission; and a major reform of the recruitment process, which enabled women to pursue commanding careers in combat units. That reform will undoubtedly lead to a significant increase in women's participation in the near future. The Kingdom of Morocco currently has deployed 44 women in the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as part of the Rapid Deployment Battalion; five military staff officers in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic; as well as two military observers in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. We are confident that these numbers will increase in the near future, mainly thank to the recruitment reform. Finally, the Kingdom of Morocco would like to reiterate its unwavering commitment to the women and peace and security agenda, and its support for global efforts towards moving ahead with the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its successors, through a timely, robust and action-oriented approach that will allow for the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in peace, security and development. This can be achieved through building and strengthening confidence in women and believing in their full potential and merit.
