At the outset, Djibouti would like to commend the Dominican Republic for convening this open debate on the theme of youth and peace and security, as well as for preparing the concept note (S/2020/302). Issues surrounding young people and the challenges relating to their participation, their greater inclusion and the prevention of violence remain, for us, topics of concern and urgency. The first report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/167) submitted pursuant to resolution 2419 (2018), on the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), provides valuable and informative analysis of and insights into the situation of young people around the world and articulates targeted recommendations. We take this opportunity to commend the efforts of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in promoting this theme in the Security Council and for the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015). We thank South Africa for its initiative of December 2019, which led to the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2019/15, on the crucial topic of youth mobilization in the context of the major continental initiative promoting peace and security in Africa, "Silencing the guns by 2020". The report entitled "The missing peace: independent progress study on youth and peace and security" (see S/2018/86) illustrated how young people had for too long been portrayed as a challenge or problem. While it is true that one's youth is the period of life when rebellious potential is highest and there is a lack of trust in institutions, as well as a conscious effort to unmask them as illegitimate, we must also stress the vital importance of creating links, structures and institutions allowing for the full and robust participation of young people in building a peaceful and prosperous society. To achieve that goal, their motivations, expectations and aspirations must be taken into account. Based on our belief that young people can make a significant contribution to transmitting the ideals of peace and help resolve conflicts, Djibouti incorporated a major youth pillar into its mediation strategy for the Somali crisis that began in 2000, better known as of the Arta peace process. In a conscious effort to link generations, young people, women and traditional leaders have comprised what we refer to as the "forces of peace", as opposed to the warlords and cynical actors who have dominated the Somali political stage since the collapse of the Somali State in 1991. Numerous studies show that the lack of sufficient attention to material and economic issues or to mechanisms of exclusion highlights the disturbing phenomenon of the recruitment of young people into terrorist networks and transnational organized crime. The radicalization and recruitment strategy of Al-Shabaab militants - a group whose name means "young people" in Arabic - primarily targets this category of the population. An analysis of the geography of terrorism, as highlighted in national plans to combat and prevent violent extremism, further illustrates the importance of creating space for the inclusion of young people, in particular, but not only, in large, densely populated metropolitan areas. The global COVID-19 crisis and this shared historical experience could represent an opportunity to create a global civic awareness among young people. Experience shows that young people have acted and can still act selflessly while demonstrating unfailing solidarity in the face of challenges. In conclusion, Djibouti reiterates its support for your efforts, Mr. President, and supports the concrete recommendations of the Secretary-General concerning the four Ps - participation, prevention, partnership and protection - formulated with regard to the Security Council, Member States and the United Nations.
