Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me, Sir, to express my
delegation's satisfaction at seeing you preside over the
Security Council for the month of June. On this
occasion, I should like to assure you of our readiness to
cooperate fully with you and with your brotherly
country in any way possible to crown your efforts with
success, efforts to promote the role of the United
Nations and, particularly, this Security Council, in the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
would also like to express our appreciation to you for
this meeting. Allow us also to express our sincere
thanks to Ambassador Sergei Lavrov for his proposal
to convene this open meeting of the Security Council in
order to undertake a general debate on this important
and timely issue.

The Syrian Arab Republic is carefully following
the Security Council's continuing deliberations on the
sanctions imposed on Iraq. We are hopeful that the
current consultations will lead to a definitive end to the
suffering of millions of women, children, young people
and the elderly in Iraq, all of whom are suffering from
the harshness of the embargo and its destructive
consequences at various levels. We are glad to note an
increasing international understanding, as I heard in
delegations' statements yesterday and today. This
concern shows the importance of freeing the Iraqi
people from its suffering after more than 10 years of
the embargo, the sole consequence of which has been
more suffering and frustration for our Iraqi brothers.

At this stage, I would like to state that
continuation of the sanctions will lead to serious
repercussions for the unity of Iraq, for the security and
stability of the region and for unforeseeable
environmental and social deterioration, not to mention
a grinding halt to development in all its forms.

My delegation wishes to state that we are strongly
attached to the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq.
Syria opposes any measures taken against Iraq outside
of the purview of United Nations resolutions. We must
ensure the necessary credibility of the Security Council
in its implementation of United Nations resolutions.

Faced with the stormy developments of 1990, the
position of the Syrian Arab Republic was crystal clear.
We recall the constructive role played by Syria in the
liberation of brotherly Kuwait, assisting our brothers in
that nation by all means available to us. We continue
our endeavours to help Kuwait overcome the pain
afflicted upon it. The Syrian Arab Republic continues
to believe that it is necessary to eliminate all the
negative effects that have befallen the people of
Kuwait as a result of that war. We express our
attachment to the independence, sovereignty and
security of Kuwait, as well as to the return of Kuwaiti
prisoners of war, missing persons and others to their
families and homes. Let me stress the need for the
return of Kuwaiti properties to Kuwait in a practical
framework agreed upon fundamentally between the two
parties, Iraq and Kuwait, so that deliberations on these
issues may have a political and humanitarian
framework, thus leading to a solution.

The Syrian Arab Republic supports and abides by
the full implementation of the resolutions of
international legitimacy. We spoke out on the need to
maintain international legitimacy and the relevant
resolutions in all fields, without any double standards
in the implementation of such resolutions.

Within the debate on the varying aspects of
sanctions, Syria is not satisfied. We have repeatedly
said that we are not satisfied with sanctions in
principle. We have always called for the lifting of
sanctions imposed on the Iraqi people. Syria's position
proceeds from the following basic factors.

First, the principle of economic sanctions has
proved worthless and has shown that they are harmful
to international relations and therefore must be set
aside. They must not be resorted to.

Secondly, seeing that these sanctions have had
such harmful effects on the Iraqi people and have
increased its suffering, they, the sanctions, have also
been harmful to Iraq's neighbouring States and
peoples.

Thirdly, there is a general Arab consensus against
continuing sanctions with respect to Iraq. This was
made very clear during the deliberations among the
leaders of Arab States at the latest Arab summit in
Amman. Syria looks to this Council to take into
consideration, when debating and taking up the
differing viewpoints on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait, the major economic difficulties that have
confronted the neighbouring States as a consequence of
the sanctions imposed on Iraq. The Council must take
into consideration the utmost importance that
neighbouring States and peoples attach to the lifting of
the sanctions. These States must be able to resume a
normal cycle of economic life. We hope that new
resolutions in this regard will not jeopardize the
sovereignty of neighbouring States with respect to land
or the air.

Furthermore, any talk of a draft resolution tabled
in the Security Council on the elimination of weapons
of mass destruction in the region would be acceptable
if it came within a comprehensive purview aiming to
transform the Middle East into an area free of weapons
of mass destruction, especially nuclear weapons.
Therefore, this would include the need to compel Israel
to place all its nuclear installations under international
control. Security Council resolution 687 (1991) states
in paragraph 14 that the Council noted that measures to
be taken by Iraq stipulated in earlier paragraphs
represented steps towards the objective of creating a
Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction.

We are confident that the Security Council, which
bears the responsibility to maintain international peace
and security and to protect the life and future of
humanity, will take into consideration, in debating the
draft resolution on Iraq, the tragic humanitarian
situation of the people of Iraq and the peoples of
neighbouring countries.

There is a strong wish in international public
opinion, and particularly among Arab peoples, to lift
the sanctions imposed on the Iraqi people in order to
heal the wounds and put an end to suffering, so as to
allow the people of Iraq to open a new page on the long
road to comprehensive development - development
that we all seek within these United Nations.
