Mr. Palous (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate country Croatia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; and the European Free Trade
Association country Liechtenstein, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union is deeply concerned over the
ongoing fighting, the plight of civilians in and around
Gaza and the suffering and anguish of the entire
civilian population in the region. We deplore the
ongoing hostilities, which have caused high numbers of
civilian casualties, and we wish to express our sincere
condolences to the families of the Palestinian and
Israeli victims. We are profoundly disturbed by the
losses of civilian lives at the United Nations school in
J abaliya as a result of Israeli military action.

The European Union is determined to make every
effort to help stop the current violence and repeats its
call for an immediate cessation of military action on
both sides. There must be an unconditional halt to
rocket attacks by Hamas on Israel and an end to Israeli
military action.

The European Union urges the parties to fully
respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law. The European Union recalls that no
military solution can prevail in Gaza and calls for the
establishment of a lasting truce. The European Union
welcomes the initiative of Presidents Mubarak and
Sarkozy and follows with hope the latest developments
in that direction.
09-20163
The European Union also calls on the parties, in
particular Israel, to grant immediate, unhindered and
secure passage for the delivery of humanitarian aid to
the inhabitants of the Gaza Strip. The European Union
welcomes the three-hour halt of Israeli military
operations and calls on Israel to open a humanitarian
corridor in Gaza to allow humanitarian organizations
free access to the territory. The European Union is also
ready to step up its already substantial assistance for
the improvement of the humanitarian situation of those
in need.

The European Union fully supports the
international efforts to find an immediate solution to the
current crisis and takes an active part in these efforts.
The foreign ministers of the States members of the
European Union met in Paris on 30 December 2008 and
put forward their proposals to resolve the crisis.
Subsequently, a European ministerial delegation led by
the European Union presidency, represented by Czech
Foreign Minister Karel Schwarzenberg, travelled to the
region to seek an end to the violence, to alleviate the
current distressing humanitarian situation and to discuss
the European Union proposals agreed upon in Paris.

First, the current situation on the ground makes
the need to reach an immediate and permanent
ceasefire absolutely urgent. There must be an
unconditional halt to rocket attacks by Hamas on Israel
and an end to Israeli military action. The cessation of
fighting should allow a lasting and normal opening of
all border crossings, as provided for in the 2005
Agreement on Movement and Access. The European
Union is ready to re-dispatch the European Union
Border Assistance Mission to Rafah to enable its
reopening in cooperation with Egypt, the Palestinian
Authority and Israel. It is also willing to examine the
possibility of extending its assistance to other crossing
points, provided that the issues relating to security
have found a satisfactory response.

Secondly, immediate humanitarian action is
required. Food, urgent medical supplies and fuel must
be delivered to the Gaza Strip, the safe evacuation of
the injured must be allowed and immediate access for
humanitarian workers should be made possible through
the opening of crossing points. The European Union
dispatched a field mission to provide the most
appropriate response as quickly as possible, in
cooperation with the United Nations, the Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement, and non-governmental
organizations.
Lastly, the European Union reiterates the need to
step up the peace process. In this context, it welcomed
the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008). We are
convinced that there is no military solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in Gaza or elsewhere. The
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict must be
based on the process set out in Annapolis and in
accordance with the terms of reference of the Madrid
Conference, in particular land for peace, the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Quartet's Road
Map. It must lead towards the establishment of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State in
the West Bank and Gaza existing side by side with
Israel in peace and security.

In order to foster a lasting settlement, the
European Union, while neither intervening in the
negotiations nor prejudging their outcome, reiterates its
willingness to assist in the implementation of a final
peace agreement when the time comes. The European
Union calls upon the parties to desist from any actions
that threaten the viability of a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement, in conformity with international law.

The European Union is fully aware of the
responsibility of the international community,
especially the Quartet. The European Union also
reiterates the importance of the Arab partners'
sustained, broad and constructive commitment. In this
respect, it considers that the Arab Peace Initiative
offers a solid and appropriate basis for peace in the
Middle East to which all parties should give their
consideration.

The European Union also encourages inter-
Palestinian reconciliation behind President Mahmoud
Abbas, commends the mediation efforts of Egypt and
the Arab League in this respect, and is prepared to
support any Government which respects the Palestine
Liberation Organization's commitments, resolutely
supports the peace negotiations with Israel and pursues
policies and measures that reflect the Quartet's
principles.

Finally, let me stress once again that the
European Union is determined to assist alongside the
other members of the Quartet and the region's States in
ending violence and re-launching the peace process.

