Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative Arnault for his briefing on the report
of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2018/874).
We are very pleased to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs ofColombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia,
who is here with us this morning. The commitments
made by the new President of Colombia during his
inauguration certainly sent a positive message to all
who closely follow the implementation of Colombia's
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. Real commitments were made
to supporting the more effective integration of former
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP), as noted in
the Secretary-General's report.

The signing of a broad-based seven-point national
pact for life and the protection of social leaders and
human rights defenders was also a big milestone in
addressing the main challenge to the implementation
of the peace agreement. We believe that the new
Government's commitment to bringing development,
security and the rule of law to the conflict-affected
communities in a more coordinated and focused way is
the most important decision that it has reached to date
with regard to consolidating the gains made so far.

We know that Colombia is still facing so many
challenges in making the terms of the peace agreement
a reality, and the Council should continue to provide
all the necessary support to the Colombian parties in
addressing those challenges and expediting the full
implementation of the agreements. As the Secretary-
General's report indicated, the departure of several
former FARC-EP commanders from training and
reintegration areas, especially in the south-eastern
region, is a worrying sign. The underlying reasons for
that departure should therefore be addressed as quickly
as possible.

We are also aware of various sensitive issues,
including the delays in the socioeconomic reintegration
of FARC-EP combatants into civilian life, the issue of
illicit economies, the continued killings of community
leaders and former FARC-EP members and other issues
highlighted in the report that might potentially create
difficulties for the efforts aimed at consolidating peace
in the country.

With regard to the negotiations between the
Colombian Government and the National Liberation
Army, we are encouraged by the report that the two
parties have concluded a sixth round of negotiations.
While that is good progress, the parties should continue
to engage in constructive dialogue with a view to
reaching a permanent peace agreement. We commend
Special Representative Arnault and the United Nations
personnel in Colombia for all their efforts in support of
the peace agreements. We also reiterate our appreciation
to the countries of the region and other international
partners that continue to closely support and monitor
the implementation of the peace agreement. Finally, we
want to take this opportunity to reaffirm our continued
support to the full implementation of the Colombian
peace agreement and stand in solidarity with the people
and Government of Colombia as they continue their
march towards sustainable peace.

