Ms. Bensouda: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to once again engage with the Security
Council on my Office of the Prosecutor's ninth report
on Libya.

My Office welcomes the ongoing dialogue with
Council members, and in particular with Rome Statute
States parties that continue, in ways large and small,
to bring justice to the Council's table as a paramount
issue. It is those efforts that can tangibly demonstrate
that justice and peace are indeed complementary and
can go hand-in-hand. My Office supports those efforts
as an essential tool for facilitating the work of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in the halls of the
United Nations and beyond.

To that end, I extend my sincere gratitude to the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
in particular its Human Rights, Transitional Justice and
Rule of Law Division. The Mission's support for my
Office in its ongoing assessment of the admissibility
of the Abdullah Al-Senussi case has been essential. In
particular, I would like to acknowledge with thanks
the notable commitment of the United Nations Special
Representative and UNSMIL Head, Mr. Bernardino
Leon. My Office looks forward to continuing to work
closely with the Mission in the coming weeks and
months.

Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to
the Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office for its ongoing
professional engagement in implementing the November
2013 memorandum of understanding between the
Government of Libya and my Office. Together, we
remain committed to bringing fair and impartial justice
to Libya's victims.

The deteriorating security situation in Libya
continues to be a matter of great concern not only
for my Office, but for the Council and the broader
international community. Innocent civilians continue
to bear the brunt of the deteriorating security situation.
The frequency and brutality of assassinations, terrorist
attacks and threats to media workers and human rights
defenders - and in particular against women - are
especially troubling. Libya continues to be split, with
two Governments vying for legitimacy.

The international community must be more
proactive in exploring solutions in order to tangibly help
Libya restore stability and strengthen accountability
for Rome Statute crimes. To that end, my Office has
encouraged the establishment of an international
contact group on justice issues through which material,
legal and other support could be provided to Libya.
My Office is modestly contributing to those efforts
by fostering cooperative efforts between investigative
authorities in Libya and other countries. One proposal
I submit before the Council is for a willing State with
substantial experience in transitional justice to consider
partnering with Libya to explore more concretely how
such a contact group might be brought to life in the near
future.

It is crucial for such efforts to include local actors
so that their voices and views on achieving justice are
amplified and heard. My Office appreciates the efforts
that the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, as
well as the Permanent Mission of Libya to the United
Nations, have made to that end, and looks forward to
continuing such efforts with those and other partners
as we forge ahead in finding solutions to the crisis in
Libya.

As I suggested in my previous statements, the
Libyan authorities should facilitate a Visit to New
York by representatives from the local councils of
Misrata and Tawergha to meet and engage with Council
members. My Office agrees with those who believe
that facilitating a solution for the Tawergha issue will
have symbolic importance and resonance in Libya.
While it has not yet been possible to organize such a
visit, I believe that we can achieve results before our
next briefing, in November, with the help of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, the Libyan Mission
to the United Nations, the Libyan focal point to the ICC
and other initiatives engaging with Libyan local leaders
and civil society to promote justice.

I have taken note of the Council's resolution 2174
(2014), of 27 August 2014, and resolution 2213 (2015),
of 27 March 2015. Both make reference to the referral of
the Libyan situation to the ICC in resolution 1970 (2011)
and stress the importance of the Libyan Government's
full cooperation with the ICC and with my Office.
Like the Council, we deplore the increasing violence in
Libya, and we are deeply concerned at the impact of the
violence on Libya's civilian population and institutions.
Accountability for those responsible for violations or
abuses of human rights or violations of international
humanitarian law is essential.

I have also taken note of the Council's call for
accountability for the use of violence against civilians
and civilian institutions by groups purportedly
claiming allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), or Daesh. My Office believes that
ICC jurisdiction over Libya prima facie extends to
such alleged crimes. I recall, however, the principle
that States, in the first instance, bear the primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute their nationals
who have joined forces with ISIL and are alleged to be
committing Rome Statute crimes. Similarly, my Office
continues to be concerned about alleged indiscriminate
attacks in heavily populated areas by both Operation
Libyan Dawn and Operation Dignity forces, resulting
in civilian casualties, in particular in Benghazi, Tripoli,
Warshefana and in the Nafusa Mountains. I reiterate my
call to all parties involved in the conflict to refrain from
targeting civilians or civilian objects, or committing
any other crimes that may fall within ICC jurisdiction,
and to be vigilant and actively take all the necessary
measures to prevent the commission of such crimes.
My Office is actively considering the investigation and
prosecution of further cases and will not hesitate to take
such action as may be needed to contribute to ending
impunity in Libya or to contribute to such action by
other relevant prosecutorial authorities.

Although the Libyan Prosecutor-General's office in
particular has engaged in fruitful cooperation with my
Office, I must reiterate that there are specific areas in
which the Government of Libya is in non-compliance
with the Court's orders. In particular, I recall that, on
10 December 2014, the Pre-Trial Chamber found that
Libya had failed to comply with the Chamber's requests
to surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court, to
return to his defence the originals of the documents
seized in Zintan by the Libyan authorities from the
former defence counsel for Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and to destroy any copies thereof.

The Pre-Trial Chamber decided to refer the matter
of Libya's non-compliance to the Council in accordance
with regulation 109 (4) of the regulations of the Court.
The Office notes that the Council referred to that
decision in resolution 2213 (2015). The Office continues
to press Libyan authorities to comply and to consult
with the Court in order to resolve any problems that
may impede or prevent the execution of the requests.
The Council is encouraged to do the same.

The Rome Statute provides for such consultation.
In the light of the continuing cooperation that my
Office receives from the Prosecutor-General's Office,
the importance of constructive consultations to address
problems that may impede or prevent the execution
of those requests is even greater. My Office will do
whatever it can to encourage and facilitate those
consultations, with the goal of ensuring Libya's full
cooperation with the Court.

In relation to the case of Abdullah Al-Senussi,
the Office stated in its last report to the Council that
no decision had been taken at the time to submit a
request for review under article 19 (10) of the Rome
Statute. As indicated, the Office had requested from
Libya information on the national proceedings against
Mr. Al-Senussi and had taken steps to access data and
analysis from independent trial-monitoring sources.

The Office has since received information from
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya on the
domestic proceedings, as well as from the Libyan
Prosecutor-General's Office and from independent
civil society members. Based on that information and
on an internal analysis of available video recordings
of selected trial sessions received from United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, the Office has concluded
that it is not in possession of new facts that would
fully satisfy it that the basis on which the case against
Mr. Al-Senussi had previously been found inadmissible
before the ICC has been negated. This position is taken
on the basis of information currently available to the
Office and is subject to change should we receive further
reliable information that would warrant a reassessment
of the finding. The Office will continue to monitor the
situation in Libya and the domestic proceedings against
Mr. Al-Senussi.
In conclusion, I will simply reiterate that there
is more that we can and must all do to ensure peace
and justice in Libya. I will do my part in the effort to
end impunity, and I look forward to working with our
partners in Libya and among Libyan civil society and
grass-roots leadership, at the United Nations, among
the Rome Statute States parties and with the Libyan
Mission to the United Nations to bring those plans to
fruition.

