Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate. Of course, I align myself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union.

My comments will focus on the relationship
between the protection of civilians and the
responsibility to protect, which is an important
relationship that has been acknowledged in various
resolutions on the protection of civilians in recent
years.

The two principles - the protection of civilians
and the responsibility to protect - have different
origins, and their practitioners do not always seem to
see eye-to-eye. The Netherlands therefore believes that
it is important to enhance our collective understanding
of both principles and how they are related in their
implementation.

Conceptually, the responsibility to protect and the
protection of civilians are indeed distinct. The
responsibility to protect is focused on the four specific
crimes of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, be they committed in conflict
or non-conflict situations. The protection of civilians,
however, is broader in scope, as it aims to protect the
general safety, dignity and integrity of all human
beings, while at the same time being focused on
conflict situations in particular.

At the same time, the two principles are also
closely related, as they share a similar normative
foundation that consists of four elements. The first is
that the protection of individuals is a primary
responsibility of each State. Secondly, the international
community plays a supportive role concerning both
principles. Thirdly, prevention and early warning are
key aspects of the protection of civilians and the
responsibility to protect. Let me repeat here that
prevention is a key component. Fourthly, neither the
protection of civilians nor the responsibility to protect
is synonymous with military intervention. Both are
much broader concepts.

Support for the protection of civilians and the
responsibility to protect alike has also grown among
the membership of the United Nations. We welcome
that development. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations has made important progress
this year on the protection of civilians and effective
peacekeeping. The framework for drafting
comprehensive strategies for the protection of civilians
in United Nations peacekeeping operations is a
welcome tool. The three-tier approach for the
protection of civilians, as described in that framework,
holds great promise and enhances prevention aspects.

We also saw increasing consensus on the
responsibility to protect during the General Assembly
debates in 2009 and 2010. In 2009, the Secretary-
General articulated a three-pillar approach for
implementing the responsibility to protect, which has
been very useful.

In his 2010 report (A/64/864), the Secretary-
General focused, much to our agreement, on the
importance of early warning mechanisms in preventing
the four responsibility-to-protect crimes. The proposals
to strengthen the Office of the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide attracted the overwhelming
support in the Fifth Committee and the General
Assembly in December 2010.

A second positive development is that progress in
practice has also been achieved, especially in two
respects, namely, prevention - the importance of
which I already mentioned - and military measures.
Timely mediation by the international community in
Kenya and Guinea prevented further mass atrocities
and protected civilians. Both have made further action
by the Council unnecessary and, at the same time, set
important precedents for preventive measures.

As far as military measures are concerned, a
distinction can be made between situations in which a
United Nations mission is already present on the
ground and those in which that is not the case. For
instance, the United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) played an important role in halting further
violence in the country through the robust
implementation of its mandate to protect civilians. In
doing so, UNOCI also contributed to the prevention of
further developments that might have amounted to
crimes against humanity.

In Libya, the implementation of resolutions 1970
(2011) and 1973 (2011) by the coalition resulted in the
protection of civilians and the prevention of massive
crimes against humanity in Benghazi and other cities in
the country. The language of the recent resolutions on
Libya acknowledges the very close relationship
between the protection of civilians and the
responsibility to protect. The Netherlands is very
pleased about that.

We believe that we need to acknowledge the
relationship between the responsibility to protect and
the protection of civilians. In our view, doing so
strengthens the implementation of both principles,
individually and jointly. That includes looking for
synergies between the two principles. For example, the
reform of the judiciary creates a safer environment for
civilians and helps to prevent the four responsibility-
to-protect crimes from happening.

The same holds true for the implementation of
human rights conventions, the training of police forces
and support to inclusive political processes. Early
warning is another area where synergies are possible. I
would like to highlight two specific issues in that
regard. First, the United Nations, and the Council in
particular, should focus more systematically on
prevention, including in situations that are not yet on
the Council's agenda. We therefore welcome the
monthly briefings to the Council by the Department of
Political Affairs. We also welcome the statements by
the Secretary-General on serious country situations and
his role in drawing the Council's attention to them.
That is a good example of putting into practice his
promise to inform the Council about what it needs to
hear, not what it wants to know. We hope that the
Council will consistently act on his recommendations,
and we are heartened by the progress already made in
that respect.

Secondly, integrated peacekeeping missions and
special political missions of course have a very
important role to play in the protection of civilians. In
our view, those missions can and should also support,
within their means and capabilities, host Governments
in the prevention of the four crimes and in the exercise
of their responsibility to protect. Where appropriate,
mandates should enable missions to fulfil both of those
roles.

In conclusion, we believe that the protection of
civilians and the responsibility to protect are extremely
important principles. We have to acknowledge their
similarities and strengthen their relationship in
practice. That will benefit both principles and their
implementation in any given situation.

