Ms. Sison (United States): Ithank Assistant Secretary-
General, Mr. Miroslav Jenea; Assistant Secretary
General of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), Mr. Hameed Opeloyeru; and Mr. Souleymane
Bachir Diagne for joining us.

Our discussion today is a timely one. Over the past
two years, States Members of the United Nations have
shown an unprecedented willingness to collaborate
on preventing violent extremism. In December 2014,
resolution 2178 (2014) called on States to engage local
communities and non-governmental actors to counter
violent extremism. That was a major step forward. For
the first time, the need to counter violent extremism
was recognized in a Security Council resolution and
an essential element of the solution was identified.
Then, in January of this year, the Secretary-General
presented his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism to the General Assembly, which included
wise recommendations well worth implementing, such
as the call for the development of national and regional
action plans to prevent violent extremism. This past
July, in its fifth review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the General Assembly
urged States to unite against violent extremism, as and
when conducive to terrorism.

The United States welcomes the steps taken by the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation to partner with
the United Nations on that agenda, together with other
organizations. We are appreciative of OIC's support of
statements on 16 January and 8 April for the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
I would highlight in particular the fruitfulness of the
cooperation between OIC and the Global Counter-
Terrorism forum in bringing together a diverse group
of religious scholars, academics, Government officials
and experts in the field of education and preventing
violent extremism to discuss best practices and the role
of religious education in promoting peace. So how can
we build on that recent work by the United Nations and
OIC to create an even stronger strategic partnership?

One way would be to create a high-level
coordinator for the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. Such a coordinator would improve
communication between the United Nations and OIC on
counter-terrorism issues, speaking authoritatively from
the United Nations side with a single voice on behalf
of the multitude of United Nations entities engaged in
countering violent extremism. The coordinator could
be a more effective liaison between the United Nations
and OIC than is possible under the current framework,
which could benefit both organizations. In addition, the
coordinator could harness the potential of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force to provide
technical and other assistance to Member States and
international organizations. Accordingly, we urge all
States, in particular OIC members, to express support
for such a coordinator to the incoming Secretary-
General and his transition team. There is no single
step that would do more to strengthen the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and OIC.

A second way to enhance the strategic partnership is
to recommit ourselves to upholding human rights in all
of our activities to counter violent extremism. It is easy
for all of us to say that we respect and promote human
rights in our countering violent extremism efforts but
what matters is whether we actually protect such rights
in practice: the right to freedom of expression, freedom
of association and peaceful assembly. It is vital for the
United Nations and OIC to enshrine human rights in
their countering violent extremism strategies and act
when States fail to do so.

Of course, such rights are intrinsically important
because our people - all people - are entitled to
them. But such rights are also practically important,
indeed essential, to successfully counter violent
extremism. Voices from outside Governments, civil
society, community activists, youth leaders, often have
more credibility with their peers, fellow citizens, than
we as Government officials do on that topic. Generally
speaking, they are better advocates for moderation,
understanding and peace than we are. We need to
ensure that such voices have the freedom, space and
confidence to speak.

Thirdly, we must rededicate ourselves to working
to counter intolerance and discrimination against any
religious group, including Muslims, in each of our
countries. Here at the United Nations, we all often
emphasize and re-emphasize that terrorism cannot
and should not be associated with any religion or
nationality but we are not the audience we need to
convince. We must continue to do all that we can to
convey that message within our own societies. In the
2015 White House Summit on Countering Violent
Extremism, President Obama noted that inexcusable
acts of violence have been committed in the United
States and around the world by people of different faiths
and that it is not unique to any one group, geography or
period of time. That principle is a fundamental part of
the United States national strategy to counter violent
extremism. We must not lose the momentum we have
built here at the United Nations in partnership with OIC
and other groups and in our own States and societies in
countering violent extremism.

