We wish to thank the Estonian presidency of the Council for organizing today's open debate and the Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2020/366) and briefing. We also thank the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the Nobel Peace Laureate, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, for their comprehensive briefings. Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the European Union and wishes to add some remarks in its national capacity. Stepping into the new decade we have been faced with the largest global crisis seen in modern times. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has challenged our humanity and solidarity and tested our commitment to leaving no one behind. It has highlighted the weakest links in our societies and social protection systems and exposed the most vulnerable. However, it has also provided us with the opportunity to build back better, stronger and more resilient. It is our responsibility now to seize the opportunity presented. It is deeply saddening and concerning that, despite some positive steps and strengthened commitments, the evidence on the ground continues to provide a grim picture of human suffering and an alarming number of casualties in armed conflicts. That is why Slovenia strongly supports the call of the Secretary-General for an immediate global ceasefire in order to ensure delivery of humanitarian assistance to and protection of the most vulnerable to COVID-19 in situations of armed conflict. It is the primary responsibility of Governments to protect civilians. We need to do more and better when it comes to protecting civilians and the most affected in armed conflict, including by ensuring access to health services and clean water. The protection of civilians is not just an assault on our conscience; it is also our legal obligation. Moreover, it is particularly alarming that not only are civilians continuing to be disproportionally affected by armed conflict, they are also becoming the means itself by which war is waged. Assisting victims and alleviating the pain of those affected by armed conflict, especially children, has always been among Slovenia's highest priorities. Well over 500 children coming from active or post-conflict areas have been rehabilitated in Slovenia. Psychological and physical assistance and rehabilitation, social rehabilitation training for pre-school and school counsellors, and a mine-risk education programme implemented by the non-profit humanitarian organization ITF Enhancing Human Security are just a few of the examples of my country's efforts to provide for the overall well-being and development of children affected by conflicts. Women, children, refugees, persons with disabilities and older persons continue to be the most affected by armed conflict. Attacks against schools constitute a major violation of the rights of the child and international law. Strengthening the protection of education from attack and restricting the use of schools and universities for military purposes are important aspects of protecting children in armed conflict. They are essential for ensuring children's right to education and for providing them with a safe and enabling environment during this period. Without such an environment, children will have no chance as youth to participate in and contribute to post-conflict reconstruction. They are the ones that will have to live with the consequences of the war in future. Slovenia has therefore joined others in endorsing the Safe Schools Declaration and continues to promote its implementation. As the greatest global health crisis in the world since the end of the Second World War, COVID-19 has exacerbated the vulnerabilities of the least protected in societies across the globe, and the threat to lives, security and well-being of those in situations of armed conflict is even greater. Even though women and girls account for the vast majority of the recorded victims of sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflicts, men and boys are not immune to it. It is abhorrent that sexual and gender-based violence continues to be part of armed conflict, including as a tactic of warfare. This is unacceptable and cannot be tolerated. We need to do more to prevent its occurrence, prosecute and punish perpetrators and provide help, support and justice to all victims. Women and youth are important actors in ensuring the protection of civilians. They are often the first responders on the ground, the caregivers, health workers and peacebuilders. They are also the missing piece of the puzzle in finding lasting and sustainable solutions and in lessening the burden of civilians in conflict situations. It is therefore essential that they have an equal role in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution, peacebuilding and post-conflict recovery. Preventive action should be our key investment. Only through preventive efforts and the use of preventive-diplomacy tools can the protection of people be achieved and their suffering truly diminished. Respect and compliance with international humanitarian law and international human rights law must be ensured, and those who commit crimes against civilians must be prosecuted. There must be no space for immunity. As has been seen in many cases, there can be no sustainable peace without justice. Marking the seventieth anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva Conventions, Slovenia published the official Slovene translation of the Conventions together with the three Additional Protocols. Ensuring accountability and fighting impunity for the most serious crimes, such as genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, are essential components of prevention and protection. They are key to preventing armed conflicts, protecting civilians during those conflicts and building sustainable peace. Such international mechanisms as the International Criminal Court, the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar have important roles to play in these efforts. Before concluding, let us briefly touch upon the issue of access to humanitarian assistance. Slovenia calls once again on every party in every conflict to fully cooperate with the United Nations, its agencies and its partners in conflict areas to deliver, without any impediments or preconditions, the life-saving assistance to the millions of people who need it. The protection of civilians is the most important duty of international peace operations and missions. Effective and comprehensive peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations with robust mandates that are flexible enough to provide protection of and assistance to civilian populations are critical. This also requires the Security Council's strong and continuous engagement in protecting civilians on the ground, which includes systematic and timely responses to the grave violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
