The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Belarus, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia,
Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador,
Georgia, Greece, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Japan, Kuwait, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, the Philippines, the Republic of
Korea, Singapore, South Africa, the Sudan,
Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Viet Nam and
Zimbabwe in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aldouri
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Nesho
(Albania), Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr. Listre
(Argentina), Mr. Dauth (Australia), Mr. Ivanou
(Belarus), Mr. Murillo de la Rocha (Bolivia), Mr.
Moura (Brazil), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr.
Giraldo (Colombia), Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla
(Cuba), Mr. Padilla Tonos (Dominican Republic),
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Lagos Pizzati (El Salvador), Mr. Lordkipanidze (Georgia), Mr.
Vassilakis (Greece), Mr. Ingolfsson (Iceland), Mr.
Nambiar (India), Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia), Mr.
Zarif (Islamic Republic ofIran), Mr. Haraguchi
(Japan), Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Kittikhoun
(Lao People 's Democratic Republic), Mr.
Jegermanis (Latvia), MrDiab (Lebanon), Mr. Own
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Zainuddin
(Malaysia), Mr. Mackay (New Zealand), Mr.
Sevilla Somoza (Nicaragua), Mrs. Yahaya
(Nigeria), Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Manalo
(Philippines), Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea), Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore), Mr. Kumalo
(South Africa), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Staehelin
(Switzerland), Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand), Mr.
Cengizer (Turkey), Mr. Ngo Duc Thang (Viet Nam)
and Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe) took the seats
reservedfor them at the side ofthe Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that l have received a letter from
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, which reads as follows:

"In accordance with article 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, I have the honour to request the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, Permanent Observer of the League
of Arab States to the United Nations, in the
discussion of the agenda item entitled 'The
situation between Iraq and Kuwait', which will
start on 11 March 2003."

That letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2003/292.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Yahya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States to the United Nations, Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, to take the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 11 March 2003 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Sudan to the United Nations, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the Islamic
Group, I have the honour to request that
Ambassador Mokhtar Lamani, Permanent
Observer of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to the United Nations, be allowed to
participate in the debate in the Security Council
on the agenda item entitled 'The situation
between Iraq and Kuwait', in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council."

This letter will be issued as a document of the Security
Council (S/2003/298).

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Mokhtar Lamani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Lamani to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in response to the request contained
in a letter dated 7 March 2003 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Malaysia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (document 8/2003/283).

I welcome the presence in our midst of the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Frechette.

Before opening the floor, I wish to request all
participants to limit their statement to no more than
seven minutes in order to enable the Council to work
efficiently within its timetable. I thank you for your
understanding and cooperation.

I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.


