Mr. Inzko (spoke in French): I appreciate this
opportunity to introduce my sixth report as High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina - the
fortieth report of the High Representative (see S/201 1/682). My briefing today is my first statement as
High Representative since my duties as European
Union Special Representative were assumed by the
new Head of the European Union Delegation to Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Peter Sorensen. We are working
together in close and even friendly relations. through
that collaboration, I expect us to demonstrate the
international community's unity and strong support for
Bosnia and Herzegovina as it pursues its aspirations to
Euro-Atlantic integration, while fully ensuring that the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina - the Dayton-Paris Peace
2
Accords - are integrally respected and implemented,
and that internal reforms to implement those
agreements is not endangered.

(spoke in English)

When I spoke to the Council one year ago (see S/PV.6421), I noted with reserved optimism that, in
spite of all the difficulties that Bosnia and Herzegovina
was facing, the previous year had brought a number of
positive developments, especially in the context of
regional cooperation and reconciliation and Visa-free
travel to the European Union (EU). I would note that
Serbian President Boris Tadie and Croatian President
Ivo Josipovie have continued their policies of positive
engagement, and that the regional situation remains
better than at any other point since the war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Since my last report (8/2011/283), however,
Bosnia and Herzegovina itself has continued to see
political stagnation and some backsliding. When I
spoke to the Council in May (see S/PV.6529), I was
forced to submit a special report that detailed serious
violations of the Dayton Agreement by one of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's two entities. Sadly, since that time
and in spite of the good will of the international
community, the challenges to the Dayton Agreement
have continued. One of the basic reasons for those
challenges lies at the core of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
political culture, in which politicians show little
willingness to compromise, avoiding dialogue on
crucial issues and regularly misusing the system.

More than 12 months after the general elections,
the State-level Council of Ministers has yet to be
formed and many State institutions are under serious
political, institutional and economic pressure, with a
clear impact on their efficiency and functionality. A
State-level budget for 2011 has yet to be passed, and
the State-level institutions are struggling under
temporary financing. The prospect of a budget being
adopted soon for 2011, or for 2012, appears distant.
The European Union and the Euro-Atlantic integration
processes effectively remain blocked due to the
continued adherence to narrow ethno-nationalist
policies. Not surprisingly, the economy continues to
suffer.

In that context, international credit-rating
agencies downgraded the country's outlook, not for
economic reasons but specifically citing the negative
political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In its
11-59360
annual progress report on Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
European Commission also noted the country's
political problems.

During the reporting period, Republika Srpska
continued its legal and political actions and sharp
rhetoric that have challenged Bosnia and
Herzegovina's State-level institutions, competencies
and laws, and my authority under the Dayton
Agreement, as well as relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

Although the 13 April adoption by the Republika
Srpska National Assembly of a referendum decision
was repealed on 1 June, the controversial conclusions
of the same date continue to influence Republika
Srpska policies in regard to both the institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and my Office and mandate. I
should point out that the Republika Srpska repealed its
referendum decision only after the direct, personal
intervention of Lady Catherine Ashton, the European
Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy.

I would like to take this opportunity to publicly
thank Lady Ashton for her efforts, which enabled me to
avoid the use of my executive mandate, which at this
point is a process that I am keen to refrain from using
whenever it is possible to resolve difficulties by other
means.

In that regard and in keeping with the principle of
local political ownership, during the reporting period I
maintained the long-standing policy of refraining from
the use of my executive mandate unless absolutely
necessary, despite the ongoing political difficulties. In
fact, the only case in the past six months in which I
used my executive authorities was in order to lift
sanctions imposed by my predecessors in connection
with non-cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I did this
following the capture and transfer to The Hague of
Ratko Mladic', the last ICTY fugitive accused of crimes
connected to the Bosnian war. I therefore lifted the
ban, which was my only use of my executive powers
over the past six months.

Unfortunately, the arrest of Mladie was not
accompanied by a decline in the use of inflammatory
nationalistic rhetoric, including further statements by
officials of the Republika Srpska in support of State
dissolution and chauvinistic comments directed against
other ethnic groups. In this regard, I would like to
11-59360
express my deep concern about recent public
statements from the Republika Srpska that challenge
the statehood of Bosnia and Herzegovina by
characterizing it as a "state union" - "drzavna
zajednica" - ignoring the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, together with Slovenia and Croatia, was
admitted as a Member State to the United Nations on
22 May 1992, through a direct and unanimous
recommendation of the Security Council on 18 May of
that year. These statements, which undermine the
constitutional arrangements provided for under the
Dayton Peace Agreement, need to be taken seriously,
especially in light of other actions directly challenging
the Agreement, as set out in my current and previous
reports.

Some Federation officials and politicians have
also used unwelcome rhetoric, as detailed in my report.
The two leading Croat parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continue to question the legality and
legitimacy of the incumbent Federation Government.
Some Bosniak political leaders have escalated their
rhetoric in response to statements from the Republika
Srpska leadership and warned of possible conflict were
there an attempt to divide the country. I have long
warned about the serious damage this rhetoric is doing,
and I take this opportunity to again call on Bosnia and
Herzegovina's leaders to contribute to fostering
reconciliation, dialogue and coexistence, rather than
spreading chauvinism, fear and mistrust.

Given the aforementioned negative trends and
actions, it is not surprising that there has not been
significant movement on the EU agenda or on NATO
membership. Nor has there been any movement
towards fulfilling the five objectives and two
conditions necessary for the closure of my Office.

I am also deeply concerned about the situation
with respect to the rule of law, as Republika Srpska
regularly questions the very competences of the State-
level judicial institutions, including the jurisdiction and
role of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court itself. The authorities have also continued to
undermine and question other key State-level
institutions in the country. It is difficult to avoid a
perception that the intention is to portray institutions as
dysfunctional and therefore not needed at the State
level.

This is the wrong approach. Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the entities will turn a corner
3
decisively only when political leaders understand that
the entities and State will be strong only when both
levels of Government are strong; both will go from
strength to strength only when they work together and
the State is given the support it needs to be effective.

Difficulties have also arisen in the Federation,
and 16 years after the Peace Agreement was signed
there continues to be a need for my Office to step in to
address large gaps in the country's legal system that
create significant legal and political problems for the
country. I had to intervene in July in the Central Bosnia
Canton to address an attempt to ignore the Constitution
and form a Government that could have raised tensions
to an unacceptable level. Due to my intervention - not
using my Bonn powers but in the form of a letter - the
local parties have been able to resolve the situation in
line with the constitution, and pave the way for the
formation of Governments in other cantons and
possibly even at the State level.

Given What I continue to see, there is still a Clear
need for my Office to remain in place in order to fill
such legal gaps and maintain stability. This need will
continue until such time as Bosnia and Herzegovina is
self-sustainable and firmly and irreversibly on the path
towards EU and NATO integration. Something similar
to this approach played out in my own country, Austria,
after its liberation by American, Russian, French and
British soldiers in 1945. The allied forces stayed until
they were sure there would be no revival of Nazism
and that democracy was firmly rooted in the country.

My core mandate is to oversee the Dayton Peace
Agreement. The Dayton Agreement is at its heart a
peace treaty, and every day we see signs that, should it
unravel, serious consequences could emerge not only
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also for the region
and the broader international community. Given the
continued negative trends and political instability, it is
essential that the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with a Chapter VII executive mandate,
remain in place and continue to assist the Office of the
High Representative and other international
organizations to fulfil their respective mandates.

While we must now focus on the immediate
difficulties, I believe that it is also important to take a
critical look at what we need to do to secure a
functional and viable country in the long term. It is
clear that we need to support the ownership principle in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this regard, allow me to
say a few words on how I think the international
community should approach Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the future.

We all agree that the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is within the European Union and Euro-
Atlantic institutions. The EU and NATO therefore have
an important role to play in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
assisting the country to fulfil the requirements for its
aspirations to membership of both organizations. It is
important that Bosnia and Herzegovina remain on the
international community's agenda until the job is
complete. There are some who believe that it is time
now to leave Bosnia and Herzegovina on its own; some
talk about international fatigue in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I do not share this view, and believe that
such moves would open the door to those who would
attempt to weaken and eventually divide the State, and
could lead to renewed disorder.

The international community has achieved
tremendous results in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the
past 15 years. However, it is clear from the current
political situation that we have not yet achieved a
lasting and sustainable political settlement that would
ensure a durable prospect for peace. Our continued
commitment to and focus on Bosnia and Herzegovina
is the way to get to the objective that we all want to
reach - a Bosnia and Herzegovina that is stable, safe
and solving its problems institutionally as it moves
towards full Euro-Atlantic integration. I am truly
convinced that this can become a reality if we remain
committed to the cause and if we finally see a
fundamental change in the way politics are conducted
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with dialogue and healthy
compromise becoming the rule rather than the
exception.

In spite of the challenges Bosnia and
Herzegovina faces today, I would like to congratulate
the country on its tenure as a member of this body and
for the excellent job it has done. Security Council
membership has given Bosnia and Herzegovina the
opportunity to make new friends around the world and
gain the respect of many countries, and should be
counted as a significant foreign policy success. In my
personal opinion, it is the country's biggest foreign
policy success since Dayton.

I would also like to thank personally Ambassador
Ivan Barbalic' for his dedicated work, his commitment,
his professionalism and his idealism.
11-59360
As we look to the future, I wish to assure the
Council that I am fully committed to carrying out my
mandate to the letter and ensuring that the Peace
Agreement is fully respected. The way forward is not
to go backwards. I am also committed to assisting
Peter Sorensen in his duties as European Union Special
Representative, in every way possible to advance the
EU agenda. I look to the Security Council and to the
Peace Implementation Council to support me fully in
doing my job, in keeping with the mandate the Council
has given me, and in building on a successful peace
effort in the country so that we may reach the point
where peace, stability and the country's Euro-Atlantic
future are irreversible beyond any shadow of a doubt.

Let us work together, the entire international
community, to scale the last remaining metres of the
mountain to secure the peace and to secure Bosnia and
Herzegovina's EU future. Together, we can do it.
Together, we will succeed.

