Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you and your delegation for organizing this
meeting. We commend the Secretary-General's decision
to appoint an Independent Inquiry into the actions of the
United Nations during the 1994 Rwandan genocide. I
wish also to thank Prime Minister Carlsson and his team

 

for the extensive work that they have carried out in the
fulfilment of their mandate.

We all witnessed the horrifying events of the 1994
Rwanda genocide. Innocent Rwandese were brutally
massacred by their neighbours and friends. Above all, these
were fellow Rwandese.

The report clearly places on the international
community the responsibility for the total lack of political
will to prevent the human tragedy in Rwanda. The failure
of the United Nations, and in particular of the Security
Council, to respond to the tragedy was a terrible mistake,
and we should now all work together for the good of
humanity to ensure that never again shall we allow
genocide to be repeated - anywhere.

The establishment of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda is commendable. We fully support it
and hope that all of the perpetrators of genocide and crimes
against humanity will be brought to justice. Namibia will
continue to cooperate with the Tribunal, and we call on
other States to hand over to the Tribunal all those who have
been indicted.

The observations and recommendations of the Inquiry
are pertinent and need to be taken into account when
dealing with conflict situations around the globe. I will
therefore not dwell on all of them but highlight a few
salient points.
First and foremost, it is important for the international
community to focus its resources on addressing the root
causes of conflict and to be proactive in preventing conflict
from occurring in the first place.

Secondly, Member States need to exercise the
necessary political will to adequately address conflicts in a
timely manner, irrespective of where they occur.

Thirdly, we cannot overemphasize the need to equip
each and every United Nations peacekeeping mission with
an appropriate mandate and with adequate human and
material resources. It is true that peacekeeping is costly, but
peace does not come cheap. More often, when
peacekeeping missions are considered, troop size and the
costs involved are foremost in the minds of Member States.

This brings me to my fourth point, concerning
adequate planning for each operation with the necessary
technical and political input. This is vital for the success of
any peacekeeping mission. Furthermore continuous
evaluation, monitoring and support are required and
adjustments should be made to ensure that the mission is
effectively dealing with the situation on the ground.

Fifthly, protection of civilians under threat should
form part of peacekeeping mandates. The lessons learned
from Rwanda clearly illustrate this point. I am therefore
glad that next week we will take up the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

We have noticed with regret that despite the Rwanda
experience, some of the problematic measures pointed out
in the report as having contributed to inaction in Rwanda
in 1994 are still being applied today as the United
Nations considers taking action on certain conflict
situations.

The recommendation for the Secretary-General to
develop a plan of action to prevent genocide is most
welcome. We look forward to receiving the plan, and we
have no doubt that it will greatly inform the World
Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance scheduled for the
year 2001.

We call on the international community to assist the
Rwandese society in its reconstruction and development
efforts. We support the Inquiry's call for assistance,
paying particular attention to the need for reconstruction,
genuine national reconciliation and respect for human
rights.
Finally, I wish to pay special tribute to General
Dallaire and commend the United Nations personnel
within UNAMIR and in the programmes and agencies,
who at that difficult time made tremendous efforts under
extremely dangerous conditions and saved lives of many
civilians, political leaders and United Nations staff, as
stated in the report. These brave men and women deserve
recognition for their efforts.

We have all failed the people of Rwanda. Let us
learn from past mistakes and failures and exercise the
necessary political will to make this world a better place
for all human kind to live in.

