Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank you for this welcome, Mr. President, that you
have extended to me and for having introduced me to
the members of the Council. I am grateful to you and to
the members of the Council.
As the new Permanent Representative of Tunisia
to the United Nations I am speaking for the first time in
this body. I wish to welcome you, Minister Zlenko, to
New York. I would like through you, Ambassador
Yel'chenko, and through Ambassador Kuchynski to
pay a tribute to the Ukrainian presidency, which is
providing moderation and innovative ideas and enjoys
the greatest respect.

I also wish to greet my Security Council
colleagues, who are my elders in this forum, and assure
them of my willingness to work with them in the spirit
and objectives of the Charter and in the context of
friendship and cooperation, which our mission
maintains with all.

I now turn to the item on our agenda. I wish to
thank to you, Mr. President, for having taken the
important initiative of organizing this briefing on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. These periodic
meetings are all the more important because they
summon us to carry out constant follow-up to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement and thus to
assess progress made in its implementation through
today. I also wish to thank Mr. Petritsch, the High
Representative, for his excellent statement on the
development of the situation in the region.

Tunisia considers that the breakthrough of the
moderate parties during the elections last November is
a good sign. We voice our satisfaction in this regard
that Bosnia and Herzegovina has acquired an elected
Council of Ministers, whose main objective is to
undertake basic reforms on all levels, particularly by
advancing the noble values of tolerance and peaceful
coexistence among all the ethnic groups. We are
gratified to learn that significant progress has been
made in this area, particularly the recognition of the
flag, emblems and national anthem of Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the National Assembly of the
Republika Srpska - symbols of a united State and of a
symbiosis of communities.

However, it should be noted that the international
community should not show any tolerance for any
secessionist designs of the nationalist parties. In this
respect, like my colleague from Bangladesh, we
deplore the proclamation of autonomy by the
nationalists Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we
hope that they will reconsider their decision in the light
of the Peace Agreements.

We believe that a united, stable, multi-ethnic
State is a factor for regional balance that will make it
possible to contemplate calmly the future in Bosnia and
Herzegovina within the framework of European
integration.

A strong and prosperous economy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is unquestionably a factor for peace-
building in that country. It therefore seems to us
important that special attention be paid to the economic
difficulties experienced by Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which flow directly from the effects of the war that it
underwent. We are particularly sensitive to the rise in
debt-servicing costs in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
call upon the donor countries and credit organizations
to show understanding in view of the fragility of the
economic situation in that country and its consequences
for social peace.

The reform of the judicial system is one of the
pillars of a State of law. We believe that it is critically
important for this reform to be concluded in the best
possible conditions. The application of laws in
impartial and non-discriminatory fashion will assist in
establishing confidence and reconciliation among the
Bosnian communities. In that context, we support the
creation of the Independent Judicial Commission,
which has been entrusted by the Office of the High
Representative with the implementation of a consistent
and comprehensive reform of the judicial system.

We also applaud the creation of the function of
national mediator. It is essential that this post remain
neutral and apolitical so that it can properly play its
role, particularly in championing human rights and
restoring the rights of citizens.

More than five years have elapsed since the
signing of the Peace Agreements in the country. The
refugees, however, have still not returned despite the
untiring efforts of the international community. It is
true that significant progress has been made and that
the return of the minorities has noticeably increased in
all regions of the country, but we continue to believe
that an acceleration of targeted programmes allowing
the refugees to return to their rightful place in Bosnian
society -measures such as strengthening security
around zones in which minorities live, the settlement of
real estate issues and access to basic public services -
will help in advancing the flourishing of a multi-ethnic
society in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Tunisia would like to take this opportunity to
voice its concern regarding the possibility of a halt to
the demining programme in the spring due to a lack of
funds. Energetic action by the High Representative in
this respect should renew the confidence of the donor
countries and prompt them to continue to provide
necessary assistance to undertake the total demining of
all of the mine-infested regions of the country.

Moreover, we believe that any disengagement on
the part of the international community from Bosnia
and Herzegovina at this decisive stage is premature and
likely to have unexpected consequences. The events
taking place in the region show us how fragile the
situation is.

In conclusion, I should like pay tribute to
Mr. Wolfang Petritsch for his decisive action to
implement the Peace Agreement for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to express to his entire team my
delegation's support.

