Mr. Skracie (Croatia): Croatia would like to
reiterate the grave concerns that it expressed last night
at the meeting on Georgia with respect to the
developments in that country. News agencies have
given us reports of heavy fighting between Georgian
armed forces and the forces of the Georgian region of
South Ossetia, as well as Russian armed forces and
peacekeepers near the regional capital of Tskhinvali.

We have taken note, with extreme concern, of
reports from both the news media and the Georgian
side that Russian armed forces, reinforced with tanks
and other military equipment, have crossed into the
Georgian territory of South Ossetia, and possibly
elsewhere. Although we understand and welcome the
Russians' role as peacekeepers and their call for a
cessation of hostilities and a return to diplomacy, that
cannot be a justification for the violation of Georgia's
territory, integrity and sovereignty.

Croatia is particularly concerned by some
statements coming from authorities in the region on the
possibility of an outbreak of open war between Georgia
and Russia. Public statements that Russia must protect
the life and dignity of Russian citizens Wherever they
are can have far-reaching ramifications not limited to
the present conflict. Moreover, we know that there is
an increasing number of casualties on all sides,
including members of Georgia's armed forces and
Russian peacekeepers, as well as civilians in and
around the conflict zone.

Croatia strongly believes that the sides should
promptly agree to an immediate and unconditional
ceasefire and refrain from further acts of provocation,
to be followed by a return to the negotiating table. In
that regard, Croatia supports the efforts of the
European Union, announced on 8 August 2008, to
establish an immediate ceasefire in the conflict zone,
as well as the efforts of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and others to that
same end. We support the ongoing activities of the
OSCE in that region of Georgia, including, if
appropriate, as a possible mediator between the sides.

Let me conclude, as some other delegations did at
last night's meeting on this subject, and as was also
expressed by the Secretary-General and the President
of the General Assembly, that Croatia would welcome
the observance of the Olympic Truce by all sides, as
was urged in the consensus General Assembly
resolution 62/4 of October 2007.

