Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Burkina Faso is grateful to you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate on a question as
significant as the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We thank the Secretary-General for his
commitment to find solutions commensurate with this
problem. The relevant recommendations in his report
form an important contribution to the Council's action.
We also wish to thank Mr. John Holmes for his
statement and for his efforts in the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to meet those
challenges.

Many have pointed out that to meet the ever-
more-complex needs for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, the international community has
established a legal and institutional framework, in
particular the Charter of the United Nations and the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and its two
Additional Protocols of 1977. In addition, recently the

08-3528]
International Criminal Court, the Special Tribunals and
Council resolution 1674 (2006) have reiterated the
responsibility of States and of the international
community in this area.

With regard to the persistence of violence
experienced by civilians in conflict zones, in violation
of resolution 1674 (2006), the appeal launched by the
Secretary-General during the Council's most recent
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(5781st meeting) unfortunately has not generated a
reaction. It should be recalled that the responsibility to
protect civilians under their jurisdiction devolves first
and foremost on States, due to their territorial and
personal competences. When necessary, the United
Nations and particularly the Security Council must see
to it that they can bring the necessary assistance to
distressed civilian populations, with the assistance and
cooperation of Governments.

Millions of civilians, including women, children,
the elderly and the disabled, are still being wounded,
mutilated and killed because they have been
deliberately targeted, sometimes with disproportionate
use of military force. The result is an ever-growing
number of refugees and displaced persons crammed
into camps where they are subjected to inhuman and
unacceptable living conditions and conditions for
survival. In addition to the many damaging effects
associated with overcrowding, those people are
sometimes the focus of unacceptable blackmail by the
protagonists.

The situation of civilian victims of conflicts is
often exacerbated by deliberate restrictions on
humanitarian access through attacks on convoys, acts
of aggression and the killing of humanitarian
personnel, as we have unfortunately seen quite recently
in Somalia. That is a major concern for which we must
find the appropriate answers, such as humanitarian
corridors. In particular, there is a need to provide the
means to bring parties to fully respect their obligations
within the framework of international humanitarian law
and human rights. The same holds true for the
protection of journalists, who are often the initial
witnesses to civilian tragedies and the only link
between those people and the outside world.
It nearly goes without saying that Burkina Faso
condemns the use of generalized and systematized
sexual violence as a weapon of war and therefore
advocates a zero-tolerance policy towards those proven

08-3528]

to have committed such acts. We therefore encourage
the investigation, trial and appropriate punishment of
such individuals.

We are also concerned by the use of cluster
bombs and other weapons having excessive and
injurious effects on civilians, in particular children. In
addition, such weapons hamper access of humanitarian
workers to people and therefore have disastrous
consequences during and for a long time following
conflict, thus making the return of civilians difficult,
leading to a deterioration of the environment and
destroying much agricultural land. They therefore form
an obstacle to the socio-economic reconstruction and
development of States. While waiting for the
conclusion of the Oslo process, we urge parties to
respect the recommendations made in paragraph 65 of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2007/643).

The struggle against impunity is an integral part
of the protection of civilian populations, including
humanitarian workers. My delegation reaffirms its
support for all initiatives designed to bring to justice
the perpetrators of violations in this sphere.

The best guarantee of respect for the rights of
civilians is the creation of conditions ensuring stability
and lasting peace in States, in particular through
strengthening the rule of law, democracy and good
governance. Another element in this strategy is the
struggle against trafficking in small arms and drugs,
which is also contributing to destabilizing countries
and even entire regions.

Together with all of these actions, the Security
Council and the Secretary-General must for their part
continue to promote preventive diplomacy in
coordination with subregional and regional
organizations. For ultimately the efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflicts must be developed and
harmonized in an integrated, inclusive and
participatory manner.

