Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in welcoming Mr. Heraldo Mufioz,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile, and thanking
the Chilean presidency for convening this open debate.
I would also like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General ad interim for his comprehensive briefing.

Allow me also to congratulate the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council:
Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela.

Indonesia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic
of Iran and Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively.

I wish to focus my statement on the question of
Palestine and underline the importance of the debate
with a view of devising a way forward after the
Council failed to adopt the draft resolution on Palestine
(S/2014/9l6) in its deliberations on 30 December last
year (see S/PV.7354).

When the General Assembly declared the year
2014 as the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, it was our fervent hope that the
year would witness a substantial breakthrough in
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. What we witnessed,
instead, was the collapse of the peace process and the
rise of an explosive situation at the expense of many
civilian casualties, especially in Gaza. Sadly, we also
witnessed the insufficient response of the Council.

Nonetheless, wider recognition of the State of
Palestine, as well as other expressions of support on the
part of the international community last year are true
testimony to the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian
people. With all of those in mind, as we enter the year
2015, I would like to reiterate Indonesia's View that it is
high time for the Security Council to fulfil the demand
of the Palestinian people to set a deadline for Israel to
end its occupation.

Indonesia deeply regrets the failure of the Security
Council to adopt the draft resolution on Palestine in
December. We sincerely believe that it was indeed
an opportunity lost when the draft resolution, which
resulted from deliberations between Palestine and
other important key actors and aimed at realizing
the inalienable rights of the Palestinians, failed to be
adopted. The refusal of the Council to look favourably
on the request of Palestine clearly calls into question the
very principles ofjustice and humanity upon which the
United Nations is founded. Such action - or inaction,
if one prefers - of the Council on that critical agenda
item may also be interpreted as an authorization of the
odious practices of occupation and the subjugation of
people. There can be no argument against the point
that such conduct is counterproductive to the efforts to
create stability in the occupied Palestinian territory and
end the cycle of violence in Palestine.

Indonesia is unceasing in its belief that a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement must be
attained peacefully, based, inter alia, on relevant
United Nations resolutions, the road map of the Quartet
and the Arab Peace Initiative. It is therefore important
for the United Nations not to remain on the sidelines
in pursuit of a comprehensive, peaceful solution to the
question of Palestine. The United Nations must play a
more substantial role within the Quartet to ensure that
the peace process is restarted.

On a different matter, the United Nations must
also shoulder the international responsibility to protect
civilians on behalf of the Palestinian people, including
by considering the urgency of Palestine's proposal
to be placed under the United Nations protection
mechanism. Furthermore, the international community
should support the work of the Human Rights Council's
commission of inquiry on Palestine.

In conclusion, Indonesia shall remain unyielding
in its support for the independence of the Palestinian
people and for East Jerusalem being their capital.
Indonesia will continue to support the Palestinian
initiative to strengthen its engagement in the global
arena and search for international support through
membership in various organizations. For people who
have long been subjected to occupation and oppression,
those peaceful means are a courageous move, and they
deserve to be rewarded by encouragement and not
criticism, let alone punishment.

