Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
I would like to offer you my heartfelt congratulations
on your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to thank you for having organized
today's open debate on peacekeeping operations. I
would like to pay particular tribute to you for having
been kind enough to preside over today's debate
yourself. The contribution of the Secretary-General to
today's debate was a very edifying contribution as well.

Peacekeeping operations are a crucial aspect
of the work of the United Nations in exercising its
responsibilities. The international community has made
much progress in adapting that precious instrument to
changing challenges and threats to international peace
and security. At the current stage of its development, the
main issues facing peacekeeping remain how to balance
mandates for missions and the resources available to
them with the challenges they face, and how to ensure
complementarity between conventional peacekeeping
activities and assistance measures designed to allow
host countries of peacekeeping operations to swiftly
reach a level of stability and normality. The forces
deployed would thereby be able to withdraw at the right
time, and the transition towards development in the
context of autonomous governance could begin.

On the first point, it is important to continue to
consider the possibility of providing peacekeeping
operations with robust mandates and high-tech
equipment, enabling them to address situations that
require such measures. Such situations are increasingly
encountered in the theatre of operations, in particular
when there is a need to protect civilians from imminent
violence and to monitor and enforce embargoes.

On the second point, it is important to harmonize
security measures with efforts to rebuild and strengthen
national institutions, which are the main vehicles for
peacebuilding. In order to be sustainable, those national
institutions must be founded on a fair division of power
among the different parts of society, and they must be
inclusive. The configuration ofpeacekeeping operations
should respond to the nature of the challenges faced.
The relative clout of their various component should
depend on the challenges faced in the various stages, as
the situation on the ground returns to normal.

The definition of strategic priorities and the follow-
up to their implementation should be undertaken in a
coordinated manner through ongoing dialogue between
the authorities of the country and the relevant head of
the mission or Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in order to enable full national ownership of
the normalization process. The development of the
nature and orientation of the mission must take into
consideration the actions most necessary at each stage.
The relevant decisions should be taken in conjunction
with the national authorities.

The comparative advantages of peacekeeping
operations should be harnessed to increase
the effectiveness of measures taken and their
implementation. Such effectiveness depends on the
ability of the mission to transfer the necessary know-
how and expertise to national structures to enable
them to fully play their role in the functioning of
the State apparatuse. However, the manner in which
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
measures for former combatants are carried out is also
important in this respect, as is the manner in which the
basis for economic recovery is laid out. The procurement
policies of peacekeeping operations should contribute
to that recovery.

On another note, a degree of continuity should be
ensured in the work of the international community in
terms of the leadership of the mission. The completion
of military operations should involve the departure of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
who led the mission in the first phase of its activities.
That departure should enable the Deputy Special
Representative to be promoted to head of the mission
to manage the peacebuilding phase. The key role of
the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General is to prepare reforms in the context of long-
term peacebuilding by identifying the problems and
challenges to be faced and assisting the country in
developing a strategic work plan drafted in conjunction
with the country's authorities and various stakeholders.
If possible, some structural reforms should be launched
while the international force is still on the ground in
order to maximize synergies.

Quick-impact projects would be very useful in
all phases of the normalization process, not only to
win hearts and minds by providing immediate peace
dividends, but also to create the appropriate context in
which to undertake dialogue on long-term measures
for post-conflict recovery. Soldiers deployed in the
force should be made available for basic infrastructure
projects. This would enable them to ensure the provision
of essential social services.

However, the most important point to be aware
of is the need to harmonize efforts for stabilization
and peacebuilding, and to ensure that the necessary
civil skills are made available to that end as soon as
possible. In this regard, the CAPMATCH arrangement
established by the Secretary-General is of real interest
in terms of building the capacity of peacekeeping
operations because it enables, inter alia, the sharing
of experience with countries that have been through
similar experiences.

In conclusion, I underscore the need for cooperation
between Member States in order to enhance the ability
of least developed countries to contribute effectively
to peacekeeping operations by providing them with
equipment that meets United Nations standards. In
that respect, I commend our partnerships with France,
Belgium and the United States, which have allowed our
country to contribute to United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

I would be remiss not to mention the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union,
in particular in terms of deploying peacekeeping
operations. The question of the financing of operations
initiated by the African Union and its regional economic
communities is on the table. It needs to be resolved in
order to shore up complementarities in the collective
security system established by the Charter of the United
Nations to address threats to international peace and
security. That is particularly relevant when there is
a need for strenuous combat action, which the basic
principles of peacekeeping operations do not allow the
United Nations to undertake.

I would also like to endorse the appeal made
by the Ambassador of France for more respect for
multilingualism in the deployment of peacekeeping
operations, in particular in French-speaking countries.

