Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
My delegation welcomes you, Mr. Minister, and
expresses its pleasure at seeing you in the Chair at
today's meeting. We thank the Secretary-General for
his statement, and our thanks go also to Mr. Petritsch
and Mr. Klein for their comprehensive briefings. We
welcome Mr. Solana, and we thank him for his
statement.

In recent years, the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has made
progress in police reform and training, and in the
judicial field. This has laid a good foundation for the
reconstruction and development of Bosnia. We hope
that all the international agencies active in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will work to enhance their coordination
and cooperation so that, together, they can create the
conditions necessary for the orderly departure of
UNMIBH when it has fulfilled its core mandate.

With the help of the international community,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made remarkable progress
in the political, economic, social and development
spheres. The general elections, which will mark the
people's true ownership of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
are to take place in October. Yet there are still
differences on key issues among the various ethnic
communities and the main political parties. We believe
that the urgent tasks for reconstruction and for the
restoration of peace and stability in the region are to
eliminate differences among ethnic communities, ease
social tension and promote national reconciliation.
Here, the international presence faces difficult tasks
and has a long way to go. We hope that through
reasonable streamlining, the international presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina can improve the efficiency
and effectiveness of its work and speed up the process
of national reconciliation there.

The peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
at a critical stage. We welcome the European Union's
decision to send a Police Mission following the end of
UNMIBH's mandate. China will continue to support
UNMIBH in its work, and we favour the adoption of a
Security Council resolution in this respect.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation to High Representative Petritsch, who for
more than two years has accomplished much in
coordinating the work of the agencies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the reconstruction of that country.
We welcome the European Union's designation of a
new High Representative and hope that he will also
play a constructive role in the reconstruction of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in promoting peace and stability
in the region.

