Mr. Tiirk (spoke in French): Today, the Security
Council is meeting, for the first time in its history, to
debate the issues of water, peace and security. It is a
great honour to be able to address the Council as Chair
of the Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace.

It is very important that this discussion be being led
by you, Sir, and by Senegal, a country that has developed
an effective model of active and peaceful cooperation
with its neighbouring countries, particularly in the
field of transboundary cooperation on water. I pay
tribute to Senegal and to Mr. Leopold Senghor, its
late President, who several decades ago persuaded the
Heads of State of Guinea, Mali and Mauritania to found
the Senegal River Basin Development Organization.
Today, Senegalese President Macky Sall and his
counterparts from those three neighbouring countries
have capitalized on this legacy.

This experience is also a source of inspiration at
the global level. It contributed to the establishment of
the Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace, which
I have the honour to chair. The Panel was established
in November 2015 at the initiative of 15 States
Members of the United Nations, including my country,
Slovenia, and will present its report in September
next year. The Panel's objective is to propose concrete
recommendations that could be implemented. The aim
of our efforts is not only to understand the problem, but
also to assist in the search for solutions. The guiding
idea of our work is the prevention of armed conflict.

(spoke in English)

Recent United Nations reports have repeatedly
emphasized the importance of the prevention of armed
conflicts and preventive diplomacy more generally.
Transboundary water cooperation is a prime example of
a potentially powerful tool for long-term prevention, as
explained a few minutes ago by the Secretary-General.
Countries with developed mechanisms of water
cooperation seldom resort to war. Moreover, water
cooperation has a significant stabilizing effect on those
areas within States that are benefiting from cooperative
water management installations. Other briefers today
will discuss the experience and potential of water
cooperation for stability and peace in some detail. On
my part, I wish to emphasize four fundamental points.

First, while the transboundary mechanisms of water
cooperation are well known and historically tested, they
are still relatively few in number. Out of the 263 shared
river basins, involving 145 States in the world, only 84
have joint water management bodies. Some of those
institutions are not very effective. Clearly, political
support for additional international cooperation in this
domain is needed, and much of that political support
can be generated by the United Nations, in particular by
the General Assembly and the Security Council. Such
support would be particularly timely now with regard
to new initiatives such as the Congo River Basin Blue
Fund, which is gaining momentum at present.

Secondly, political support for transboundary water
cooperation arrangements has to be complemented by
financial incentives. This, too, is an important political
priority. The international financial institutions and
private investors have an important role to play. The
idea of setting up a special blue fund at the global level
will be explained in a short while by the President of
the Strategic Foresight Group, Mr. Sundeep Waslekar.
I believe that idea has to be given particular attention.

Thirdly, in its preventive mode the United Nations
has to be attentive to intersectoral cooperation
relating to water use aimed at reducing tensions and
the potential for violent conflicts. Quite naturally,
sovereign States exercise their sovereign powers in
that regard. Therefore, international cooperation has
to be in full accordance with the sovereign rights of
States. However, it is important to understand that
good practices exist and that they should be encouraged
globally. They include voluntary codes of practice on
water management involving a variety of stakeholders.
Such codes of practice should be encouraged and, as
appropriate, assisted. The Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace is studying the existing practices
and will be prepared to share its findings with the
appropriate United Nations bodies.
Fourthly, the United Nations system has been
dealing with various water issues for a long time now.
The coordination ofthose activities is organized through
the UN-Water mechanism, which brings together all the
relevant United Nations organs, funds and agencies.
However, that activity has been mostly concentrated
on technical, environmental and legal questions, and
only indirectly addresses the fundamental political and
security aspects. Now the time has come to address the
political and security aspects of water cooperation more
directly, in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly. I would like to emphasize that the Security
Council can play a critically important role - as a
decision-maker with the proven ability to innovate and
as a catalyst that brings an important political message
to the other parts of the United Nations system.

Those are some of the basic considerations. In
addition, there are specific aspects of the links between
water, peace and security that affect the daily work of
the Security Council. Allow me, therefore, to briefly
refer to some of those aspects.

Expert studies on contemporary armed conflicts
suggest that water is seldom the single cause of armed
conflict. However, water issues are often among
the important contributing factors. Moreover, water
usually becomes a military and strategic tool during an
armed conflict, a weapon of war that most often affects
civilian populations. It is in that context that some of
the most serious concerns arise.

Historically, the Security Council has accumulated
vast experience in addressing the dangers affecting
civilian populations in situations of armed conflict.
Ever since resolution 1265 (1999) was adopted, the
protection of civilians has been one of the main themes
in the Council's decision-making. The Council has since
been engaged in deciding on "appropriate measures"
in response to situations where civilians are targeted
or where humanitarian assistance is being deliberately
obstructed. While the results of those efforts have so
far been mixed, the direction is clearly correct. The
Security Council deserves all support in its efforts to
protect civilians.

The question today is how to increase the
effectiveness of those efforts, including in matters
concerning water supply to civilian populations in
armed conflicts. Clearly, humanitarian organizations
with long experience of working in conditions of armed
conflict, in particular the International Committee of
the Red Cross, deserve every support. In particular,
they have to be supported in their cooperation with
local actors in protecting water resources and water
installations. Their long-term presence in affected
areas and their familiarity with both water situations
and local actors in water management are indeed key
assets that have to be recognized and, as appropriate,
protected.

However, the efforts of local and international
humanitarian organizations and specialists to ensure
the functioning of water infrastructure during
armed conflicts may not always suffice. They may
require additional means, including diplomatic
and - yes - military means. Obviously, that opens up
a set of difficult questions, in particular in situations
of urban armed conflicts. Difficult, but not necessarily
impossible. Defence of water for the civilian populations
by the affected populations themselves is a legitimate
form of self-defence and can be legitimately assisted by
military means.

The principles of proportionality of the use of
military force and distinction between military and
non-military objects provide the legal framework for
such assistance. Although it might not be possible to
authorize each and every action, it should be within
the reach of the Security Council to convey a sense of
legitimacy to those military actions whose sole purpose
is the protection of water sources and installations that
are vital for civilian populations. Again, the principles
of proportionality of the use of military force and
distinction between military and non-military objects
would be an essential platform for such an assessment.

The compelling nature of assistance to legitimate
defence of the affected civilian populations and of
effective protection of water resources and installations
is closely related to the entire future of international
humanitarian law. The increasingly internal and
increasingly chaotic armed conflicts of our era have
generated violations of humanitarian law that were
unimaginable in the past. The weakening of the authority
ofhumanitarian law needs to be stopped. New norms are
not urgently necessary, although improvements in legal
architecture are always welcome. The more immediate
need is to strengthen the effectiveness of existing
norms on the protection of civilians and to find ways
of ensuring compliance. In that regard again, the policy
guidance and specific actions taken or authorized by
the Security Council will be of great importance.

Let me now turn to another aspect of the linkage
between water, peace and security. Water sources
and water installations are among the major areas
of concern for peace operations and in the context
of peacebuilding - both of which are fundamental
tasks of the United Nations. Obviously, the defence
of civilians, robust defence if necessary, has become
part of the doctrine of United Nations peacekeeping.
Defending civilians and the mandates of peace
operations strengthens the credibility and legitimacy of
the peacekeeping in the eyes of the people whom the
United Nations has to serve.

The recent report (see S/2015/446) ofthe High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations is very clear on
that. However, in paragraph 95 of its report, the Panel
also emphasized that Member States must provide
peace missions with adequate capabilities to implement
their mandates. This is a highly pertinent emphasis
worthy of the particular attention of Governments and
the United Nations. "Adequate capabilities" should
include water and electric-power specialists. Most
Member States with highly developed military systems
have skilled military specialists trained to deliver
Vital services, including drilling, water distribution,
sanitation, power production and distribution. It would
make sense if Member States could, in the context of
their effort to strengthen the capacity of United Nations
peacekeeping, provide, as appropriate, the assistance
of their specialists for the evaluation, repair and
rehabilitation of water-supply systems so as to restore
or establish basic services for affected populations in
the early stages of deployment of peace operations.

Furthermore, the current development of the
concept and practice of United Nations field missions
offers some promising possibilities. It is encouraging
that the Global Field Support Strategy places stronger
emphasis on environmental management, including
water, both at the level of field missions and globally.
It will be important to give water-related aspects
the priority status they deserve and that periodic
evaluations of water-related-issues practice in the
context of peacebuilding take place regularly.

In addition, water infrastructure is a vital
part of any peacebuilding activity. Historically,
and in more recent United Nations practice, peace
agreements have included clauses on water use and
water cooperation. Cooperation in shared water
basins is a historically proven factor of post-conflict
stabilization and peacebuilding. It is therefore natural
for the Peacebuilding Commission to include water
management and water cooperation among its priorities
in its efforts to promote an integrated, strategic and
coherent approach to peacebuilding, as noted in relevant
General Assembly resolutions. I believe that water is
vital part of such an ideal concept of peacebuilding.
This year's reviews ofthe United Nations peacebuilding
architecture have already provided a good framework for
such prioritization, and I hope this effort will continue.

In conclusion, I have referred to some of the key
questions considered by the Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace and some of those frequently
considered by the Security Council. I am grateful for
the opportunity to be able to present these ideas and
thoughts to the Security Council today.

There are obviously other, more specific questions
related to the protection of water resources, prevention
of conflicts over water quality, development of
mechanisms of hydrodiplomacy and other questions
considered by our Panel. As I mentioned at the
beginning, in less than a year from now, we shall
prepare our report. It goes without saying that our Panel
will be ready to share its findings and proposals with
the Security Council as well as other relevant bodies
of the United Nations. I hope that the Security Council
will remain seized of the matter of connections between
water and peace and security in future.

