Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to thank the Indonesian presidency for
organizing this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We also thank the Secretary
General for having taken time from his busy schedule
to join us in this debate. We wish also to commend
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for briefing the Council. We look forward
to the briefing to be given later by the representative of
the International Committee of the Red Cross.

The sixth report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, contained in
document S/2007/643, is a stark reminder that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict has become
even more urgent since the Security Council first
addressed this issue eight years ago. According to the
report, the nature of contemporary armed conflicts
presents new and unique challenges for protecting
civilians and has raised issues that require further study
by the Security Council before it responds
appropriately.

However, while exploring the response to these
new challenges for the protection of civilians, it is
important that on the question of the conduct of
hostilities there is an accurate and factual account of
conditions on the ground. For example, one of the most
objectionable forms of attack on civilians, which needs
to be utterly condemned, is the use of suicide attacks.

When suicide attacks were used against civilians in
Israel, they were roundly condemned by everyone,
including Palestinians. Suicide attacks have since
decreased in Israel and have not taken place in a long
time, and it is for this reason that we regret that the
report did not make that clear.

In his letter to the Security Council, dated
19 November 2007, Ambassador Riyad Mansour,
Permanent Observer of Palestine, confirms the
decrease in suicide attacks. He also points out that

"[t]he perpetuation of reporting, including certain
language usage that overlooks the existence of this
occupation, is unacceptable. Of course, this in no way
implies that the occupied people are absolved from
respecting international law, which should have
primacy in all circumstances; but rather, the point is to
stress that any examination of the situation and
developments in this regard must be considered within
the overall context of the occupation, which
unquestionably impacts all aspects of the situation on
the ground and remains the root cause of this conflict".

The fact that suicide attacks are still used against
civilians in Afghanistan, Iraq, Sri Lanka and Somalia
remains a challenge for the international community.

In situations of conflict it is incumbent on States,
with the support of the United Nations and relevant
humanitarian actors, to protect civilians from abuse, to
mitigate the impact of warfare and to alleviate their
suffering. For this reason, my delegation wishes to
reaffirm the primary responsibility of each State to
protect its citizens and persons within its jurisdiction,
as proclaimed in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document. Furthermore, it is important that
humanitarian assistance continues to be provided in
accordance with the principles of neutrality and
impartiality, and parties to the conflict must allow
timely and unhindered access of humanitarian
assistance to civilians.

Perhaps the most cruel and despicable tool of
conflict is the systematic use of gender-based violence,
particularly rape and other forms of sexual violence. It
is for this reason that my delegation has always
supported the call for the elimination of rape and other
forms of sexual violence in all their manifestations,
including in conflict and related situations.
In its recent open debate on women and peace
and security (see S/PV.5766 and Resumption 1), the
Council stressed its repeated condemnation of all acts
of violence, including killing, maiming, sexual
violence, exploitation and abuse in situations of armed
conflict. The Council called on all parties to armed
conflict to cease such acts with immediate effect and
adopt specific measures to protect women and girls
from all forms of violence. The Council stressed the
need to end impunity for such acts as part of a
comprehensive approach to seeking peace, justice,
truth and national reconciliation.

Furthermore, it is important that steps be taken to
ensure that all aspects of peacekeeping operations have
adequate training of personnel on the specific needs of
women and children prior to deployment. The
zero-tolerance policy of the United Nations must be
uniformly applied, and action should be taken by States
and international and regional institutions to
investigate and punish those who perpetrate acts of
gender-based violence against women and girls in
situations of armed conflict.

Above all, the international community should
assist in providing all necessary assistance to the
victims of rape and other sexual violence, who are
usually forgotten after their crimes have been
publicized.

Another major result of conflict is the
unprecedented wave of displaced people, both within
and across borders. The report points out that for
35 million people flight has become the only option as
displacement has become the main feature of conflict,
creating a great humanitarian challenge. It is worth
noting that the report further points out that this
displacement phenomenon can be found anywhere in
the world where there is armed conflict, whether it be
in Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo or the Darfur region of the Sudan.

The next challenge for the international
community will be how to resettle people in the
territories from which they fled during war, but which
may now be occupied by the victors in the conflicts.
Ensuring the right of safe and unimpeded return for
refugees and internally displaced persons needs to be
addressed if future peace is to be sustained and further
violence prevented. The right of people to return to
their former homes and countries is sacrosanct and
should never be compromised.

In resolution 1674 (2006) the Security Council
reaffirmed the importance of preventing armed conflict

and its recurrence by stressing the need for a
comprehensive approach through promoting economic
growth, poverty eradication, sustainable development,
national reconciliation, good governance and
democracy, the rule of law, and respect for and
protection of human rights. This confirms the agreed
principle that development, peace and security and
human rights are interlinked and should form the basis
for our collective security and well-being.

South Africa expresses deep concern about the
impact of unexploded cluster munitions on civilians,
particularly children, who are maimed and even killed
by these weapons long after the war has ended. These
weapons constitute an obstacle to the return of refugees
and other displaced persons, humanitarian aid
operations, reconstruction and economic development,
as well as to the restoration of normal social
conditions, and have serious and lasting social and
economic consequences. Concerted efforts are required
to end the use of cluster munitions, and my delegation
looks forward to future discussions in the United
Nations on how to address the danger posed by cluster
munitions.

We are pleased that the report of the Secretary-
General addresses the disturbing and seemingly
increasing trend of attacks on humanitarian workers.
We welcome Security Council resolution 1502 (2003)
on the protection of United Nations personnel,
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in
conflict zones. The report points out that between 1997
and 2005 the absolute number of acts of violence
perpetrated against humanitarian workers nearly
doubled. The international community will have to
redouble its efforts if it wants to protect the
humanitarian workers who are often the only lifeline
for the victims of war.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is,
and must remain, an absolute priority for the Council.
My delegation is therefore of the view that finding a
common solution to the protection of civilians will
require the cooperation of each and every Member
State. We also believe that the protection of civilians in
armed conflict would be better addressed in partnership
with regional mechanisms, and that strengthening
dialogue and cooperation between the Security Council
and regional organizations would contribute to tackling
common security challenges and ensuring speedy
action on the ground.

