Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Honduras believes that all peace-loving States
must align their conduct with the principles and norms of
general, treaty and customary international law. That is why
we regret the events related to the shooting down of two
civil aircraft on 24 February 1996 by the Cuban Air Force,
acts that are in clear contravention of those international
principles and norms.

In deploring that incident, this Council recalled in its
presidential statement of 27 February that States must
refrain from the use of weapons against civil aircraft and
must not endanger the lives of persons on board and the
safety of aircraft and that States are obliged in all
circumstances to respect international law and human
rights norms, in particular article 3 bis of the Convention
on International Civil Aviation.

The report of the International Civil Aviation
Organization, which investigated the incident at the
Security Council's request, not only reaffirms these
principles, but also affirms that, although every State
exercises territorial sovereignty over its airspace, it has
the duty to observe the principle recognized in customary
international law regarding the non-use of weapons
against civil aircraft in flight and that, in intercepting such
aircraft, its conduct must be guided by the rules laid
down in the Chicago Convention of 7 December 1944
and its annexes.

At the same time, the report reminds us that no State
must permit, in violation of its international obligations,
the deliberate use from its territory of civil aircraft
registered in that State to violate the territorial sovereignty
of another State. Article 4 of the Chicago Convention is
clear in stipulating that:

"Each Contracting State agrees not to use civil
aviation for any purpose inconsistent with the aims
of this Convention".

My delegation considers that, in the incident of 24
February, there was a twofold lack of compliance with
the responsibilities and obligations established by the
Convention on International Civil Aviation. We feel that
the international community must not permit such conduct
to continue. That is why Honduras, while condemning the
use of weapons against civil aircraft, wishes to appeal to
the parties involved to comply with their international
commitments, to take measures to avoid committing in
future such acts, which are incompatible with the
objectives of the Convention, and to ratify its article 3
bis. My delegation therefore agrees with the contents of
the draft resolution before the Council and will vote in its
favour.

