The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council has considered the matter
of protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees
and others in conflict situations and has given careful
consideration to the views expressed in the debate on
the matter at its 3778th meeting on 21 May 1997.

"The Security Council notes that massive
displacement of civilian populations in conflict
situations may pose a serious challenge to
international peace and security. The Council, in
seeking protection for humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations, underlines
the importance of pursuing a coordinated and
comprehensive approach in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the recent increase in attacks or use of
force in conflict situations against refugees and other
civilians, in violation of the relevant rules of
international law, including those of international
humanitarian law. The Council reiterates its
condemnation of such acts and once again calls upon
all those concerned to comply strictly with the
relevant rules of international law. In particular, it
calls upon all parties concerned to ensure the safety of
refugees, displaced persons and other civilians, and
guarantee the unimpeded and safe access of United
Nations and other humanitarian personnel to those in
need.

"The Security Council also expresses its grave
concern at all attacks or use of force against United
Nations and other personnel associated with United
Nations operations as well as personnel of
humanitarian organizations, in violation of the
relevant rules of international law, including those of
international humanitarian law. In this context, the
Council recalls its resolution 868 (1993) and the
statement by its President of 12 March 1997
(S/PRST/1997/13). It also recalls the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel adopted by the General Assembly on 9
December 1994. In this context, it calls upon all
parties concerned to ensure the safety and security of
these personnel as well as personnel of humanitarian
organizations, and encourages all States to consider
ways and means to strengthen the protection of such
personnel.

"The Security Council reminds all States and
others concerned of the need to bring to justice those
who violate international humanitarian law. In this
context, it recalls the resolution on the establishment
of an international criminal court adopted by the
General Assembly on 17 December 1996
(A/RES/51/207).

"The Security Council supports further
exploration of ways and means by which the
international community may enhance the
compliance by parties concerned with the relevant
rules of international law, including those of
international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council encourages States to
consider acceding to the relevant international
conventions designed to address the problems of
refugees.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of ensuring clear, appropriate and
realistic mandates to be implemented in an impartial
manner as well as adequate resources for United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In this context, the
Council, in establishing or authorizing an operation
to protect humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations, reaffirms the principles
of full respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the States concerned. The
Council also underlines the importance of ensuring
the proper discharge of the mandates conferred upon
peacekeeping operations.
 

"The Security Council stresses the importance of
ensuring closer coordination between the relevant
United Nations bodies and other international
agencies, acting in accordance with their own
mandates and status, with a view to effectively
providing or protecting humanitarian assistance to
those in need. In this context, the Council encourages
an enhanced role for the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General in coordination to this end.

"The Security Council stresses the importance of
the activities of the relevant United Nations bodies,
agencies and other international humanitarian
organizations and the need for these activities to
continue to be carried out in accordance with the
principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality of
humanitarian assistance.

"The Security Council also stresses the
importance of crisis prevention, including by
addressing the root causes of such crises. It therefore
encourages the Secretary-General and all States to
look further into practical ways to enhance the
United Nations capacity and capability in this regard.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to study further how to improve
the protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees
and others in conflict situations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/34.

In conclusion, I should like once again to express

my gratitude to the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Korea, who coordinated the informal
consultations for the preparation of this presidential
statement.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present

stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
