Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and your
country, Italy, for convening today's open debate and
for the concept note (S/2017/972, annex ) that you
have prepared for us. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and,
of course, Ms. Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
for their briefings.

I echo the words of so many who have preceded me
in emphasizing the horror of the images that we have
seen on television of slavery in the Mediterranean,
showing human beings being sold like merchandise,
and the condemnation of the Secretary-General, which
says it all. Slavery has no place in our world. By its
nature and its global effects, trafficking in persons, a
twenty-first-century form of slavery, leads to serious
violations of human rights whose effects have touched
my country too. Every year we identify and assist many
victims of crimes that range from sexual exploitation to
forced labour and begging. For that reason, we welcome
the renewed support for the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, shown
by the General Assembly's adoption in September of
the political declaration on the implementation of the
Global Plan of Action (resolution 72/1), along with
the various related Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which are unequivocal, as
well as the New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants, which adopted at the high-level meeting on
refugees and migrants in 2016.

Next year's intergovernmental conference
on migration in the General Assembly will be an
opportunity for all of us to adopt a global compact for
safe, orderly and regular migration and will create an
additional framework for cooperation among States. As
the concept note says so eloquently, such mechanisms,
agreements and plans will enable us to continue to
eliminate the legal loopholes that organized crime
takes advantage of in our countries by increasing the
exchange of good practices and lessons learned on ways
in which Member States can tackle such transnational
crime more effectively.

Colombia considers trafficking in persons as
a type of transnational organized crime. Many
countries simultaneously become points of origin,
transit and destination for victims, which makes the
process of preventing such crimes and investigating
and prosecuting criminal organizations and the links
between them much more difficult. We join those who
have been promoting the universal ratification of the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children
supplementary to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime. It has served
as a platform for Colombia to accede to and implement
eight memorandums of understanding and bilateral
agreements with countries in our region.

Following the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/939), we support
the efforts of UNODC and other agencies in the United
Nations system with experience in the fight against
trafficking to help Member States combat it. Our goal is
zero trafficking. Let us commit to stronger cooperation
for decisive global action that can put an end to the
abominable trade of human beings forever.

