Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I understand that this discussion has dragged
on, and I do not want to prolong it. This is not a right of
reply. I simply want to make one comment that I believe
worth stating.

As I mentioned today, United States Secretary of
State Pompeo claimed that his country's position is
shared by the majority of members of the international
community and that the Maduro regime is supported
by only five countries, which I listed. I must reply that
in listening to the representatives of the countries that
spoke today, we counted 11 Latin American countries
that spoke in favour of the legitimate Government
of Venezuela, whereas 10 countries spoke against.
The representative of Barbados referred to the joint
statement of the Caribbean Community, which stresses
non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
respect for sovereignty and independence. I am not
even including the members of the Security Council
that are also divided on this matter.

First of all, that confirms what I said earlier while
Secretary of State Pompeo was still in the Chamber,
to the effect that there is not as much unity in support
of his position in the world as he thinks. We believe
that there is a majority in favour of those who
support the sovereignty, territorial independence and
non-interference in the internal affairs of Venezuela.

Secondly, what we are seeing today clearly
demonstrates that the United States and its allies have
not been able to achieve their aim. What, then, was
the point of holding this meeting? It has been useful
because it has shown our United States colleagues
the true attitude of the international community with
regard to what is going on in the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.

We once again repeat - let us not escalate tensions

around Venezuela. Let us stop all the threats and
threatening the use of force against that country. Let us
set aside ridiculous ultimatums of eight days. What is
the special significance of eight days? Why not seven
days or thirty days? Who was the genius who came up
with the eight-day formula? Let us give Venezuelans a
chance to solve their own problems. If we can help them
do that then let us help them. But let us not try to trip
them up on that path.

We welcome the initiative of Mexico and Uruguay,
which have extended their good offices in fostering
dialogue between the Government and the opposition.
We call on everyone to join that effort in good faith
and with good intentions, unlike what has been
demonstrated by some today.

The meeting rose at 1.50 pm.
