Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would first like to warmly welcome
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, to the Security Council, and we thank her and
the Secretary-General for their briefings.
The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
the development and improvement of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
mechanisms on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations and Chapter VIII of the Charter in particular.
It is on that basis, and within the framework adopted
by the General Assembly in May 2011 in its resolution
65/276, that cooperation should be established between
our global Organization and the European Union (EU).
The European Union is a significant political and
economic player in the international arena, helping to
strengthen multilateralism under the leading role of the
United Nations in combating new challenges and threats
and eradicating poverty. We have seen the added value
that the EU has brought to its cooperation, including
financially, in areas involving individual countries,
particularly the Central African Republic, Mali and the
Sahel region as a whole, and to the efforts to arrive at
a peaceful settlement of the situation concerning Iran's
nuclear programme.

We have taken note of the contribution of the
European Union's missions, conducted within the
framework of its Common Security and Defence Policy,
to international conflict-resolution efforts. Despite
the fact that relations between the EU and Russia
are currently being severely tested, we are ready to
continue cooperating with Brussels and all European
Union member States on the wide range ofissues where
our interests coincide. Our positions differ on some
issues on the international agenda.

Nonetheless, there are a number of areas where
our cooperation continues, including within the United
Nations. Those include our opposition to such global
challenges as terrorism, religious extremism, piracy,
drug trafficking, transnational crime, illegal migration,
combating the Ebola virus, dealing with the Middle
East peace process and resolving the situations in
Libya and around Iran's nuclear programme. We are
interested in full cooperation with Brussels, but only
when it is conducted on an equal footing and takes
into account each other's interests and concerns. We
hope the European Union will shake off the untoward
influence of anti-Russian marginals among its ranks.

We have a positive experience of ad hoc joint
security actions, including past operations and missions
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Chad and the Central
African Republic, and currently with the anti-piracy
Operation Atalanta in the area of the Horn of Africa.
In that regard, it is important to remember that in
implementing its crisis-management operations, the
European Union and its member States should always
go strictly by the relevant decisions of the Security
Council. While recognizing the importance of efforts
on the part of Brussels to establish a dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, we note that the sides must arrive
at any agreements on their own, without any pressure
and without undermining the role of the United Nations.

We have been closely following the work of the
European Union's Advisory Mission for Civilian
Security Sector Reform Ukraine, which was launched
on 1 December. We assume that among other things,
the mission will help to root out nationalist sentiment
within Ukraine's law-enforcement and judicial
authorities. At this stage, we see one of its main tasks as
making a legal assessment of the activity of the punitive
battalions of the so-called private armies in south-
eastern Ukraine and helping to solve the problem of
illegal Ukrainian armed groups. We are also expecting
principled evaluations of the lustration law on cleansing
the Government and of other laws designed to restrict
the rights of certain groups in Ukrainian society. We
do not understand why the European Union has still not
reacted to the fact that, in association with a Ukrainian
national holiday, a day celebrating the creation of the
collaborationist Ukrainian insurgent army that the
Nazis organized to carry out punitive operations in the
occupied territories was declared national holiday.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
despite the growing demand for an effective mechanism
for organizing a division of labour between the United
Nations and regional associations, including the EU, the
leading role of the Security Council in issues related to
the maintenance of international peace and security is
unshakable. It is enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and cannot be subject to review.

