Let me begin by thanking Special Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Noura Ghazi for their insightful presentations. We heard Ms. Ghazi's heartfelt cry of distress. I would also like to welcome Bashar Ja'afari, Permanent Representative of Syria, who is joining us this morning. The Niger would like to reaffirm that a solution to the Syrian conflict cannot be pursued by military action alone. While we welcome the decrease in violence since the Turkey/Russia-sponsored ceasefire, we believe that the cessation of hostilities must go in tandem with a revival of the political process. We cannot afford to see the crisis become more and more entrenched and the suffering of innocent and vulnerable population be prolonged. There is an urgent need to make progress on the path to a political solution to the Syrian conflict. To this respect, allow me to touch upon the following points, which we believe are the cornerstones of an inclusive and lasting solution to this protracted crisis. First, securing a comprehensive national ceasefire, as called by the Special Envoy and the Secretary-General, is crucial at this time of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which requires all parties to focus on containing and mitigating its impacts on the population, which is already experiencing dire living conditions. After observing many months of decreased hostilities, we note with concern reports that indicate an escalation in the Jabal Al-Zawiya area of Idlib and in north- western Hama, and we call on all parties to de-escalate. Secondly, my delegation calls on all stakeholders to return to the negotiation table in good faith. The Niger supports the efforts deployed by the Special Envoy in engaging with the various parties to the Constitutional Committee in a bid to revitalize its work. The United Nations must lend all necessary support to this process while preserving the leadership and ownership of the concerned Syrian parties over the process, in keeping with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). We call on the Syrian Government in particular to further enhance its engagement with the other parties to the talks. Thirdly, confidence-building measures on both sides could greatly help overcome mistrust between the negotiating parties in the political process. We therefore echo the call of Special Envoy Pedersen on 18 May that "[l]arge-scale and unilateral releases as well as more meaningful actions on missing persons have never been more necessary" (S/2020/420, p. 3). Both sides should show compassion in these unprecedented times by ensuring medical care for all detainees and when providing deserved clarification to the families of missing persons. Fourthly, the call for a ceasefire and the need for a common and collective effort in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic should not distract us from the fight against terrorism, especially as evidence shows that criminal groups are trying to take advantage of the current health crisis to regroup and resume their activities. The Syrian Government has the right to continue to fight terrorism on its territory. Yet it must be done in compliance with international human rights law and international humanitarian law, especially with regard to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. Lastly, we should be aware that given the recent protests fuelled by economic hardship in some southern provinces that had thus far remained stable, a constitution and the eventual holding of elections will not be a panacea to end the crisis. Economic measures and carefully considered peacebuilding efforts must be crafted and implemented. On the subject of economic hardship for the Syrian people, we must also keep in mind that often when a conflict is protracted - as we have seen elsewhere - a country's natural resources, which would normally benefit the population, are illegally exploited and looted by various actors during the conflict. We must therefore ensure that a country's people retains sovereignty over their natural resources. In conclusion, my delegation would like once again to express its appreciations to Mr. Pedersen for his unrelenting efforts in engaging with Syrians stakeholders from all sides, including the Syrian Women's Advisory Board and civil society organizations across Syria and the region. We expect to see the political process resume in earnest as current virus-related restrictions are lifted around the globe.
