Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I am
delighted, at the outset, to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for the briefing pursuant to resolution 2349
(2017). I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/764) and Ms. Imam for her briefing.

The Lake Chad basin region has witnessed genuine
progress in the fight against terrorist group Boko
Haram. First of all, many regions have been recovered
by Nigerian so Boko Haram no longer has such a strong
hold over so much territory, and many members of Boko
Haram have also been arrested. We commend the efforts
of the States of the region to overcome their challenges
despite their lack of resources. They are clearly taking
this multidimensional crisis seriously, and we are
seeing greater cooperation among them. Significant
national efforts have also been made, particularly in
the legal sphere, where there is greater cooperation
and where measures are being taken to respect human
rights, to allow refugees to return to their homes and to
free many young women kidnapped by Boko Haram.

The States of the region are today a model to be
emulated. Indeed, the humanitarian crisis is being
managed diligently and humanitarian aid has reached
the affected regions rather seamlessly. Additionally,
significant financial contributions have been made to
the region, primarily to benefit refugees. Nevertheless,
we are concerned about the humanitarian crisis in north-
eastern Nigeria, where 5.2 million people are affected
by a humanitarian crisis that today is looking very much
like a famine. That is why we call on donors to honour
the commitments they undertook in Oslo early this year
to avoid a full-blown humanitarian disaster. We call on
the various international and regional humanitarian
organizations to redouble their efforts to address and
combat the crisis. We are also deeply grateful to the
Secretary-General, who has spared no effort to raise
early awareness of the signs of this crisis this year and
to mobilize the funding needed to address it.

We strongly condemn any act that violates human
rights, including barbaric actions by Boko Haram against
the civilian population of the States in the Lake Chad
region, and especially Violations against women and
girls, and the devastation wrought on schools, hospitals
and Nigeria's medical and educational infrastructure in
general. We demand that all the perpetrators and their
supporters be brought to justice and that they do not
enjoy impunity.
In that context, we would like to note that, despite
the achievements by the Multinational Joint Task
Force in combating Boko Haram, the Force still needs
more support from the international community in
restoring stability in the Lake Chad region. We urge
all the international and regional partners concerned to
provide more support to the Task Force at every level,
including equipment, training, logistics and capacity-
building. We call on international partners to make
good on the commitments they announced at the donor
conference held in Addis Ababa on 1 February 2016
with regard to launching an African fund to support the
Multinational Joint Task Force.

