Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to welcome you,
Mr. President, to New York and thank you for presiding
over this meeting. Your presence today indicates clearly
the importance Chile places on this important subject.
I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and the Chair ofthe Peacebuilding Commission for their
respective briefings. I wish to welcome the Secretary-
General's report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict (S/2014/694), which provides a comprehensive
overview of progress in United Nations peacebuilding
efforts in the aftermath of conflict, including the issue
of women in peacebuilding.

Malaysia has always placed importance on
the Peacebuilding Commission's capacity as an
intergovernmental advisory body to provide strategies
and approaches on peacebuilding within the United
Nations system. We firmly believe that the Commission
plays a significant role, in particular in providing a
common platform for international actors working
in support of sustainable peace and development in
countries emerging from conflict. We support the
United Nations continuing efforts to pool all available
and relevant resources with a view to assisting countries
in post-conflict peacebuilding, recovery, reconstruction
and sustainable development.

My delegation also wishes to underscore the three
key priority directions for the engagement of the United
Nations system in peacebuilding, as highlighted by the
Secretary-General: inclusivity, institution-building
and sustained international support, and mutual
accountability. We believe that these key priorities
are interlinked and serve as fundamental principles in
assisting countries emerging from conflict.

Malaysia is encouraged by the progress made in
a number of countries to consolidate peace following
conflict despite far-reaching challenges. However, it is
distressing and unfortunate that we continue to witness
instances of situations relapsing into conflict across
various regions today. Against the backdrop of such
developments, we believe that there remains room for
further improvement in United Nations peacebuilding
efforts. We fully share the Secretary-General's view
on the need for the United Nations to work in a more
integrated and coherent manner in assisting countries
emerging from conflict. In this regard, Malaysia wishes
to make the following comments.

Malaysia continues to believe that the Security
Council has benefited from its increased interaction
with the Peacebuilding Commission, in particular
in the light of the linkages between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. In our view, the integration and
coherence of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
remain crucial for achieving durable peace and security
and for preventing relapses into conflict. Resolution
2086 (2013) highlighted and reaffirmed this important
interlinkage in the context of multidimensional
peacekeeping missions and expressed the Council's
continued willingness to make use of the advisory,
advocacy and resource-mobilization roles of the
Peacebuilding Commission in peacebuilding activities.

Malaysia has been a consistent advocate of
deepening the relationship between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council. Given its unique
composition, the Peacebuilding Commission is well
placed to advise the Security Council on many issues,
in particular the root causes of conflict, including
the socioeconomic causes, and the possible risk of
relapse into conflict. Malaysia sees the merit of more
frequent formal and informal interaction between the
two bodies. In our view, the advice and assessments by
the Chairs of country-specific configuration should be
considered in a meaningful way by the Council. In this
regard, Malaysia reiterates its position that there should
be greater connectivity and interaction between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council
so as to enhance further work in the development of
practical peacebuilding policies.

My delegation reaffirms that efforts to support
post-conflict countries must be premised on the
principle of national ownership. Through national
ownership, any policy of post-conflict reconstruction,
institution-building and the formulation of an economic
development programme will reflect the needs of local
stakeholders and ensure inclusivity and legitimacy.

In addition, the role of women in conflict prevention
should be further mainstreamed. In Malaysia's view,
engaging women in peacebuilding, settlement and
post-conflict decision-making processes is vital to
ensuring sustainable recovery and long-term peace. In
this regard, more effort is needed to take forward to
Secretary-General's seven-point action plan on gender-
responsive peacekeeping, particularly on gender-
responsive civilian capacity, women's representation
in post-conflict governance and conflict resolution.
We welcome the fact that there are other players in
the peacebuilding field, such as the World Bank and
the African Development Bank. The Commission's
efforts to strengthen partnerships with international
financial institutions on the basis of complementarity
between their respective roles in support of national
peacebuilding strategies should be further continued.

Malaysia believes that regional engagement
and commitment are imperative for stable and
sustainable peace. There is a need to ensure that the
perspectives, interests and concerns of regional actors
and neighbouring countries are factored into a broader
political strategy in support of countries emerging from
conflict.

As for the case of the Ebola outbreak, the
Peacebuilding Commission has been instrumental in
maintaining the focus of the international community
on the Ebola crisis and in coordinating efforts among
all partners, including regional and subregional
organizations.

Malaysia welcomes the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission in the area of resource mobilization. We
are of the view that resource mobilization should
not end at fundraising alone, but should broaden the
base and securing the buy-in of traditional and new
bilateral and multilateral donors to engage in support
of peacebuilding processes in the countries concerned.
In Malaysia's view, efforts should also be made to
develop the revenue-generation capacity of those
countries. We believe that this would be an important
step in strengthening the governance of countries and
preventing relapses into conflict. This would also
entail greater responsibility and legitimacy for the
Government and call on support from Member States
in providing training to enhance administration and
governance.

My delegation well welcomes the adoption earlier
of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/2 as the
outcome of this briefing. Malaysia wishes to express
its deep gratitude to the Peacebuilding Commission
for the progress achieved in countries such as Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Burundi. We are fully supportive of
the aims and objectives underlying the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the excellent
work that the Commission has undertaken to date.

In conclusion, Malaysia looks forward to the
outcome of the 2015 review of the peacebuilding
architecture with a view to further improving the United
Nations' peacebuilding efforts. We believe that the
review will be in a position to acknowledge the potential
of the Peacebuilding Commission as an advisory body
and as a support to countries emerging from conflict.
To this end, Malaysia is committed to working together
with all partners to support and promote peace efforts
in countries emerging from conflict.

