The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the agreement reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/488, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Chad and the Central African
Republic.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its concern
about the prevailing insecurity along the borders
between the Sudan, Chad and the Central African
Republic and about the threat which this poses to
the civilian population and the conduct of
humanitarian operations.

"Following the adoption of resolution 1769
(2007), the Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General dated 10 August 2007
(S/2007/488), which proposes a revised concept
of operations for a multidimensional presence
aimed at contributing to the protection of
refugees, internally displaced persons and civilian
populations at risk in eastern Chad and the north-
eastern Central African Republic as well as
facilitating the provision of humanitarian
assistance.

"The Security Council takes note of the
Secretary-General's observations and proposals
relating to military elements of the
multidimensional presence. It welcomes the
readiness of the European Union, expressed at the
meeting of the Council of the European Union on
23 and 24 July 2007, to consider the
establishment of an operation in support of the
2

United Nations presence in eastern Chad and the
north-eastern Central African Republic.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General and the European Union, as
appropriate and in consultation with the
Governments of Chad and the Central African
Republic, to proceed with preparations for this
multidimensional presence. It requests the
Secretary-General to study, in consultation with
the Governments of Chad and the Central African
Republic, the follow-on arrangements for this
multidimensional presence after a period of
12 months, in particular on the basis of a joint
assessment of requirements to be conducted by
the United Nations and the European Union six
months after the deployment of the
multidimensional presence.

"The Security Council expresses its
readiness to authorize the establishment of a
multidimensional presence in eastern Chad and
the north-eastern Central African Republic,
taking into account the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report and
the position of the Governments of Chad and the
Central African Republic.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General and the European Union to
continue to collaborate with the African Union
and regional stakeholders in support of the
ongoing process of improving the security
situation in the Sudan, Chad and the Central
African Republic.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to keep it closely
informed of the preparations for each element of
the multidimensional presence, including further
details on the structure, modalities and force
levels.

"The Security Council welcomes the
signing on 13 August 2007 in N'Djamena of the
Political Agreement for the reinforcement of the
democratic process in Chad. It encourages the
authorities and political stakeholders in Chad and
the Central African Republic to pursue their
efforts of national dialogue, with respect for the
constitutional framework."
07-49094

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2007/30.
07-49094

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.
