Mr. Koncke (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to begin by thanking the presidency of the Security
Council for having convened today's open debate
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture. We
also welcome the briefings made earlier today by the
Permanent Representatives of Kenya and Sweden and
Ambassador Rosenthal on the subject under discussion.
Similarly, my delegation thanks and acknowledges
the presidency for having directly inscribed the
Organization of American States (OAS) on the list of
speakers for today's open debate, without having each
of its member States speaking on its own behalf.

The General Secretariat of the OAS shares the view
that peacebuilding must be viewed as broadly and as
comprehensively as possible. Peacebuilding cannot
be regarded as a mere step in the post-conflict stage,
as that would remove from the concept elements that
must inevitably be taken into account in addressing
the underlying causes of conflict. The mandate of
the Charter of the United Nations to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war can be achieved
only through an integrated approach that allows for
a thorough analysis and concrete action to prevent
conflict. Although emergency actions taken to end
crises and start immediate reconstruction efforts are
absolutely necessary, it is in the stages prior to that
outcome on which the international community should
focus, by investing the political diplomatic capital and
development efforts required.

The nexus between development and peacebuilding
appears to be a pattern that should be highlighted
and analysed. Without harmonious development that
is sustainable and inclusive, achieving a society in
which peacebilding can reach the necessary standards
and levels of stability is unthinkable. The General
Secretariat of the OAS is ofthe view that there can be no
peacebuilding without the promotion and the protection
of human rights. Any peacebuilding process will be
inconclusive and lacking in foundation wherever the
human rights of the population are not considered the
main reason for action. Similarly, the role of women
must be given special consideration in peacebuilding
efforts.

With regard to the regional perspective, and in the
context of the provisions of Article 52 of the Charter
of the United Nations, the Organization of American
States works with a vision to prevent, promote and
protect rights, based on the premise of more rights for
more people. One of the conclusions that we take away
from the report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group
of Experts, as well as the tasks of the Peacebuilding
Commission, is the relevance of regional and
subregional organizations in preventing and resolving
conflicts, as well as in taking action in all pertinent
phases. In that context, the Organization of American
States relies on the legal tool under Article 52 of the
Charter, the Charter of the Organization of American
States and the Interamerican Democratic Charter,
among other instruments.

Early detection of indicators of crises based
on geographical and cultural proximity affords
regional and subregional organizations the necessary
perspective for playing a key role in this area. In that
connection, in its role of regional organization, my
delegation reiterates the statement made by Secretary-
General Luis Almagro when he said that the OAS is
fully committed to the peace process in Colombia, the
last armed conflict in the region, with a view to a stable
and lasting peace. By the same token, the General
Secretariat of the OAS wishes to convey appreciation
to the countries of the region, particularly Cuba and
Venezuela, for their contributions to the peace process.

In the context of the confluence afforded by the
review of the peacebuilding architecture, peacekeeping
operations and resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, my delegation considers that
the common denominator of all these, beyond the
specificities of each case, must be the priority of human
rights. With that in mind, the General Secretariat of
the OAS reiterates its enthusiasm to continue working
jointly with the States parties of the Organization of
American States and with the United Nations in hopes
of achieving the set goals.
