Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Under-
Secretary-General Holmes and Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights Kang for their
comprehensive statements.

I would like to thank the Austrian presidency for
organizing this high-level meeting. We also commend
it for building consensus on resolution 1894 (2009),
which marks the tenth anniversary of the initial
consideration of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict in the Council as a thematic issue.
Unfortunately, not a single day has passed in those 10
years without a civilian casualty in armed conflict or
without civilians being targeted. We should react to
such deliberate attacks. Indeed, we can say that the
international community is still failing to provide
security to civilians in armed conflict.

The issue of the protection of civilians has been a
priority topic on the agenda of the Council in recent
years, especially since the beginning of this year, given
the atrocities and human rights violations in different
parts of the world, in particular Gaza.

The Secretary-General's recent report
(S/2009/277) gives us a comprehensive account of the
latest situation in protecting civilians in armed
conflicts. The report indicates the difficulties and
challenges for the future. However, recent
developments offer hope as well. The adoption over the
past months of Security Council resolution 1882
(2009) on children and armed conflict, as well as
resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) on women
and peace and security, indicates an important
evolution in protecting civilians in armed conflicts.

In the light of those developments, we are pleased
that the Austrian presidency has broadly included the
peacekeeping aspect in the resolution. We attach a high
priority to peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding issues, as demonstrated during our
presidency of the Council. Naturally, the resolution
represents a balance and does not change the fact that
there are issues of a very sensitive nature that rim the
risk of undermining or weakening our efforts if not
addressed carefully.

In that vein, I would like to emphasize four
points. The first concerns non-State armed groups.
Given the inevitable ambiguity of that term and the
many different kinds of entities that fall into that
category, we believe that one should be extremely
careful in dealing with such groups. That is particularly
important as many terrorist organizations attempt to
abuse the term and what it entails in their quest to gain
international attention and support.

Secondly, combating terrorism is both the right
and the obligation of every State. Nothing should be
allowed to weaken our resolve to fight that scourge.
The activities of terrorist organizations themselves put
the lives of civilians in danger. Thus, international
organizations, and non-governmental organizations in
particular, should be vigilant in conducting their work
in conflict areas and not allow themselves to be
exploited by such groups and organizations.

Thirdly, as a troop- and police-contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping operations, we
wish to see more emphasis on the peacekeeping aspect
of this issue in the future. We look forward to a further
debate within the United Nations system on the
independent study commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the
protection of civilians in the context of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, which was released recently.

To that end, we hope that regional ownership and
cooperation will become a priority. Likewise, we
believe that the issue of cultural differences and
sensitivities should be taken into consideration in
predeployment training for peacekeeping operations by
all States. In that vein, the imbalance between well-
funded peacekeeping operations in some areas where
armed conflict has ended and other operations that
need urgent strengthening should also be immediately
addressed.

Fourthly, I would like to stress that it is in fact by
strengthening the rule of law, human rights, democracy
and good governance that we can secure the long-term
and lasting protection of civilians. Those should be our
main goals for the future.

