Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for having organized the present meeting,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing, and the Secretary-
General for his report on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and on the
Lord's Resistance Army-affected areas (S/2012/923).

We take positive note of the progress observed
during the reporting period in Central Africa, especially
the successful and peaceful conduct of elections, the
implementation of electoral reforms, and efforts to
promote economic growth, regional integration and
cooperation.

At the same time, cross-border challenges, the
deteriorating crisis in the Sahel region, the flow of
illegal arms and the activities of criminal and terrorist
groups continue to threaten the security and stability of
the region. It is important that countries in the Central
Africa subregion continue to confront the cross-border
and related security challenges together, as well as to
strengthen partnership and promote peacebuilding
initiatives to that end.

Maritime insecurity and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
are further aggravating the security situation and have
a negative impact on the economic development of
the countries concerned. In that regard, we commend
the efforts of regional stakeholders, with the support
of the United Nations, to implement resolution 2018
(2012), on maritime security. We also look forward to a
ministerial meeting on the Gulf of Guinea and a heads
of State summit to be held next year.

The high poverty and unemployment rates are also
matters of concern that require redoubled efforts from
the countries in the subregion, with the support and
assistance of the international community, with a View
to achieving the Millennium Development Goals.

We commend the efforts of UNOCA to contribute to
peace and security in Central Africa, including in such
fields as conflict prevention, governance, mediation
and good offices. In that regard, we stress the particular
importance of the increased cooperation by the Office
with regional and subregional institutions.

Despite the progress achieved in addressing the
threat and impact of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA),
that group continues to destabilize the security situation
in the region. We strongly condemn the ongoing brutal
attacks and atrocities committed by the LRA, as well as
its continued violations of international humanitarian
law and abuses of human rights. We support the efforts
aimed at bringing all those responsible for atrocious
crimes to justice.

It is essential that the United Nations and the
African Union continue their collaboration and work
with the respective Governments in addressing the
LRA threat. It is also important that the LRA-affected
countries accelerate their efforts to implement the goals
set out in the United Nations regional strategy on the
LRA, as well as to make further progress towards the
operationalization and implementation of the African
Union Regional Cooperation Initiative against the LRA.

Furthermore, strengthening the response capacities
of the affected countries, addressing the long-term
development needs and providing humanitarian
assistance in the affected areas require constant attention
by the Governments concerned and international donor
support. We also underline the importance of improving
transport and telecommunications infrastructures in
remote areas in order to better respond to the LRA
threat.

It is also essential to further encourage the
remaining LRA fighters to leave the group's ranks
and participate in the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration process.
Last but not least, increased coordination and
information-sharing between the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan are an
important prerequisite for better anticipating LRA
movements and threats of attack. Cooperation among
those missions has proven to be relevant and useful, and
we encourage them to further enhance their interaction.

