Mr. Amorim (Brazil): I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, and the delegation of Sweden for having
proposed this debate, which allows us to continue to look
at ways of improving protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations,
carrying on from last year's ground-breaking debate under
the presidency of the Republic of Korea.

A balanced and useful report has been forwarded to
the Security Council in response to the request contained
in the presidential statement of 19 June 1997. It provides
us with updated input for our efforts to develop a
common understanding on the role of the Security
Council in addressing the plight of civilians caught in
situations of conflict.

My delegation is pleased to note that the latest report
(A/53/l) on the work of the Organization defended the
promotion of new forms of cooperation between the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council in tackling the economic,
social and humanitarian prerequisites of human security.
In that report, the Secretary-General also suggested that
as the Security Council is called to address economic,
social and humanitarian crises that threaten global
security, it may wish to invoke a dormant provision of the
Charter - namely, Article 65 - which establishes a
basis for invigorating the relationship between the
Economic and Social Council and this Council. Brazil has

 

been of the same opinion for some time and welcomes the
position taken by the Secretary-General.

Let me highlight a few points that relate specifically
to the Security Council's area of competence in the report
we have just received. We agree with the importance of
promoting adherence to and compliance with international
humanitarian law in improving assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations. The nearly 5,000 Brazilian
troops that have served in United Nations peacekeeping
operations since 1993 were previously given orientation
courses by representatives of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) on the modalities and applicability
of international humanitarian law. Clearly, there is a need
for much wider dissemination of humanitarian principles
and rules, notwithstanding the commendable work being
carried out by a number of State and non-State actors
worldwide and the valuable contribution made by the ICRC
in particular.

At the same time, let us not forget that the basic tenet
of humanitarian law is that assistance must be provided in
an impartial and neutral way. The extraordinary success of
the Red Cross where others have often failed can be
explained by its adherence to this philosophy.

Governments, of course, may arrive at the conclusion
that the scale of abuses and violations in a specific situation
are such that enforcement action is justified or necessary.
It should be borne in mind, in such instances, that the resort
to Chapter VII action can negatively affect the provision of
humanitarian assistance, as indeed pointed out in the
Secretary-General's report (S/ 1998/883), which states in
paragraph 24,

"humanitarian organizations have been concerned
that the use of the military for humanitarian
activities, particularly in the context of Chapter
VII operations, compromises their impartiality
and neutrality, affects their ability to assist
victims on all sides of the conflict and, at times,
even leads to increased violence against United
Nations and other humanitarian personnel".

Until not long ago, those who favoured the use of
force to deal with mass abuses of human rights or rampant
violations of humanitarian law assumed that they occupied
the moral high ground. Today it is necessary to reassess the
situation and recognize with greater caution, and perhaps
wisdom, that the resort to force on humanitarian grounds
entails many risks and should be treated as a serious option
only in cases where it clearly stands a chance of
contributing to long-lasting peace. Lord Owen, the former
British Foreign Secretary, stated in this respect,

"after recent experience, humanitarian
interventions which require a delicate
interpretation of the United Nations Charter
will be harder to mount and will be viewed
with greater skepticism".

The international community must not shun its
collective responsibility to respond to the humanitarian
needs of refugees and other inadvertent victims of
conflict. But the lessons of the 1990s warn against the
establishment of an automatic correlation between
collective responsibility and collective security in the
humanitarian field. In attempting to establish a few clear-
cut categories for describing humanitarian operations, the
Secretary-General's report makes it clear that
humanitarian access can be satisfactorily assured through
negotiations, without Security Council involvement or
action, and that even when there are serious security
problems, these may be successfully tackled with the
consent of the parties.

In the extreme cases where there is a serious security
situation and one or more of the parties to the conflict
does not consent to the presence of external security
forces, coercive options may have to be considered. At
this point, however, it will be essential to bear in mind
that humanitarian objectives will not be achieved unless
they are combined with an effective political strategy for
cessation of hostilities and stabilization. As the Secretary-
General stated in his speech to the General Assembly
only a week ago, we should avoid placing the Security
Council in a situation in which it finds itself deploying
desperate humanitarian efforts to deal with consequences,
when it should be addressing the political roots, or the
causes, of a conflict.

The recommendations included in the Secretary-
General's report on protection for humanitarian assistance
indicate some of the areas where consensus may be
reached for progress to be made. The specific problems
created by the presence of armed combatants in refugee
camps is a matter that has already been brought to the
Council's attention in connection with the Secretary-
General's report on Africa, and we believe it deserves
priority attention, as does the question of the need to
regulate and monitor the trade in arms to areas of actual
or potential conflict.

 

According to the latest figures, the total number of
refugees, displaced and other war-affected persons fell by
some 300,000 in 1997, but the overall figure remained
extremely high at over 22 million at the end of the year.
Not all these refugees would fall into the category of people
in situations of conflict, but in the former Yugoslavia the
continued displacement of about 1.8 million people
continues to confront the Governments in the region - and
the international community - with considerable political
and humanitarian challenges.

The outflow of refugees to Guinea-Conakry from
destabilized neighbouring countries has made that least-
developed nation the host of one of the largest refugee
populations in Africa. Many developing countries are
paying with their scarce resources the economic, social and
political costs of regional humanitarian crises. In order to
approach the humanitarian agenda in a balanced way, it is
necessary to correct the misperception that developing
countries are only recipients of assistance, when in fact they
are often donating what little they have.

The valuable work of the United Nations and its
various relief agencies in the humanitarian field is being
carried out in the face of severe resource constraints, not to
speak of the political and physical difficulties involved.
Greater political and material support for the work being
carried out by the United Nations in this field is clearly
required.
Let me conclude by renewing our expressions of
support for the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and all United Nations agencies in the humanitarian
field, whose competence and sustained commitment in
assisting the involuntary victims of conflict continue to
provide reassurance to Governments and comfort to the
dispossessed.

