Mr. Verbecke (Belgium) (spoke in French): May
I begin by thanking Mr. Schwarz-Schilling, the High
Representative, for his statement and report. I also
wish to thank Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his statement.

Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
made by our German colleague on behalf of the
European Union (EU).

Belgium has noted with interest the content of the
report of the High Representative, particularly its
description of the evolution of the political situation.
We welcome the establishment of the new
Government. We are, however, concerned by the
development of the internal political situation, which is
characterized by stagnation.

Belgium calls for the cessation of all nationalist
rhetoric and for the depoliticization of certain subjects,
especially following the ruling of the International
Court of Justice of 26 February 2007. That ruling
should not serve as a pretext to review the political and
institutional architecture of Bosnia and Herzegovinia.

Regard to the pending reforms, we call on the
new Government to adhere to them and to undertake
them without delay. The road to European and Atlantic
integration has already been lengthy. Belgium hopes
that progress can be made rapidly as regards reform of
the police and full cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Those
two elements are conditions sine qua non for signing
the Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union.

Like the High Representative, we feel that
constitutional reform is also essential with a view to
establishing stable institutions and to ensuring fair
distribution of powers.

Belgium welcomes the recent improvement in the
matter of certification of police officers, and we wish
to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom, among
others, for the results achieved. We invite the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to effectively
implement that agreement.

Belgium reiterates its full support for the Dayton
Accords and for the Office of the High Representative.
In that regard, we welcome the decision to maintain the
Office with its current mandate until June 2008 and to
maintain the Bonn powers. Given the political situation
on different fronts, Belgium believes that the High
Representative continues to be called upon to play an
essential catalyzing role in the gradual transfer of
responsibilities to the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We welcome the recent decision to
appoint Mr. Lajcak as the new High Representative,
and we take this opportunity to thank Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling for the remarkable work that he has achieved.

