Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism for presenting
the sixth report of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by Da'esh to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering that threat (S/2018/80).
The report underscores the continuing terrorist threat
and calls on the Security Council and all Member
States to exercise constant vigilance and to strengthen
and fully implement the relevant United Nations
resolutions in order to combat this scourge.

The problem of terrorism, which exists among
most of the peoples of the States Members of our
Organization, continues to be a difficult challenge for
States, despite the crushing defeats recently endured by
Al-Qaida and Da'esh in Iraq, Syria and the Philippines.
With more than 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters from
more than 100 States, Da'esh has posed one ofthe biggest
threats that the international community has faced in
recent years, as the report emphasizes. Through its
adoption in September 2014 of resolution 2178 (2014),
in the presence of Heads of State and Government, the
Security Council showed its determination to tackle
this scourge. Cote d'Ivoire would like to commend
the multifaceted efforts undertaken by the United
Nations and the international community to strengthen
our ability to combat this evil, which undermines the
development efforts of many States and affects the
lives of thousands of people.

C6te d'Ivoire applauds the reforms undertaken to
restructure and improve the United Nations counter-
terrorism architecture, including the establishment, at
the initiative of the Secretary-General, of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, whose mission is to breathe new
life into the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. In the same vein, my delegation welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2354 (2017), based on the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and accompanied by guidelines and good practices.
Adherence to these principles and practices should
enable States to effectively combat the ways that
Da'esh and Al-Qaida incite and lead people to commit
acts of terrorism.

We also welcomed the Council's adoption in
December 2017 of resolution 2395 (2017), renewing the
mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), which remains a linchpin in the
counter-terrorism architecture, for a further four-year
period, until December 2021. We would like to take
this opportunity to congratulate the new Executive
Director of CTED, Ms. Michele Coninsx, and to assure
her of the determination of the Cote d'Ivoire authorities
to collaborate with her Committee in order to enable
it to fulfil its assigned tasks. We look forward to her
forthcoming visit to Cote d'Ivoire in March and assure
her of our readiness to work for her mission's success.

The fight against Da'esh and its associated groups
appears to be a long-term endeavour, owing to these
criminal groups' new ways of operating. In this respect,
my delegation stresses the need for all Member States
to work for the common goal of strengthening regional
and international cooperation mechanisms. We also
urge CTED to support States in formulating national
legislation that translates into concrete measures that
will enable them to fully implement their obligations
under the relevant United Nations resolutions.

We call on the Security Council to give special
attention to the most sensitive regions, specifically the
West African region, which has been plagued by the
foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon and by violent
extremism. Cote d'Ivoire would like to once again
urge the Security Council to support the initiatives of
the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel and
the efforts of the Lake Chad countries. We also call
for solidarity among States in helping to build the
capacities of less affluent countries to deal with the
evolving challenges presented by this ongoing threat.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to recall
the responsibility incumbent on us all to cooperate
at the regional and international levels in the fight
against Da'esh and its associated groups. For its part,
cote d'Ivoire is determined to work with all bilateral
and multilateral partners to counter this scourge, in
particular in West Africa and the Sahel. To that end,
I would like to announce that beginning in July, my
country will host a regional counter-terrorism school,
with the assistance of France. The school will be used
to train army officials, and members of special forces
involved in the fight against terrorism in particular.

