Mr. Bande (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's debate, which provides an
opportunity to reflect on the fast-developing events
in Jerusalem. We thank the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Mladenov, for his very lucid briefing and commend
him for his efforts in the search for peace in the
Middle East.

Iwish to align myselfwith the statements made by the
representative of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, and of Uzbekistan, on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

The surge in violence and senseless killings in
Jerusalem perpetrated by extremists on both sides,
so well articulated by speakers before me, is deeply
troubling. Indeed, fears have been expressed that if the
situation is not contained, it could escalate further, with
its attendant unsavoury consequences. The international
community must work in a concerted manner to avert
such an occurrence. At this crucial moment, we find
it crucially important for Security Council member
States to use their influence with both sides in order to
encourage them to de-escalate tensions. It is imperative
to maintain the age-long status quo by ensuring the
safety and security of both worshippers and visitors to
the holy sites in Jerusalem. In that regard, we welcome
the assurances of Prime Minister Netanyahu that Israel
has no interest in changing the status quo.

It must be stated that recent developments must
not obscure the underlying problem in the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. As widely acknowledged, the
inherent difficulty is the lack of progress in the Middle
East peace process. We would like to see a genuine effort
on the part of Israeli and Palestinian leaders to return
to negotiations. The current situation does not offer a
sustainable solution to the question of Palestine. Indeed,
it is creating despair among the people of Palestine and
causing anxiety among the people of Israel.

It is evident that a departure from the current crisis

and a revival of the peace process is hardly achievable
without ending or reversing the policy of settlement
expansion in the occupied Palestinian territories. We
believe that there are a number of specific actions that
are necessary to foster mutual respect and compromise,
build confidence, and pave the way for the realization
of the two-State solution. In that regard, we encourage
Israel to take concrete steps to freeze and reverse all
settlement-related activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. On their part, Palestinian leaders must also
signal their readiness to return to the negotiating table
by making enhanced efforts for unity and dealing with
militancy and other internal security challenges.

Beyond a doubt, neither military might nor
militancy will resolve the protracted conflict. The
current stalemate in the Middle East peace process
is neither ideal nor sustainable. Both sides must take
concrete steps to return to negotiations on the basis of
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road
map, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the relevant agreements between them. Nigeria
supports the efforts of the international community
towards establishing an environment conducive to a
return to meaningful negotiations to end the occupation
and resolve the long-standing conflict.

