Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to join previous speakers in
welcoming to the Chamber Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
thank him for his report on the implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2018/974, annex).

Our delegation has taken note of the report of
the High Representative on the achievements and
positive developments in the country over the past six
months, such as the recent adoption of the long-awaited
amendments to the code of criminal procedure by the
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in line with international standards, as well as the
completion of the country's eighth general elections
on 7 October. We also commend the progress made
by Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting
period with respect to economic reforms in order to
strengthen the economy, reform institutions and reduce
unemployment. Those are all signs that there is a
common Vision for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

However, while significant progress has been
made, we are concerned by the decision in August
of the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska to
revoke its support for the Srebrenica report of 2004.
That revocation only serves to undermine the political
stability and prosperity of the country, endangering
all the achievements and efforts made by the parties
for reconciliation among various ethnic groups and
communities and prospects for the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In that regard, we call on all parties
to refrain from divisive rhetoric and actions that could
endanger the stability of the country and hinder the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.

On the other hand, regarding the general elections
on 7 October, the Government of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea welcomes the fact that the elections
were held without any serious security incident, as
reflected in the report ofthe High Representative. At the
same time, we regret that the parties did not implement
the recommendations of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights in order to improve the
integrity of the electoral process before the elections.
In that context, while we praise the progress made,
we believe that there is still much to be done and that
we must continue working towards a common vision
of the future that will help to foster a lasting national
unity that will cement Bosnia and Herzegovina's role
in the Balkans, Europe and the world. We therefore
encourage the parties to amend the laws regarding
the House of Peoples of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to strengthen the rule of law, ensure the
full implementation of the election results and pursue
efforts to contain and eliminate ethnic divisions, crime,
corruption, violent extremism and terrorism, which
remain key issues in ensuring stability and prosperity
in the country and the region.

In conclusion, my delegation advocates full respect
for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We commend the
commitment of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina within his mandate and we emphasize our
support for his efforts to promote the implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We also welcome the
extension of the mandate of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea, which we have
just unanimously adopted (resolution 2443 (2018)), and
we hope that the mission will continue its important
work of assisting the country and facilitating the
process of achieving lasting peace and stability, as well
as its support for the work of the High Representative
and the United Nations country team. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea is ready to work with the
international community to support the process towards
lasting peace and security and sustainable development
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

