Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my delegation would like to associate itself
with previous speakers in extending our sincere thanks
to the President and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and to the
President and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We would like to thank
them for their comprehensive briefings to the Council,
which covered the efforts that both Tribunals have
made over the past six months. We take this
opportunity to commend both Tribunals once again for
the important work they are doing in the interests of
peace and national reconciliation and for the progress
that they have achieved over the past period.

The completion strategy, which the Security
Council called on the two courts to implement in its
resolution 1503 (2003), is well under way, and a
number of steps have been taken, including measures
to transfer intermediate- and low-level defendants to
national jurisdictions and to make greater use of the ad
litem judges.

In the context of those efforts, we would like to
stress the importance of the recommendations made by
the working group on speeding up appeals and trial, as
noted in the report issued last February. Those
recommendations include increasing the efficiency of
the ad litem judges and enhancing pretrial procedures,
the initiation of the e-Court system and the transfer of
certain cases to national jurisdictions.

The most recent inquiry conducted by the ICTY
and the Dutch authorities has concluded that Slobodan
Milosevic died of natural causes, thus dispelling all
suspicions raised by the media. We would like in that
regard to stress that the fact that Milosevic's trial ended
prematurely will not have an impact on the overall
work of the Tribunal, since the trial was already in its
final stages.

Once again, we would like to stress the obligation
of the United Nations to enhance the work of both
Tribunals so that those responsible for the most
grievous violations of humanitarian law can be brought
to justice. In doing so, it must respect the rights of all
defendants and enhance cooperation to extradite the
accused. The non-extradition of such accused persons
would gravely undermine the work of the Tribunals.
We would like to appeal, therefore, to the Government
of Serbia to fulfil its obligations to the international
community in accordance with resolutions 1503 (2003)
and 1534 (2004), particularly with respect to the
capture of Mladic and Karadzic and their extradition,
in order that justice may be upheld. We should also not
fail to mention the 18 accused who should stand trial
before the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
so as to ensure that justice is done - justice which has
been lacking in that part of the world.

Both Tribunals should continue to make the
utmost efforts to improve their administration and
enhance their efficiency. The victims of those grievous
violations of international law are counting on both
courts to uphold justice. We therefore urge the
Tribunals to continue to make the utmost efforts
regarding the application of the law in the cases before
it, within the framework of the completion strategy.

Since we have been given the opportunity to ask
some questions of both Presidents and Prosecutors, I
would like to inquire if, since the report was prepared,
further efforts have been made by the tribunals,
particularly the Rwanda Tribunal, with respect to
trying Mr. Taylor before the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. Have they been able to provide any services to
the Special Court for Sierra Leone in the trial of Mr.
Taylor, or has that not been possible to date?

