Mr. Belinga-Eboutu (Cameroon) (spoke in French): A month ago the Security Council had a
precursor debate on the subject of the Security Council
and regional organizations: facing the new challenges
to international peace and security. Among these
challenges, there is the imbalance in international
economic relations, with the worsening of poverty,
terrorism, and, above all, the persistence of conflicts.
This meeting devoted to the Council's role in the
pacific settlement of conflicts is an extension of that
exercise.

I would like to commend Pakistan - your
country, Mr. President - for choosing this topic and to
thank you, Sir, for taking your valuable time to
personally lead our work at this important meeting. I
wish to welcome the outstanding personalities present
who have helped us with their thoughts and experience
as their contribution to the role of the Security Council
in the pacific settlement of disputes.

Finally, last but not least, I would like to welcome
the presence of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
at the beginning of our meeting and his important
statement.

The Preamble of the Charter gives the general
principles, establishes standards and proclaims the
maintenance of peace as a priority concern, a
fundamental base for the United Nations. This
proclamation determines the profound philosophy of
the Charter: to prevent war, to maintain peace. How is
this to be done, and in what way? The essential role in
this regard was entrusted to the Security Council, in
Articles 25 and 33 to 44 in particular. The Council
therefore appears to be the cornerstone of the system
for maintaining peace - the indisputable cornerstone,
because it remains the depositary of both preventive
action and coercive action. However, it is not an
unshakeable cornerstone, nor is it one which cannot be
ignored, because the lack of means and especially the
absence of political will on the part of its members
drastically limit its actions. This is why our current
debate is timely and important.

The peaceful settlement of disputes is not a new
issue. Already, in 1907, Article 1 of The Hague
Convention for the Peaceful Settlement of International
Disputes, signed on 17 October at The Hague, provided
that "With a View to obviating as far as possible
recourse to force in relations between States, the
Contracting Parties agree to use their best efforts to
ensure the pacific settlement of their international
differences."

Other initiatives and other resolutions adopted
within the United Nations reinforce this dynamic. This
is the case with the resolution on principles for the
prevention and peaceful settlement of disputes adopted
in 2002. This is the case with the Declaration on the
Prevention and Elimination of Disputes adopted in
1998. This is the case with the Manila Declaration on
the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes of
1982. Finally, this is the case with the 1970 declaration
on principles of international law concerning friendly
relations and cooperation among States.

The pacific settlement of disputes would thus
seem to be an imperative norm reaffirmed by the
Charter in Article 2, paragraph 3. The obligation for
States to settle their disputes by peaceful means new
should have a deeper impact on their behaviour. In
other words, this obligation should encourage States to
give preference to negotiation over war. That is the
price of international peace and security.

With this in view, the Charter gives to the
Security Council a pre-eminent role, as set out in
Article 24, paragraph 1. This is a responsibility fraught
with consequences. It means, inter alia, that the
Council must in all circumstances act in a resolute and
preventive manner in order to forestall the guns from
sounding. This, for my delegation, is the thrust of
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.

The Manila Declaration got it right in inviting the
Council and its members, as well as the Members of
the Organization, to make use of every possibility to
achieve the peaceful settlement of disputes with a view
to averting breaches of the peace. In order effectively
to discharge this role, the Council has at its disposal a
range of instruments and mechanisms that together
help in the peaceful settlement of disputes. Here I am
thinking of missions of inquiry, good offices and
cooperation with regional organizations, which have
established expertise with regard to their regions,
experience as to the cause of conflicts and the ability,
perhaps, to put an end to them. I am thinking also of
the various decisions that might be taken at any time to
force States to resort strictly to peaceful means in order
to prevent or resolve problems that may have arisen
among them.

That any Member of the United Nations has the
option of bringing a dispute to the Security Council, if
it is a party to a conflict, and that it must assume the
obligations stemming from a peaceful settlement
constitutes, as we see it, one of the most important
contributions of our Charter in this field.

The Charter also extends this privilege to the
General Assembly and to the Secretary-General when a
dispute has the potential to endanger international
peace and security. This openness in the jurisdiction of
the Council allows it to use its competence in any
warlike situation and to show the firm determination of
the founders of the United Nations to discharge its full
responsibility in this regard. Moreover, the Council has
the ability to refer States to the International Court of
Justice. This without doubt represents major progress
in the promotion of international peace and security
through peaceful means, usefully supplemented by
mediation and conciliation, as provided for in Articles
37 and 38 of the Charter.

The instruments available to the Council can be
effective only if States cooperate fully, and for good
reason. That is because States have a key responsibility
in the prevention and settlement of conflicts. Today
more than ever before, the international community is
called upon to strengthen methods for the peaceful
settlement of disputes. There can be no doubt that all of
humankind in solidarity can win the battle for peace if
guns give way to negotiations and international legal
bodies.

Formerly a ward of the United Nations,
Cameroon is deeply dedicated to the Organization, to
the principles that are its bedrock and to the peaceful
settlement of disputes. We demonstrated this once
again most recently, both in principle and in our
convictions. Cameroon is indeed convinced, as
President Paul Biya consistently emphasizes, that there
is no crisis involving two States, and in particular no
internal crisis, that cannot be resolved peacefully.

Above and beyond dialogue, the major tool in this
regard is, no doubt, reliance on law. Cameroon
welcomes the sound steps taken along the path to peace
by the Security Council. This progress, however,
should not make us forget the deadly conflicts that
continue to claim the lives of civilians and combatants
throughout the world or the grave threat posed to the
world today by the spread of weapons of mass
destruction, the resurgence of terrorist activities and, as
has been said, the persistence of poverty.

In order to avert or overcome such dangers, we
must join forces and practice tolerance and dialogue.
We must vigorously reaffirm our dedication to the
primacy of law in relations among States and, hence, to
the pacific settlement of disputes, including the resort
to the courts of law.

The pacific settlement of disputes would entail
adoption by the Security Council and the United
Nations, whenever circumstances so dictate, of any
measure to compel States, if necessary, to implement
forthwith and without equivocation the decisions
established for peaceful procedures. This is even more
fundamental when it comes to the decisions of the
International Court of Justice. At stake is the
credibility of the machinery established in the Charter.
At stake is the credibility of the Security Council in
exercising its essential role in the pacific settlement of
disputes.

This debate has given us an opportunity for
fruitful consideration of the future role of the Security
Council in the pacific settlement of disputes. In future,
we must be even more innovative and creative in
making our Council more capable of facing the
challenges to peace and security posed by conflict.

