The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Lebanon.

Like others before me, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh, President of Djibouti, and
thank him for his kind words addressed to my country,
Lebanon.

We regret the border dispute between Djibouti
and Eritrea and hope that it will come to an end as soon
as possible. We stress and reiterate the importance of
Djibouti's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and we
reject all acts of aggression against that country. We
also stress the importance of respect for Security
Council resolution 1907 (2009), which calls on Eritrea
to withdraw its forces from Djibouti forthwith. We also
stress the importance of compliance with resolution
1862 (2009) so as to restore peaceful dialogue between
the two countries and to return the situation to the
status quo ante. We call on Eritrea to allow access to
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
as called for by Djibouti.

We applaud Djibouti for the withdrawal of its
forces and troops in compliance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Resolution 1907 (2009),
which imposes sanctions on Eritrea, was adopted as a
result of the concern that Eritrea had not complied with
previous Security Council resolutions. We stress the
importance of ending any confrontation on the border
between Djibouti and Eritrea.
10-36796
With regard to Somalia, we would like to stress
that the Djibouti peace process should be upheld, and
we stress that efforts to resolve the situation in Somalia
should not focus exclusively on the maintenance of
security and stability. In particular, we would like to
stress the following.

With regard to security, we emphasize the
importance of providing training for security forces in
Somalia, and we call on donors to provide the
resources necessary to support the security sector in
Somalia.

With regard to piracy, we stress the impact that
this scourge has on international maritime routes and
the obstacles it poses to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to Somalia. Economic development and
efforts to fight poverty on land and to reach a political
solution to the situation in Somalia are factors that will
contribute to fighting piracy.

We condemn attacks against humanitarian
workers and call on donors to respond to the
humanitarian appeals that have been made. In the
absence of an international peace force, we call on
donors to support the African Union Mission in
Somalia, and we commend the African Union's efforts
to establish comprehensive peace in Somalia.

In conclusion, we applaud Djibouti for its efforts
to revive peace in the Horn of Africa. We stress the
importance of the Istanbul Conference on Somalia and
of enhancing the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union so as to establish
stability in the Horn of Africa.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded this stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.40 am.
15
