Malta thanks the Russian Federation for holding today's open debate on women and peace and security on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). We also thank the Secretary-General for his message and the briefers for sharing their invaluable insights and experiences. Malta joins the international community in commemorating this milestone. Resolution 1325 (2000) puts to the fore the principle that women and a gender perspective are crucial for sustainable peace, and this anniversary provides us with an opportunity to reflect on the past 20 years and on how we continue to build on what we have already achieved. It is imperative that women be involved in all the stages of the peace process, from peace negotiations to peacebuilding, and at all levels. Women on the ground have a unique perspective, and their views must be duly considered and incorporated in a meaningful manner. Peace processes that involve women are likely to be more successful and sustainable. Without women, there is no peace. The coronavirus disease pandemic has deepened pre-existing inequalities and exposed further vulnerabilities in social, political and economic systems. The reports of increased violence against women and girls around the world, particularly in conflict-affected areas and in fragile, humanitarian and armed conflict-affected contexts are particularly worrisome. Although the situation seems daunting, solutions are available and within reach. It is crucial that States continue to fully respect and implement existing commitments and obligations with respect to the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and the full and equal enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental freedoms. This also should include the strengthening of women's leadership and ensure the full, effective and meaningful participation of women in decision-making processes at all stages, and include gender mainstreaming across the board. Investing in young women's leadership will not only change the trajectory of their future, but that of their communities as well. Malta remains committed to the women and peace and security agenda, including through achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls. Malta ratified the Istanbul Convention in 2014 and the Gender-Based Violence and Domestic Violence Act came into force in 2018. In 2017, a Consultative Council for Women's Rights was established with the aim of strengthening dialogue between the Government and civil society and mainstreaming equality in all aspects of Government's processes. And the Government of Malta launched the Gender- Based Violence and Domestic Violence Strategy and Action Plan. The female employment rate increased from 54.3 per cent in 2014 to 66.1 per cent in 2019, that is, by 11.8 per cent. Last year, Malta acceded to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which was one of the pledges it made in April 2019 during the high-level side event on women and peace and security. We have also continued to raise awareness on women and peace and security issues locally, regionally and multilaterally. Furthermore, Malta appointed its first Ambassador for Women, Peace and Security, Her Excellency Cecilia Attard- Pirotta - proving its strong commitment to the cause. Malta is proud to also be about to fulfil its second pledge, namely, the launching of its first national action plan in the coming hours. Much effort and thought has been put into its drafting, and we look forward to its official launch, followed by its implementation. That is the real challenge to be faced - putting words into actions. However, with the support of relevant local stakeholders, as well as by learning from our international partners and their best practices, we will succeed. Furthering the women and peace and security agenda is not a task for women and girls alone. Men and boys need to be brought on board as well, since they also have a stake in the agenda's success.
