Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Ms. Ursula Mueller for their briefings. Particular thanks go to Ms. Muller for highlighting some positive aspects, however small, and for inviting us to use them to give new impetus to our collective actions. The Middle East peace process is a phrase used by world leaders time and again to refer to efforts to end the conflict between Israel and Palestine. It is a conflict whose undeniable regional ramifications continue to heighten threats to international peace and security. One of the most important events of the past 50 years was the signing of the Oslo Accords of 1993, which established a series of commitments based on United Nations resolutions towards an independent, secure and self-reliant Palestinian State. However, almost 30 years later, neither Israelis nor Palestinians, for different reasons, have succeeded in conducting a dialogue that opens the door to the negotiations necessary to resolve their disputes. Peace in the region, including the Palestinian people's undeniable right to independence, seemed to be slowly eroding. Much has changed since then, and the actors are certainly different, but we believe that it is essential to the resolution of this long conflict that the parties decide to relaunch with renewed impetus a peace process aimed at satisfying the legitimate aspirations of both peoples to live in peace. Dialogue is the vital avenue for improving the situation of those affected by the conflict and for taking firm steps towards sustainable development based on justice, equal opportunities and a peace that can be replicated throughout the Middle East region. Both parties must immediately desist from acts that contravene international law, including international humanitarian and human rights law, as well as resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly, and guarantee the health, dignity, freedom and well-being of a population that has suffered years of violence and conflict.As an international community, we understand that our collective action must be aimed at contributing in an impartial and effective manner to the search for real solutions to a conflict that so often endangers the lives of so many civilians. We must move forward and reduce pointless processes. Open discussions such as today's are a platform to send a clear message that there is a collective will to put the process towards a negotiated peace back on track, not to point fingers and deepen divisions. We understand that any participation by the Security Council must be framed by recognition and respect for mutual rights, including self-determination and independence, non-interference and by the legacy of understandings reflected in previous agreements. Before concluding, I would like to highlight a few points. It is essential to prevent the tensions between the parties from rising. We call for restraint and for respect for international law and existing ceasefire provisions. The resumption of dialogue must be the sole and central objective of all parties. The humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian territory continues to be a source of concern and deserves the full attention of the international community. We believe that the Israeli settlements and their impact on the Palestinian people foster an atmosphere of tension and insecurity that affects women and children most. They face violence, threats, intimidation, restriction of movement and discrimination. The expansion not only contravenes international law but also undermines any possibility of reaching a point where the reconciliation and peace process between the parties can continue. However, the deep division among Palestinians themselves also erodes efforts towards State-building and inflicts uncertainty that is difficult to bear. It is perhaps a problem that the Palestinian people must resolve before they can sit down and talk about a real and lasting peace with Israel. It is therefore necessary to insist on a Palestinian electoral process as soon as possible as the first step towards a new political transformation that will help strengthen the position of Palestinians in the concert of nations.
