Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Like previous speakers, I too would like to
thank Mr. Jack Lang, Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Legal Issues Related to Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia, for his briefing. We are confident that his
work will contribute to progress on this complex and
sensitive question. We would also like to thank
Mr. Mathias, Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, and the representative of Somalia for their
statements.

By appointing Mr. Lang as the Special Adviser on
Legal Issues Related to Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia, the Secretary-General has both assessed the
scale of the threat of piracy off the Somali coast and
has shown the commitment of the United Nations to
combat this phenomenon. While we await a more in-
depth analysis of the report (see S/2011/30), I would
like to make some comments.

First of all, my delegation considers - as is often
said - that the question of piracy needs to be
considered from two angles. One the one hand is the
importance of setting up an inclusive judicial
mechanism, and on the other is the need to tackle the
question of piracy off the Somali coast in conjunction
with the security threat in the interior of the country.
Piracy is a shared security challenge; protecting the
coasts of the Gulf of Aden from acts of piracy as well
as implementing a rapid and effective crackdown on
perpetrators require a coordinated international
response. The establishment of legal instruments
should primarily involve regional actors directly
affected by the unstable situation off their coasts.

As Mr. Jack Lang clearly underscored in his
report, we must strengthen both the financial and the
judicial support provided to States in the region in
general, and to Somalia in particular, in order to enable
them to ensure the security of their territories.
Strengthening Somali security capacity, adapting
national legal instruments to deal with piracy and
ensuring effective international cooperation are all part
of such an approach.

My delegation supports the proposal by the
Special Adviser for the establishment of jurisdictional
provisions in Puntland and Somaliland, as well as a
special Somali court. This legal framework for action
should enable States in the region to take more
effective steps against the phenomenon of piracy.
Nevertheless, it is essential that complementary
measures also be contemplated to specifically take into
account the security threats within Somalia.

Whenever the topic of piracy has been addressed
in the Council, my delegation has always advocated for
a comprehensive strategy for resolving the Somali
crisis. Guaranteeing security on the ground in Somalia
calls for the imposition of a naval blockade and a no-
flight zone over Somalia, as recommended by the
African Union. Among other things, such a blockade
would make it possible to prevent the entry of foreign
elements and the theft and transfer of weapons and
ammunition to armed groups, thereby leading to an end
to the fighting that has ravaged the country for just
over two decades.

It is also important to link the number of
maritime and judicial anti-piracy initiatives with
international initiatives supporting the Transitional
Federal Government in its economic development
efforts, especially since poverty is one of the root
causes of piracy. Indeed, many pirates are ex-fishermen
who became pirates because their traditional
occupation disappeared as a result of industrial fishing
practices off the coast.

Finally, I underscore my delegation's
endorsement of Mr. Lang's position that the United
Nations must take swift, strong action. For its part,
Gabon will continue contributing to the consideration
of the report of the Special Adviser. We reaffirm our
gratitude and support to Mr. Lang for his work in
seeking concrete, effective and rapid solutions in the
fight against piracy in the Gulf of Aden.

