Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Let me first and foremost
congratulate you, Madam President, on your presidency
of the Council, and secondly, state that we align my
delegation's statement with the statements of the
representatives of Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and Tajikistan, on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

The continued occupation of Palestinian territory
and its ramifications are unacceptable. The build-up of
illegal Israeli settlements on Palestinian lands,
including in East Jerusalem, continues unabated. That
includes the recent demolition of the historic Shepherd
Hotel in order to make way for the construction of
more housing for settlers.

In continuing to do so, Israel has time and again
put itself on the wrong side of history, with impunity.
In that connection, we welcome the European Union's
declaration on the Middle East peace process of
13 December 2010, which considers Israeli
settlements, including in East Jerusalem, illegal under
international law and an obstacle to peace. In addition,
we also welcome the increasing number of countries
officially recognizing the State of Palestine. At the very
least, that development serves as an indication to all
Palestinians that the world at large has not forgotten or
forsaken them.

It is also a reminder to Israel that it must fulfil its
legal obligations by stopping all illegal settlement
activities, the construction of the separation wall and
the demolition of Palestinian-owned buildings and
infrastructure, particularly in East Jerusalem. Only by
doing so can the peace process timeline stipulated in
September 2010 be adhered to and the occupation end.
Only by doing so can we bring stability and peace to
the Middle East. Most important of all, we can restore
justice and all rights due to the Palestinian people.

On Gaza, we reiterate our call on Israel to lift the
blockade and end the imprisonment of more than
1.5 million people, to normalize the flow of
construction materials and to expedite further
approvals of United Nations projects, including the
building of more schools by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. Provocative actions, such as the shooting of
Palestinian civilians, including children, by Israeli
military personnel, must stop, as such actions further
aggravate the already dire situation in the Strip.

Resolving these issues requires the international
community to focus all its energy and efforts on
achieving a comprehensive peace in the region and on
restoring the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to an independent State of
Palestine. All parties must act truthfully and sincerely
towards achieving these objectives. We again urge the
Security Council to take the necessary action by
bringing into effect its very own resolutions on
Palestine and the Middle East.

