Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (Spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, at the outset let me thank you for having
convened this informative open meeting with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Antonio Guterres. We would like to thank
Mr. Guterres for his briefing on the situation of world
refugees and internally displaced persons worldwide. I
would like also to express the appreciation of the
Government of Argentina for the important work
undertaken daily by his organization and by
Mr. Guterres himself, for we believe that in order to
carry out the functions he is charged with, one must
have in-depth knowledge of international realities as
well as a clear militant spirit in favour of those who
have no voice.

Recent reports indicate that there is reason for
hope as concerns some conflicts. Indeed, we have
heard from Mr. Guterres that the current number of
refugees is the lowest in the last 25 years and that in
some conflicts, in particular in Africa, the situation
seems to have improved.

However, conflicts and human rights violations
continue to prevail that trigger the displacement of
many persons in other areas.

We are concerned by the issue of internal
displacements due to conflicts, and we believe that it
should receive appropriate attention from the Council,
given that refugees and internally displaced persons are
particularly vulnerable in the context of armed conflict,
as the Council has said in the past.

The recent debate held by the Council on
9December on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict eloquently underlined the difficult situation of
displaced persons in many of those conflicts.

From that perspective, there are certainly
important areas of common concern for the Office of
the High Commissioner and for the Council. The
mandates contained in thematic and country-specific
Council resolutions in areas such as access of
humanitarian personnel to populations in need; safety
and security of humanitarian personnel; the situation of
children and women in armed conflict; and the
protection of civilians are particularly relevant to the
work of the Office of the High Commissioner and can
have a significant impact on that Office's protection
mandate.

We believe that the interaction between those
various dimensions should be taken into account,
especially in the design, deployment and functioning of
integrated missions.

It is important that there be clear mandates
concerning the protection of camps for displaced
persons and that these be included in the establishment
or renewal of peacekeeping missions.

Reports of the use of rape against refugees as a
weapon of conflict and the abduction and humiliation
of refugee children continue to be routine features of
displacement situations. The violation of the human
rights of displaced persons is especially relevant in the
context of the Council's mandate when it comes to
assessing situations in which civilians are attacked or
in which humanitarian assistance to them is
deliberately obstructed. Special attention should be
paid to situations constituting war crimes, crimes
against humanity and other crimes with regard to
which the Council has been given the responsibility to
protect.

We have already expressed our hopes with regard
to reports about the return of many refugees to their
countries of origin, especially in Africa. The contexts
in which those returns are taking place are very
diverse. They include a variety of factors - including
security considerations - that positively or negatively
affect the sustainability of those returns. Although
some of those factors fall within competence of the
Council, it is clear that the broad involvement of the
various bodies of the Organization, including the
recently established Peacebuilding Commission, is
truly crucial.

