Judge Agius: I feel deeply honoured to have once
again the privilege of addressing the Security Council,
this time as the new President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I am
fortunate to have assumed the leadership of the
Mechanism when the institution is strong and well-
established, thanks to the unstinting and outstanding
work of my predecessor, Judge Theodor Meron,
together with that of my colleagues, the Mechanism's
remarkable Judges, and of course its wonderful staff.

This is not to say that my first months have been easy.
The role of Mechanism President is a demanding one,
running an institution spread across two continents, with
Judges and staff coming from numerous legal systems
and diverse backgrounds, working in different time
zones; with our focus split between the residual judicial
matters arising out of two very distinct conflicts and
resulting from the closure of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I already
knew of these unique circumstances before assuming
the presidency, of course, because I have been a Judge
of the Mechanism since it came into operation in 2012
and was a Judge of the ICTY for many years before
that. Nevertheless, I have been surprised and enthralled
by the extent to which the Mechanism differs from its
predecessor institutions.

Despite our unique mandate and the many challenges
that no doubt lie ahead, I remain fully committed, first
and foremost, to the efficient and timely conclusion
of the judicial proceedings at both the Arusha and
The Hague branches of the Mechanism, bearing in
mind due process and fundamental fair trial rights;
secondly, to enhancing inter-branch coordination and
harmonization of practices and procedures; and thirdly,
to doing my utmost to foster a working environment
that encourages high staff morale and performance.
This is in line with the priorities I announced at
the start of my presidency, which are elaborated in
document S/2019/4l7, being the Mechanism's progress
report for the period 16 November 2018 to 15 May 2019.
I must add that the report partly reflects the work of
the Mechanism under President Meron's guidance until
19 January of this year, when I took over the leadership
of that fine institution from him.

As set out in the report before the Council, the
Mechanism continues to work vigorously towards
concluding its residual judicial workload. Notably, most
of this work has been performed by Judges working
remotely, with the assistance of Chambers staff at both
branches, in accordance with the imperative to operate in
a cost-efficient manner. In the Mechanism's seven years
of existence, its Judges have had only two opportunities
to come together for the purpose of in-person plenary
sessions. The second in-person plenary of Judges, and
the first to be held at the Mechanism's Arusha branch,
took place earlier this year, in March, offering my
colleagues and me a tremendous opportunity to discuss
practical and substantial matters, familiarize ourselves

with the new courtroom and get to know our dedicated
staffin Tanzania. It was a most valuable meeting, which
I hope will be repeated periodically.
Turning to our workload, I am pleased to note
that the appeal judgment in the Karadzie case was
delivered on 20 March, representing a milestone for
the Mechanism in the conclusion of one of its most
significant cases. Remarkably, the timely adjudication
of the case was achieved despite changes in the bench at
a very late stage. I wish to particularly commend Judge
Vagn Joensen, who took over as the presiding Judge,
and Judge Ivo Nelson de Caires Batista Rosa, who, upon
being newly assigned to the case, was able to quickly
take up the complex and significant responsibilities
entrusted to him.

In relation to the other ongoing cases in The Hague,
I am also pleased to report that changes in late 2018
to the bench assigned to the Mladic' case have also not
resulted in any delays to the appeal proceedings, which
are progressing smoothly. I am grateful to the presiding
Judge, Judge Prisca Matimba Nyambe, and the other
Judges on the bench, whose diligence, together with that
of the Chambers team, has allowed the case to remain
on track to conclude by the end of 2020. Solid progress
is also being made in the Stanisic' and Simatovic' retrial,
with the defence case underway as of 18 June. Thanks
to the dedication of the Presiding Judge, Judge Burton
Hall, and the rest of the Bench and assigned staff, the
trial judgment in this case also remains on schedule for
delivery by the end of 2020.

In Arusha, the Ngirabatware review proceedings
are currently expected to be heard in September.
As the Council may be aware, the replacement
of Mr. Ngirabatware's counsel and the disclosure
of voluminous material from a related contempt
case resulted in the postponement of the review
hearing, which had previously been scheduled for
September 2018.

In addition to those proceedings, which relate to
core crimes within the jurisdiction of the Mechanism,
the Mechanism is seized ofa number ofcases pertaining
to allegations of contempt of court. I refer in particular
to the multi-accused Turinabo et a]. case, in which a
single Judge continues to conduct pre-trial proceedings
and to deal with numerous motions filed by the five
accused. It is anticipated that the trial will start in
October and conclude in the first semester of next year.
I would like to add that the Appeals Chamber, which
I preside over, is also seized of several appeals of
pre-trial decisions of the single Judge, and is making
its best efforts to ensure that these are adjudicated as
expeditiously as possible in order to allow the trial to
start on time.
Another contempt case, the case ofPetar Jojie and
Vjerica Radeta, is presently back before the Mechanism.
In 2018, this case was referred to the authorities of
Serbia for trial, but was subsequently remanded back
to a single Judge following an appeal by the Amicus
Curiae Prosecutor. In May of this year, the single Judge
revoked the previous referral order and requested Serbia
to transfer the accused to the Mechanism without delay.
While the two accused have not filed an appeal against
this decision, Serbia has, and the matter is currently
pending before the Appeals Chamber.

What the Council has just heard relates to the most
Visible aspect of the Mechanism's mandate, namely,
its residual judicial workload. It is clear that our trials
and appeals, and especially our decisions, orders
and judgments, are followed closely not only by the
countries most affected by our work - Rwanda and
those in the region of the former Yugoslavia - but
also by other States Members of the United Nations
and numerous stakeholders around the world. Less
attention, however, is paid to the Mechanism's additional
statutory functions, which include protecting victims
and witnesses, monitoring cases referred to national
jurisdictions, preserving the archives of the ICTR, the
ICTY and the Mechanism itself, addressing requests for
assistance from national jurisdictions and supervising
the enforcement of sentences. I would therefore like
to share some of my reflections, since assuming the
presidency, on what it means to manage some of these
residual matters, and will focus my remarks here on
enforcement issues.

My first observation may be an obvious one,
namely, that justice does not end with the delivery
of a judgment. I am referring here to post-conviction
matters, which are a little-understood but crucial part
of the Mechanism's work. The legal framework of the
Mechanism grants me, as President, broad powers to
supervise the enforcement of sentences, and I do not
take those responsibilities lightly. Determinations
as to where a convicted person will serve his or her
sentence, whether he or she should be transferred to
continue a sentence elsewhere, or whether a person
may be eligible to be considered for early release,
pardon or commutation of sentence, are extremely
important. There are also very sensitive issues relating,
inter alia, to the rights of detainees and to sentences
imposed as a result of painstaking, often lengthy
trials and appeal proceedings concerning the gravest
violations of international criminal law. My duty
remains to apply the law, and I will continue to do so
responsibly, thoroughly and with as much transparency
as possible. I recall that, pursuant to the Mechanism's
legal framework, such decisions involve the exercise
of discretionary functions by the President and require
a careful case-by-case assessment and balancing
of factors.

Secondly, as a judicial institution, the Mechanism
is bound to strictly observe its duty to safeguard
the rights of all its detainees, whether subject to
pending or ongoing proceedings or awaiting transfer
to an enforcement State. As of 5 December 2018, the
Mechanism has been implementing a new regulatory
framework on detention matters that I believe can serve
as a model for other institutions. In that regard, the
Mechanism has been guided by the need to harmonize
practices between the Arusha and The Hague detention
facilities, and by standards enunciated by the General
Assembly through its adoption of the Nelson Mandela
Rules. Moreover, it has sought to build upon those
standards through detailed procedures governing
visits, communications, complaints and disciplinary
matters in a detention setting. The Mechanism will
continue to focus on ensuring that its implementation
of this framework is also reflective of best practices in
detention management.

Thirdly, in undertaking its enforcement functions,
the Mechanism will continue to rely on the support of
Member States and other key stakeholders. It is evident
that in order to have an enduring impact on international
peace and justice, we must all remain committed not
only to having trials and appeals and active judicial
processes, but also to what comes afterwards. In my
six months as President, I have come to appreciate even
more how complex the enforcement of sentences can be
and how precious such commitment is. In this regard,
I would like to praise the critical role performed by
Enforcement States that voluntarily assume additional
responsibilities to further the cause of international
justice. In particular, I wish to thank Austria, Benin,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy,
Mali, Norway, Poland, Senegal, Sweden and the United
Kingdom for their generosity and ongoing support with
regard to the Mechanism's enforcement functions.

This exemplary cooperation is not only vital to the
Mechanism's ability to fulfil its broader mandate; it is
also a sign of the trust and credibility that our institution
enjoys in the eyes of the international community. For
that reason, I am compelled to raise a challenging and
most unfortunate situation under the Mechanism's
purview. I am referring to the fate of the nine acquitted
and released persons that remain in Arusha, one of them
since 2004, and they remain there in an unacceptable
legal limbo. These persons should be free to start a
new life, having served their sentences or never been
convicted in the first place, and yet they cannot. While
the Mechanism is doing everything it can to find a
long-term solution, the fate of these nine individuals is
a responsibility it shares with the States Members ofthe
United Nations, as was noted in resolution 2422 (2018).
More can and must be done to resolve this situation.

It is of course a double pleasure for me to appear
before the Security Council on the occasion of the Day
of International Criminal Justice - a day celebrating
the achievements of international criminal courts and
tribunals in delivering justice and holding to account
those responsible for violations of international law.
Today we pay tribute to the vision and the commitment
of all of the individuals, organizations and stakeholders
that have advocated, and continue to advocate, for
justice to be more than an abstract ideal. The underlying
reason for this important day, namely, the adoption of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
would not have been possible without the ICTY and
the ICTR having paved the way for such a remarkable
endeavour. The establishment of the Mechanism as the
successor institution to the two ad hoc Tribunals further
demonstrates the Security Council's commitment to
principled accountability and its members' resolve to
ensure that the closure of the Tribunals will not open
the way for impunity to reign once more.

On this day, we are also called upon to remember that
international criminal justice is not the responsibility
of courts alone. All those who are committed to
the rule of law have a vital part to play in the fight
against impunity - and particularly now, when there
is a resurgence in genocide denial and revisionism
in both the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Such
an effort includes defending judicial processes and
pronouncements and speaking out against those who
try to distort the truth as established by international
and domestic courts. Consequently, those who deny the
legitimacy of the findings of the ICTY, the ICTR and
the Mechanism must be reminded that this body, the
Security Council, mandated these institutions - and
no one else - to investigate, prosecute, adjudicate and
punish the crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. Likewise, they must be reminded that the
domestic courts are entrusted with continuing to carry
out these functions and not politicians or individuals.
I therefore call upon the Council to defend and protect
our judicial legacy, which established time and time
again, beyond a reasonable doubt, that what the world
witnessed both in 1994 and in 1995 was genocide,
together with the gravest and most brutal of other
international crimes.

International criminal justice concerns us all,
becausejustice is in the service ofpeace, and peace must
be maintained on a daily basis, as this distinguished
Council knows all too well. The extent of the world's
yearning for justice was made clear to me this year
when I attended the twenty-fifth commemoration of
the genocide against the Tutsi, in Kigali, and again
last week in Potocari, where I attended the twenty-
fourth commemoration of the Srebrenica genocide.
These occasions reinforced in me the firm belief
that, while international justice takes time and costs
money, it is always worth it for the victims and affected
communities, offering not only some form of closure
but also a powerful way forward. However, we must
be mindful that justice has enemies as well, who are
constantly seeking to make sure that countless atrocities
throughout the globe remain unanswered.

I am determined to do my utmost to maximize
the Mechanism's ability to deliver meaningful justice
and to fulfil all aspects of its mandate in an effective
and efficient manner. My colleagues - the other
judges - and the Mechanism's principals, together
with our exceptional staff, are equally committed to
this task. However, we cannot do it alone. The success
of international justice depends on sustained support
and cooperation, today and every day. I hope and trust
that the Mechanism will continue to find such help in
the esteemed States members of the Security Council.
For their support thus far, I am extremely grateful.

Before concluding, please allow me, Mr. President,
to commend you on your presidency for the month of
July and to thank you in particular for your personal
commitment and outstanding leadership as Chair of the
Council's Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. My recognition also goes to the Office of
Legal Affairs and its dedicated team for their invaluable
support. And last but not least, I wish to express my
sincere gratitude for the continuing and excellent
support provided by the two Host Countries of the
Mechanism, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
United Republic of Tanzania.

