Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): Mr. President, our delegation wishes to
express its appreciation for your continued leadership
as the Chairman of the Security Council's 1737
Sanctions Committee and for your report to the
Council today. Your efforts were essential in the
Committee's establishment of its guidelines on 30 May
2007, and they continue to be critical as the Committee
now shifts to a discussion of substantive matters.

Ninety days have passed and, unfortunately, we
cannot report that Iran has complied with either
resolution 1737 (2006), adopted on 23 December 2006,
or resolution 1747 (2007), adopted on 24 March 2007.
To the contrary, International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Director General ElBaradei's report to the
Council and to the IAEA Board of Governors on
23 May confirms that Iran has failed to suspend its
uranium-enrichment- and heavy-water-related activities
and to cooperate fully with the IAEA in its ongoing
investigation. Instead, Iran has taken steps to limit the
IAEA's access to the Arak heavy water research reactor
and has announced a suspension of implementation of
the early declaration provisions of its IAEA Safeguards
Agreement; the legitimacy of these steps has been
refuted by the IAEA, but Iran's decisions in this regard
are deeply troubling.

We continue to urge all Member States to stress
to Iran the importance of its compliance with its
obligations in their regular discussions and
consultations with Iran and the benefits that will accrue
to Iran in return for compliance. In that regard, I would
like to reiterate that the generous package offered to
3

Iran in June 2006 by the Permanent Five (P-S) plus one
remains on the table. We believe that this package and
the historic offer extended by the United States to
engage in direct talks with Iran, alongside our P-S plus
one partners, should Iran suspend enrichment,
represent the best path towards a diplomatic solution of
this matter. It is our hope that the Iranian regime will
change its current confrontational course, suspend its
proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities and engage in
constructive negotiations on the future of its nuclear
programme.

We are pleased to note that so many States have
taken their obligations under Security Council
resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007) seriously, and
have submitted timely and substantive reports on their
implementation of the measures contained therein. Our
delegation found many of these reports informative in
their scope and discussion.

On the other hand, we found some reports to be
less than detailed in their treatment of the steps taken
by Member States to enforce or enact laws or
regulations to implement the resolution.
Comprehensive descriptions of those steps are
necessary in order for members of the Committee to
have a complete picture of Member State
implementation of resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747
(2007). We encourage States to provide the greatest
detail possible when responding to these reporting
requests and, more generally, to any such requests set
forth in Security Council resolutions.
We are pleased to note that many States have
responded to the Security Council's call for
implementation reports for resolution 1747 (2007) but
are concerned that only 40 per cent of Member States
have submitted reports as required by resolution 1737
(2006). We urge those States that have not yet done so
to fulfil this requirement and to ensure the
implementation of those resolutions without delay.

Finally, we also take note of numerous
notifications invoking exemptions to the asset freeze
requirements of Security Council resolution 1737
(2006) under paragraphs 13 and 15 of that resolution
and stress that Member States should be judicious in
the application of those exemptions. We also encourage
Member States, firms and financial institutions to close
out quickly any existing legitimate contracts with
designated individuals and entities.

Our delegation looks forward to continuing to
work with others in the Committee to execute our
mandate under resolution 1737 (2006) and to ensure
the most robust and comprehensive implementation
possible of these critical resolutions in order to achieve
their ultimate objectives.

