Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express our gratitude for the Secretary-
General's report on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) and for
Mr. Sharma's briefing.

Spain endorses the statement to be made by the
delegation of Italy on behalf of the European Union. I
shall therefore limit my comments.

First, the progress made by Timor-Leste, with
UNMISET's support during its first year and a half, is
tremendous and gives good reasons for hope. The
foundation has been laid for a democratic, independent
State that respects human rights, is integrated at the
regional level and maintains good relations with all the
States in the area.

However, much remains to be done. Accordingly,
Timor-Leste must continue to receive support from the
United Nations. As the Secretary-General's report says,
in a number of areas requirements will remain
outstanding after the conclusion of UNMISET's
mandate and that in other areas, international assistance
will continue to be indispensable. We look forward to
hearing the suggestions that the Secretariat will put
forward at the beginning of next year to deal with the
outstanding requirements after 20 May 2004.

In this connection, Spain considers that the
United Nations should continue to have a smaller
presence or mission with a clear-cut mandate approved
by the Security Council to consolidate the
achievements made to date, complete the remaining
tasks and achieve the goals set, The mission could
include, for example, several dozen military and police
observers and an appropriate number of advisers. The
financial implications of such a presence would be
relatively small; it would require a very slight
additional effort compared to what has been made to
date, but one that is indispensable to the success of
Timor-Leste.

The continued progress in bilateral relations with
Indonesia is very encouraging. We particularly
welcome the near conclusion of the land border
delimitation and the commitment of both Governments
to resettle Timor-Leste nationals who remain in
western Timor and to facilitate the return of refugees
who wish to go back.

With regard to the crimes committed in 1999 in
Timor-Leste, Indonesia took an important step forward
by bringing the perpetrators of human rights violations
before its Ad Hoc Human Rights Tribunal, but we are
disappointed by the conduct of the trials at the court of
first instance, which ended on 5 August. The
Indonesian judicial authorities must guarantee that the
appeals process is transparent and consonant with
international norms to ensure that justice is served.

Spain welcomes the commitment by the
Government of Timor-Leste to human rights. We also
welcome the progress made, thanks to assistance by
UNMISET, in bringing to justice the perpetrators of
grave crimes. We hope that the national Parliament will
adopt the legislation on the office of the prosecutor and
human rights so that it can begin to operate as soon as
possible.

We would also like to mention the resumed work
of the appeals court, after more than a year of
paralysis, and the bill on the election of mayors and
municipal councils.

