Mr. Motoc (Romania): I too welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General during the first part
of our meeting and the participation of Foreign
Minister Knight and Foreign Minister Mitchell. I
convey through them our sincere appreciation for the
steady efforts that the authorities of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) member States are making
with a view to ensuring a peaceful resolution of the
current political crisis in Haiti.

As Romania associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Ireland on behalf of the European Union, I would like
to make only a few brief comments. First, I reaffirm
Romania's support for the regional initiatives aimed at
restoring peace in Haiti. We are of the View that the
Plan of Action of CARICOM. and the Organization of
American States (OAS) provides good elements for
building confidence and fostering political dialogue
among the Haitian parties. Its basic tenets should be
pursued, as they bear real potential for bringing about a
peaceful and constitutional settlement of the crisis.

The international community cannot afford to
ignore the risks entailed by the violent disruption of the
constitutional process. In that context, we commend the
initiatives taken by the United States, France and
Canada alongside the regional actors. We believe that it
would be appropriate and wise to refine and
complement the Plan of Action already presented to the
Haitian Government and the political opposition with
other ideas aimed at strengthening global support for a
political settlement in accordance with the United
Nations Charter.

In that manner, it would be possible to consider
an accelerated timetable for the political process in
Haiti. We continue to believe that an inclusive political
agreement is possible and that achieving it should be of
the utmost priority. In that regard, we join others in
urging all Haitian parties to show the necessary spirit
of compromise and in urging the armed rebels to stop
the violence and make a political settlement possible.

Secondly, I wish to emphasize that the sources of
instability in Haiti are complex and interrelated:
poverty, weak governance, the lack of development and
the lack of tangible benefits in the day-to-day life of
Haitians. The situation requires a coherent and
integrated approach to addressing the core causes of
instability and to considering a long-term solution.
Instead of putting out the fire every time a crisis arises,
we must deal with the causes that generate periodic re-
ignition.

Thirdly, along with other members of the Security
Council, Romania takes note of the request for action
made by CARICOM. and by the representative of the
Haitian Government. The Romanian delegation is
ready to work closely with other delegations in order to
find the necessary answer to this request, in accordance
with the United Nations Charter and within the specific
competence of the Security Council in the area of
maintaining international peace and security.

Finally, Romania welcomes the Secretary-
General's decision to appoint a Special Adviser for
Haiti and believes that one of the Adviser's priority
tasks should be to address the humanitarian crisis
which threatens to engulf the entire country. We
believe that, meanwhile, the Security Council should
continue to follow closely the unfolding of events in
Haiti.

