Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to address the Security Council on behalf of
the 19 member States of the Rio Group, during
consideration of the fourth quarterly report of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001).
I should like to begin by thanking Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, Chairman of the Committee, for his
excellent work at the helm of the Committee and for
the presentation this morning of his report.

A year after the regrettable terrorist attacks of 11
September 2001, the Rio Group categorically reiterates
its condemnation and rejection of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We the member States of the
Group firmly support all cooperation and coordination
measures adopted at the international and regional
level in order to combat terrorism, on the basis of strict
respect for human rights, the rule of law, international
humanitarian law and other norms and principles of
general international law.

We the member States of the Rio Group are
firmly committed to the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). Where it has been necessary, and in order
fully to comply with the obligations set out in that
resolution, our countries have prepared new legislation
and have ratified or initiated the process of ratification
of those international ant-terrorism conventions that
had not been ratified earlier.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has the
fundamental task of establishing a constructive
dialogue with all States Members of the United Nations
in order to ensure that all nations have adopted
effective measures to prevent, eradicate and punish
terrorist acts. The success of the Committee depends on
its capacity to generate ongoing communication
between this Organization and its Member States in
order to strengthen intergovernmental and inter-
institutional cooperation and assistance in the fight
against terrorism.

We the member States of the Rio Group
appreciate the opportunity for a constructive dialogue
provided by the submission and consideration of
national reports. We recognize the value of the
Committee's recommendations, while noting, as
indicated by Ambassador Greenstock himself, that this
body does not exercise judicial functions or seek to
judge the conduct of States.

The Rio Group notes with satisfaction the
submission of more than 261 national reports, in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001). We appreciate
the excellent work done by the Committee, which has
enabled it to consider, with professionalism and
transparency, the majority of these reports. We note in
particular the progress achieved in the second round of
exchanges.
We have noted that a small group of States has
not yet submitted initial reports. While we recognize
that some of those States have structural problems
which might have made it difficult to prepare their
respective reports, we deem it essential that they
submit those reports as soon as possible. Therefore we
urge them to contact the Committee's experts, who are
prepared to help them overcome any practical
difficulties they are facing.

We welcome the presentation of the Committee's
programme of work for the fifth 90-day period in
document S/2002/1075. We welcome the Committee's
intention to finalize its consideration of the second
round of letters before 31 December this year as well
as to compile a list of actions undertaken by various
international, regional and subregional organizations.

We are pleased at the Committee's determination
to strengthen its contacts and cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations in order to create
positive synergy among the various multilateral efforts
aimed at countering terrorism. In this context, we
would mention the adoption, at the thirty-second
General Assembly of the Organization of American
States, of the Inter-American Convention against
Terrorism and of a resolution on human rights and
terrorism - resolution 1906 (XXXII-0/02), dated 3
June 2002.

We have noted, however, that regional
organizations can only act within the respective
legislative mandates and in accordance with their
constitutions. In this framework, cooperation between
these organizations and the Committee should be
carried out with strict compliance for these mandates.
It is essential for these States which make up the
various regional and subregional entities to consider
the role which each of them can play in combating this
crime.

We have observed the intention of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to remain in constant contact
with the High Commissioner for Human Rights. This
Committee must always be aware of the
interrelationship between combating terrorism and the
full observance of human rights.

We the member States of the Rio Group are aware
that combating terrorism means attacking structural
conditions which promote terrorism. With this in mind,
we feel it necessary to achieve the goals enshrined in
the Millennium Declaration, substantially reducing
levels of poverty and improving conditions for health,
housing, education and democracy throughout the
world.

Moreover, the Rio Group is pleased with the
increase in international cooperation to combat
terrorism. In this context, we have noted with
satisfaction renewed bilateral assistance as well as
technical assistance, and financial cooperation
undertaken through the Committee.

In addition, we must reiterate our concern at the
financial situation of the Committee. We feel it
essential to apportion sufficient resources to the
Committee so that it can effectively carry out its work.

The members of the Rio Group are aware that
combating terrorism must lead us to build more open
and tolerant societies. Combating this scourge must
promote the creation of a true culture of peace,
tolerance and solidarity. The members of the Rio
Group are firmly committed to this objective.

