Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Malaysia commends
Senegal's initiative in convening today's briefing.
We would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenea, Mr. Hameed Opeleyeru, Assistant
Secretary General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), and Mr. Souleymayne Bachir
Diagne of Columbia University for their participation
and presentations.

We believe that the initiatives on preventing and
countering extremist ideology anchored by both OIC and
the United Nations require a streamlined partnership in
order to make a more positive and effective contribution
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
In enhancing the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and OIC for curbing extremist ideology,
it is important to dissociate terrorism from any religion.
The advent of Islamophobia has created a convenient
false truth supporting terrorists' agendas, enabling
a misleading mindset to prevail as people surrender
to irrational responses to terrorism and associate
terrorism with religion. The international community
should therefore address the increase in Islamophobic
sentiments that has led to the marginalization and
alienation of Muslims and to discrimination against
them on the basis of their religion. Muslims should
not be victimized twice - first, by terror attacks, and
subsequently by the policy responses to such attacks.

The international community's efforts to counter
extremist ideology must be founded on internalizing
a culture of peace, tolerance and understanding in
the psyche of people who are vulnerable to terrorist
groups and targeted by them, especially young people.
Those efforts require consistent commitment, resolute
effort and unwavering focus on our part. Addressing
the root causes of terrorism is vital to an effective
strategy and central to the OIC's positions on the
issue. Those underlying causes may arise from issues
such as the protracted illegal occupation of Palestine,
non-inclusive governance, dysfunctional institutions
and gross violations of human rights, all of which
breed anger, frustration and despair and have proved
a powerful tool for recruiting foreign terrorist fighters.
In order, therefore, in seeking complementarities
in the cooperation between the United Nations and
OIC on a comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy,
we should consider more policies based on dialogue,
socioeconomic inclusion and non-discrimination in
support of minority groups. Malaysia believes that
exploring synergies on such policies will bring long-
term and sustainable benefits to pluralistic societies.

Both OIC and the United Nations have provided
the international community with an exhaustive list of
instruments, plans of action and documents as guiding
principles for playing an effective role in combating
terrorism and countering extremist ideology. We see
value in streamlining the shared goals and agendas
of OIC and the United Nations in order to address
the many dimensions of extremist ideology. The
recommendations made, which include technical
assistance for capacity-building, developing a regional
contact list of focal points and establishing early
warning centres for exchanging information on violent
extremist activities, could be effective when undertaken
within a framework of constructive cooperation with
States and international and regional organizations. It
would undermine our agenda to belabour the issues and
ponder what we should do; rather, we should act now
and implement those measures as quickly as possible.

We are also pleased to see the continuing synergy
between the United Nations and OIC through the
continuing cooperation that has been expressed this
year, as evidenced this year in the support shown for
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism in OIC's communique on the 13th
Islamic Summit.

Malaysia looks forward to the efforts that have been
launched by the OIC General Secretariat to establish
a messaging centre aimed at countering terrorist
narratives through counter-messaging on social media
sites, juxtaposing true interpretations of the Koran
and Hadith on ideological subjects and exposing the
machinations of the deviant extremist groups that
propagate hate, terror and violence. As far as possible,
the OIC messaging centre should coordinate its activities
and messages with other, similar centres, including the
Abu Dhabi-based Sawab Centre and the Kuala Lumpur-
based Regional Digital Counter Messaging Centre for
Southeast Asia, established in July. It is essential that
information and clarification on the core Islamic values
of peace, tolerance and moderation, among others, be
disseminated to the widest possible audience.

In addition, close cooperation with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force would
assist in crafting relevant messages on effective counter-
terrorism and counter-violent extremism policies and
implementation measures for a broader audience.
As such, the newly established OIC Peace, Security
and Conflict Resolution Unit could also benefit from
closer interaction with the United Nations Department
of Political Affairs' Mediation Support Unit and the
lessons learned from their experiences through ongoing
dialogue and exchanges.

Before concluding, Malaysia wishes also to pay
tribute to the OIC secretariat and the United Nations for
its initiatives to combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. As a member of OIC, we reiterate our
utmost support to OIC for ensuring the success of those
initiatives. We continue to call on the full support of
all OIC member States to continue working effectively
with the United Nations so as to ensure the success of
these initiatives.

