Mr. Leon: The Security Council has before it the
Secretary-General's report (8/2014/653) on the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). The
report provides details on the work of the Mission
over the past six months, and highlights some of the
critical political and security developments that have
taken place in Libya during that period. It provides a
sombre reading of the rapidly deteriorating political
and security landscape in the country.

Tomorrow will mark three years since the Council
established the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
Despite the initial sense of optimism that accompanied
the Mission's establishment, today we find ourselves at
a critical moment in Libya's democratic transition - a
faltering political process that has brought the country
closer to the brink ofprotracted conflict and civil strife.

Since assuming my duties just over two weeks ago,
I have been in contact with Libyans from across the
political spectrum. On 8 September, I undertook my
first official visit to Libya as Special Representative,
traveling to Tobruk, Al-Baida, Tripoli, Misrata and
Zintan. Following frank and open exchanges with
Libyan interlocutors, I am confident of the willingness
of all the parties to engage constructively with our
efforts to explore options for a peaceful way out of
the current crisis. All acknowledged the deep political
differences and profound sense of mistrust, yet all
underscored the need to overcome those differences and
to end armed hostilities, and for the political process to
resume as soon as possible in order to prevent further
polarization and division.

In my discussions with the elected House of
Representatives, currently seated in Tobruk, I reiterated
the international community's unequivocal recognition
of it as the sole legislative authority in the country.
But I also impressed upon its members the need for
brave, responsible leadership. Given that a group of
parliamentarians continues to absent itself from the
House ofRepresentatives' proceedings, I underlined the
importance of active inclusiveness and for immediate
steps to be taken to address the concerns cited by these
parliamentarians. In this respect, I am encouraged by
the apparent willingness of the House to display the
necessary flexibility in pursuit ofa mediated resolution
of the current crisis surrounding it. I have also received
positive signals from the other side that it intends to
move in a similar direction.

I also had the privilege of meeting with members
of the Constitution Drafting Assembly in the city of
Al-Baida. Despite the difficult political and security
challenges that confront its work, I was heartened by
the sense of perseverance and commitment conveyed by
members of the Assembly. At that meeting, UNSMIL
agreed to facilitate an event that will bring together the
various committees established by the Assembly with a
number of legal experts to provide technical assistance.

In Tripoli, Misrata and Zintan, I had the opportunity
to meet with various political leaders and other key
figures associated with the recent outbreak of military
conflict in Tripoli and its environs. I conveyed to all
the Council's commitment to Libya, as made clear in
resolution 2174 (2014), to hold accountable anyone
actively undermining the country's political process
or responsible for a continuation of armed conflict
or for violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

I stressed that the solution to Libya's current
crisis can be achieved not through military means, but
through political consensus based on key principles,
including respect for the Constitutional Declaration, the
democratic process, the 25 June legislative elections,
an end to incitement and provocation, the unequivocal
rejection of terrorism, and a meaningful and inclusive
political process. This would have to be accompanied
by steps on the security front to enable the State
to assert its control over vital installations, and for
Government to exercise its authority without the threat
of armed intimidation. There can be no compromise on
these principles.

In all my meetings, I warned of the dangers of
creating parallel political institutions and processes,
which can only contribute to further division and
polarization. I impressed upon my interlocutors the
need to refrain from taking any action that would
further exacerbate current divisions, and stressed that
any solution to the current crisis would have to be
negotiated within the framework of the current political
legitimacy emanating from the elections. While the
parties reiterated their willingness to engage according
to these principles, there remains a huge trust deficit.
The parties will need to move quickly to translate their
stated commitment into actions.

In the east, renewed military confrontations in
Benghazi threaten to exact an increasingly heavier toll
on the civilian population. In the west, an unrelenting
campaign of indiscriminate shelling continues to target
large sections of the Warshafana area near Tripoli,
causing untold suffering for the civilian population.
Tens of thousands of civilians are now known to have
fled their homes; many, including women and children,
have also lost their lives as a result of the shelling. We
also have credible reports - including one I received
just a few minutes ago from the local councils in
Warshafana - of severe shortages of medical supplies
and further suffering. Our appeals for an immediate
halt to military operations have gone unheeded, as have
our calls for urgent humanitarian access.

Efforts aimed at resolving the current crisis and
resuming the political process cannot make progress
against the backdrop of continued fighting. Despite
repeated calls for an immediate cessation of hostilities,
including from the Security Council, the situation on
the ground remains extremely volatile and precarious.
I continue to remind all concerned parties of the urgent
need to heed the Security Council's call to bring an
immediate end to armed hostilities in the country.

In Tripoli, reports of retaliatory attacks against
individuals and property of those associated with the
Government of Prime Minister Al-Thinni, as well as
individuals hailing from Zintan, are a cause for concern.
Camps in Tripoli housing displaced members of the
Tawergha community, one of which was attacked on
30 August, have now been vacated for fear ofshelling and
abductions. We have also received credible information
from eastern Libya about incidents of intimidation and
other retaliatory attacks targeting individuals hailing
from Misrata. The growing number of acts of human
rights violations and abuses has created a climate of
fear, and countless political and civil society activists,
including women, are known to have left the country
out of concern for their safety and security.

I have also reminded all parties of their obligation
not to take hostages and to treat humanely anyone
whom they have detained in the course of the recent
fighting. I urge all armed groups holding people to
release them or hand them over to the justice system.
Armed groups must also account for the fate of those
under their control who are presumed missing. In
thatregard, UNSMIL offered to assist in addressing the
issue of detainees. Both sides expressed their readiness
to cooperate.

Given the scale of the humanitarian situation
across Libya, the United Nations humanitarian country
team is urgently taking steps to mobilize additional
resources to cover the high demand for relief support.
Within the past month, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) dispatched
a humanitarian convoy to assist some 12,000 displaced
people in the western town of Zuwara. The World Food
Programme, which is already providing assistance
to some 50,000 internally displaced persons, will
participate alongside UNHCR to reach an additional
6,000. Separately, the International Organization for
Migration has taken steps to repatriate thousands of
stranded migrants to their countries of origin.

Within the past two weeks, United Nations teams
have carried out an initial assessment of contamination
by explosive remnants of war in Tripoli as a result
of the recent fighting. It is clear that the scale of the
contamination is significant and poses a threat to
civilian lives. Plans to deploy risk-education and
explosive-ordnance disposal teams as immediate
priorities are under consideration.

Three years following the fall ofthe former regime,
the Libyan people find themselves nowhere closer to
realizing their hopes and aspirations for a better future
and for a State that safeguards their safety and security.
Accordingly, many Libyans are deeply disillusioned
with their country's democratic transition.
The United Nations remains committed to its
mission in Libya and will continue to impress upon all
Libyans the urgent need for progress in overcoming
their differences through dialogue. I believe that is
the only way to spare the country further chaos and
violence, and to prevent it becoming a magnet for
extremist and terrorist groups.

I have no illusions regarding the difficulties and
challenges ahead. Political divisions are deep, the
sense of mistrust is almost overwhelming and, given
the proliferation of arms outside the effective control
of State authorities, the security situation remains
extremely fragile. But I nonetheless remain a fervent
supporter of the Libyan people's desire to safeguard
their country's national unity and social fabric.

The small window of opportunity before us for a
peaceful resolution to the current crisis should not be
missed. Libya's leaders will have to act quickly and
seek a political solution through a meaningful and
inclusive dialogue. Given the urgency, I intend to follow
up shortly with further visits to Libya. Our engagement
and that of the international community - next week at
the General Assembly we will have new opportunities
for this, as well as next Wednesday at an international
conference of regional actors in Madrid - will
remain solidly anchored in the principles of unbiased
engagement with all parties, and that of non-intervention
in Libya's internal affairs and respect for its national
sovereignty.

