Mr. Brencick (United States of America): The
United States welcomes Prime Minister Ramos-Horta
to the Council today, and we take positive note of his
remarks this morning, including on the need for
sustained engagement with and support for his country.
We also thank Mr. Khare, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, for his balanced
and detailed briefing on the situation in Timor-Leste,
and we welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2007/50).

The United States strongly supports and
encourages the efforts made by the Government and
political leaders in Timor-Leste to reach a political
accommodation and reconciliation. We call on them to
build on their recent efforts to regain the trust of the
public. The United States urges all parties to act on the
findings of the United Nations Independent Electoral
Certification Team in order that free, fair and
transparent elections may be held. We call on all
participants to avoid violence and fully to respect legal
processes in conducting the presidential and
parliamentary elections this year.

We reaffirm the continuing need for
accountability and justice in Timor-Leste and support
effective and timely implementation of the
recommendations of the United Nations Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry. The United States also
urges that the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) take action as soon as possible
to provide an expert investigation team to complete the
outstanding investigations by the Serious Crimes Unit
of the offences committed in 1999. Justice too long
delayed can become justice denied.
With due recognition of the legitimate role of the
army, the United States nonetheless expresses its
concern that the presence of armed soldiers of the
Timorese armed forces - Falintil-Forcas Armadas de
Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) - has served to
heighten the sense of insecurity among the Timorese
people. We urge the Government to ensure that the
Timorese military assumes an appropriate profile and
note that the United Nations police continue to have
the Security Council's mandate to provide interim law
enforcement and public security in East Timor.

Finally, we commend the efforts that UNMIT is
making to reconstitute the Timorese police as an
effective police force, and we support the Secretary-
General's recommendation for the strengthening of the
Timorese judiciary. The establishment of the rule of
law is a cornerstone in the building of a strong and
secure nation.

