Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Allow me first
to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his informative
briefing and for his tireless efforts and those ofhis team,
working sometimes under very difficult circumstances.

Today, I will address three points: first, the situation
in Gaza: secondly, the developments in the West Bank:
and thirdly, the way forward.

First, on Gaza, we are deeply concerned by the
flare-up of violence that we witnessed at the beginning
of last week. We welcome the efforts of the United
Nations, Egypt and others that led to an agreement to
restore calm. It is now up to the parties to maintain that
restoration of relative calm. All parties must exercise
maximum restraint. They must refrain from any action
that could provoke an escalation, that would put civilian
lives at risk and that would jeopardize recent efforts
towards reducing tensions and a long-term truce.
We reiterate that all parties must comply with their
obligations under international law. We condemn the
indiscriminate firing of rockets. We reiterate that Israel
must ensure that all its responses are proportionate and
necessary at all times, in line with its obligations under
international law.

It has been said many times that the recent
escalation cannot be seen in isolation and only reminds
us that a sustainable solution for Gaza is needed, as
Mr. Mladenov has also just said. The humanitarian and
economic situation must be improved. In that regard,
the opening of crossings and easing of restrictions on
the movement of goods and persons in and out of Gaza
are also needed, while taking into account Israel's
legitimate security concerns. We continue to express
our full support for the efforts of the United Nations and
Nickolay Mladenov to improve the situation in Gaza.
We welcome the recent improvement in the electricity
supply.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains
committed to doing its part. Let me give three examples:
first, an additional contribution of €6 million to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for this year; secondly, our
continued investment in the Gas for Gaza project; and
thirdly, through our trilateral meetings on water, energy
and crossings. A sustainable solution also includes the
need for intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which should
result in the return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza.

My second point is on the developments in the
West Bank. Rising tensions and an increase in violent
incidents in the West Bank, leading to the loss of life
on both sides, are highly concerning. The suspension of
the demolition of the community of Khan Al-Ahmar is
a positive development. However, the demolition plan
must be withdrawn definitively for it to no longer pose
a threat to a two-State-solution. Also in that regard,
we are very concerned about the announcement of new
settlements in East Jerusalem and Hebron. We reiterate
that settlements are illegal under international law and
are a Violation of resolution 2334 (2016).

That brings me to my third point, on the way
forward. The current situation is a painful reminder
of the lack of progress on the peace process. Yet the
goal on which we all agree is bringing an end to the
conflict. Positive steps are now needed for the parties to
return to the negotiation table and to restart a genuine
peace process leading to a two-State solution, based on
the well-known parameters. That is the only way to a
sustainable solution, fulfilling the aspirations of both
sides.

