Mr. Danon (Israel): I have a few comments to
make on the circus that has been staged today in
this Chamber. B'Tselem is an Israeli organization
that is funded by the European Union and European
Governments. It was invited to the Security Council
today by Bolivia - a country with a terrible human
rights record - to defame our strong democracy, but it
has actually had the exact opposite effect. By inviting
B'Tselem, Bolivia has in fact demonstrated the strength
of Israel's vibrant democracy. I challenge everyone
present to find a Palestinian or a Bolivian who could
dare defame his Government in the Security Council.
At best, he might be thrown in jail, but he would more
likely end up dead.

I would like to read out an English translation of
a short passage from an official Palestinian Authority
textbook. It states,

"There is an important place for heroes in every
nation. They have sacrificed everything. They
should be remembered forever, and we must be
proud of them. A nation becomes even more proud
as it gains more and more heroes. For if it were not
for our heroes, we would not have a nation."

The next page of the textbook lists the number of those
so-called heroes, like Dalal Mughrabi, the terrorist
responsible for a massacre that killed 38 innocent
people. For her killing, she is described in the book as
"a crown of her nation".

That is from a textbook that Mahmoud Abbas has
authorized for the current school year. This is Abbas's
culture of hatred, right before the Council. It is the
reason why Palestinian school children learn that it
is better to kill a Jew than to keep a job. The Council
will not hear that from Mr. Mansour or Mr. El-Ad,
but Mahmoud Abbas is to blame. In his 13 years of
rule, Abbas has done nothing but inspire that rampant
culture of hatred. He is enabling an imminent war
between Hamas and Israel. He preaches tolerance
in English and terror in Arabic. If Council members
are really interested in the truth, they should read
translations of Abbas's Arabic speeches. He does not
recognize Israel. He calls us racist. He is trying to bring
us to court. He has led his people down a path of self-
destruction and misery, stealing their chance at a good
life. Far from being a peace partner, Mahmoud Abbas
is the obstacle to peace. If members hope to see a better
future for Palestinians and Israelis, they will join us in
indicting Abbas.

We are on the brink of a major escalation in Gaza.
Last night, two rockets were fired from Gaza into Israel.
One hit Beersheba, and the other one was aimed at Tel
Aviv. Hamas has set more than 8,000 acres of Israeli
agricultural land on fire. It has launched at least 300
rockets into Israel this year alone. It sends thousands
of rioters to commit violence on our southern border
almost every day. It steals foreign-aid funding to expand
its weapons arsenal and uses the cement intended for
schools and hospitals to construct terror tunnels. Israel
has just discovered and destroyed the fifteenth terror
tunnel found since October of last year.

Israel continues to send a strong message to
Hamas that nothing will justify terror and that it will
pay a heavy price for attacking Israel. But we have not
forgotten about Abbas. Abbas is taking active measures
to radicalize the people of Gaza and prolong their
suffering. For his own on cynical political purposes,
Abbas is pushing Israel and Hamas towards a war that
could begin any day. For months, Abbas has withheld
critical international funding for the people of Gaza.

We heard Mr. Mladenov. Today, more than 40,000
Palestinian workers in Gaza do not receive a paycheque
from Abbas and half of them live below the poverty
line. The unemployment rate is 53 per cent. Families
live with little electricity or fuel and even less clean
water. When an Arab country offered $60 million to
help to pay for electricity in Gaza, Abbas said no. He
even threatened to make it worse for the people of Gaza
if countries ignored those orders and delivered funds.
Abbas has now refused help from Israel, the United
States and even the United Nations. He exploits the dire
situation in Gaza in order to stay in power.

In Judea and Samaria, Abbas is guilty ofa different
type of exploitation - the infamous "pay to slay" policy,
which remains the crown jewel of Abbas's incitement
campaign. In the Palestinian Authority's 2018 budget,
Abbas allocated $355 million towards the "pay to slay"
policy. That is 7 per cent of the total budget of the
Palestinian Authority - 7 per cent. Let me put that into
perspective - 7 per cent of the budget of Bolivia last
year was more than $1 billion; 7 per cent of the budget
of Sweden was $19 billion; and 7 per cent of the budget
of the Netherlands was $24 billion. Imagine all that
money spent to encourage the killing of Jews.

That criminal policy is killing people. Ten days
ago, it did. It was just the beginning of another ordinary
workweek. Kim Levengrond Yehezkel and Ziv Hagbi
entered their offices as usual, like every Sunday in
Israel. They worked in the Barkan industrial zone, a
complex of factories in which thousands of Israelis and
Palestinians work side by side. Kim was 28 years old.
She was a mother with a one-year-old baby. Ziv was 35
and a father of three. The ordinary workweek quickly
turned into a massacre. A Palestinian co-worker of
Kim and Ziv - someone they knew - turned into
a terrorist that day. He used his work permit to enter
the factory as he would any other day. But this time he
had a rifle hidden in his bag. He made it through the
security checkpoint and entered the room where Kim
and Ziv sat in their office. Then he had them tied up and
he shot them in cold blood.

Just like that, four children lost a parent, two
spouses lost their partners and that very society suffered
yet another wound from terrorism. The killer is still at
large but he cannot hide forever. We will catch him,
and he will pay for his crime. But Abbas will pay too.
Abbas will pay him. He will pay a total of $3 million
to that animal during his lifetime in prison. That is the
legacy of Abbas - to slaughter innocent Israelis and be
rewarded for life. The same $355 million Abbas pays to
terrorists is also more than 45 per cent ofthe foreign aid
that the Palestinians will receive in 2018. That means
that nearly half of every dollar that everyone gives to
the Palestinian people to build roads and schools is put
into the pockets of those who murder Jews. Therefore,
if they do not pull their funding, they are complicit in
the "pay to slay" policy. Earlier this year, the United
States and Israel passed legislation to freeze payments
to the Palestinian Authority until it ends its "pay to slay"
programme. Australia has also cut aid funding to the
Palestinians, as it feared they were financing terror. In
response, Abbas ensured that he would continue those
payments even if "we had only a single penny left".

Abbas's priority is clear. His aim is to incite, so
ours must be to indict. If there were no culture of
hate, no incitement, no payments to terrorists and no
glorification of murder, just imagine where Israel and the
Palestinians would be today. If there was a Palestinian
leader who actually cared about his people, perhaps we
would have a solution to the conflict. Let me remind
the members of the Council of some simple logic. They
cannot expect different results when they do not change
the equation. If they really want to change the reality
for Palestinians and Israelis, they must change the
equation. Remove the source of the culture of hate and
textbook terrorism. When that source is removed, when
Abbas is gone, only then will we see a brighter future.

