Mr. Thoresson (Sweden): First, I would like
to thank the delegation of Chad for providing this
important opportunity to discuss how the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) can be enhanced.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic
countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my
own country, Sweden.

Before going into the substance of today's debate,
however, the Nordic countries would like to add their
voices of condemnation with regard to the horrendous
terrorist attack committed in Pakistan. We offer our
sincere condolences to the families of all the victims
and to the Government and the people of Pakistan.

The Nordic countries attach great importance to
peace and security in Africa. We welcome the fact that
there has been a deepening of cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations in the past decade.
The AU and its member States have demonstrated an
increasing ability to contribute to resolving conflicts
on the continent. We endorse the important work done
by the United Nations Office to the African Union, and
we welcome the AU's efforts to strengthen the role of
its office here in New York.

We commend the role played by the AU in leading
regional missions, such as the African Union Mission in
Somalia. At the same time, there are many lessons that
we can learn from the cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations in Somalia, as well as
in Darfur, Mali and the Central African Republic.
We must strive to ensure better complementarity of
roles. Difficult issues, such as financing and improved
capabilities, must be part of that discussion.

The Nordic countries welcome the intention of
the AU to develop its civilian and military conflict-
management capacities further, and stand ready
to support that endeavour. For many years, the
Nordic countries have helped to strengthen the
institutional capacity of the AU Commission, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Eastern African Standby Force. We also contribute
troops, not least to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, as well as
military observers, staff officers, police and correction
officers and other civilian personnel to both United
Nations- and European Union-led peace operations
across the continent.

The Nordic countries are dedicated to continue
supporting African aspirations and commitments so as
to ensure peace, security and stability in the continent.
The African Peace and Security Architecture has proved
its value as a good framework for that endeavour. We
believe that the AU's role in ensuring peace and stability
in Africa could be strengthened even further through
closer cooperation between the Peace and Security
Architecture and the African Governance Architecture.

Onthis occasion, we would also like to recall General
Assembly resolution 68/303, entitled "Strengthening the
role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution." That resolution
stresses the importance of regional organizations in
conflict prevention and resolution, and acknowledges
the contribution of the African Union.

The Nordic countries continue to emphasize the
importance of the full and active participation of
women in the prevention, management and resolution
of conflicts, as well as in post-conflict efforts and
cooperation. This is key to building inclusive and
sustainable peace and security. Ensuring that the women
and peace and security agenda is properly implemented
in peacekeeping missions will also increase their
effectiveness. In that regard, we commend the African
Union for having appointed a Special Envoy for
resolution 1325 (2010).

The Nordic commitment to supporting peace and
security in Africa is to a large extent focused on tackling
the root causes of conflict, instability and fragility.
Promoting peace effectively requires a comprehensive
approach. Without sustained and inclusive economic
growth, without equitable social development that
includes men, women and children, without progress in
democracy, governance and human rights, we all know
that peace and security will be elusive. Fighting poverty,
exclusion, injustice and impunity and implementing
international law and global norms will therefore
always be crucial for promoting long-term peace and
security.

Reconstruction and reconciliation after a conflict
should also always receive our central support
and participation. In that respect, we welcome the
African Solidarity Initiative and look forward to its
implementation.

We need strategies to avoid fragile States
relapsing into conflict. In that regard, peacebuilding
and State-building are crucial. The Nordic countries
and the African Union are already engaged in
knowledge-sharing, and we would welcome further
engagement from and exchange with the African Union
in the international dialogue on peacebuilding. We
welcome the recently held dialogue in Addis Ababa
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission, and we encourage
the continued strengthening of such activities during
the coming year.

In conclusion, the Nordic countries welcome the
particular focus of the Security Council onthepartnership
between the United Nations and the African Union,
which should also be duly reflected in the Secretary-
General's review of peace operations. We stand ready
to contribute by supporting regional capacity-building
and participating directly in international and regional
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, as well as
other conflict-prevention and -management efforts.

