The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

I too thank Under-Secretary-General John Holmes
for his comprehensive briefing.

Today a great number of casualties in armed
conflict continue to be civilians, and the numbers are
constantly increasing. We condemn in the strongest
possible terms all deliberate acts against civilians and
deaths resulting from the indiscriminate and excessive
use of force. The challenge for all of us is to stop such
killings and reverse the alarming trend. On this issue,
the credibility of the Security Council is also at stake.

Council members will all recall that our debate in
January (see S/PV.6066) was held in the shadow of the
tragic developments in Gaza. Indeed, what happened in
Gaza was a stark reminder of the vulnerability of
civilians in times of armed conflict. It also proved once
again the need for all parties to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law. That
said, Gaza has not been the only case where civilians
have faced danger during armed conflict. Indeed, the
issue of the protection of civilians has been particularly
high on the agenda of the Council during recent years,
and especially since the beginning of this year, for we
have been Witnessing extremely dire challenges in
many parts of the world, in terms of providing a safe
and secure environment for civilians.

It was in that frame of mind that my delegation
studied carefully the recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/277), which gives a comprehensive
account of the latest situation in various theatres and
the difficulties encountered in protecting civilians. The
report clearly demonstrates the magnitude of the task
incumbent upon all of us to ensure the effective
protection of civilians in times of conflict. This should
be a collective and multidimensional effort, with the
primary obligation and responsibility resting first and
foremost with States. Yet the entire international
community, including non-governmental organizations
and international organizations, has a responsibility to
protect civilians.

Almost everything has already been said this
morning in terms of what can and what should be done.
The Secretary-General's report also offers some useful
recommendations, so I will not elaborate any further on
those points. However, allow me to highlight one issue
of a very sensitive nature that bears the risk of
undermining or weakening our efforts if it is not
handled carefully. It related to non-State armed groups.
Given the inevitable ambiguity of that term and the
many different types of entities that fall under the
category, we feel that one should be extremely careful
in dealing with such groups. This is particularly
important as many terrorist organizations attempt to
abuse the term and what it entails in their quest to gain
international attention and support.

Combating terrorism is both the right and the
obligation of every State. Nothing should be allowed to
weaken our resolve to fight that scourge. It is the
activities of the terrorist organizations themselves that
put the lives of civilians in danger, so international
organizations, and non-governmental organizations in
particular, should be vigilant in conducting their work
in conflict areas and not allow themselves to be
exploited by such groups and organizations.

Before concluding, I would also like to stress
that, in effect, it is through strengthening the rule of
law, human rights, democracy and governance that we
can secure the long-term and lasting protection of
civilians.

We should also ensure that the perpetrators of
violence against civilians are held fully accountable for
their actions. They should know that they can run, but
they cannot escape, and that they will face justice
eventually. The international community has the duty
to do more in that direction, including through
capacity-building and technical assistance.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Before we proceed, may I kindly remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to conclude its
open debate today.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Brazil.

