Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Peacebuilding is a question that transcends the narrow
context of peacekeeping, because it is a key factor in
ensuring the lasting settlement of conflicts and the
return to sustainable peace and stability.

Today peacekeeping operations aim not only to
separate the parties to a conflict but also to eliminate
those factors that could promote any resumption of
hostilities. Measures that are already being taken
include disarming troops and militias that are not
recognized as legal; collecting the illegal weapons
possessed by former combatants; and demobilizing and
reintegrating the latter within their societies.

From time to time the Security Council has
undertaken to create missions that are as integrated as
possible, as demonstrated in the mission to be deployed
in the Sudan. That task becomes easier when, as is the
case in the Sudan, the parties to a conflict have
previously negotiated and accepted a comprehensive
agreement containing all of the elements conducive to
ensuring peace, development and respect for the rule of
law.

Peacebuilding involves the quest for equitable,
reliable and credible solutions to the political,
economic and social problems that are at the root of a
conflict. That is a long-term undertaking that requires
genuine political will at the local and sometimes
regional levels as well as significant support from the
international community.

The conflicts that our Organization is facing are
generally the result of extreme poverty - the perfect
breeding ground for fanaticism and violence. Extreme
poverty is also conducive to the usurpation of power by
force, the absence of democracy and, as a result, a lack
of prospects for change, which, in combination with
external factors, sometimes leads to a conflagration.

We believe that, in view of the unique character
of each situation and of the absence ofa mechanism for
the formulation of a comprehensive strategy, any
peacebuilding strategy should take a wider perspective
and move beyond traditional peacekeeping activities to
become part of an ongoing United Nations programme
designed to rebuild a country and restore or rehabilitate
viable and credible political institutions, so to ensure
their support by the broadest possible segment of
society, the rehabilitation of social structures and the
establishment of the foundations for sustainable
economic development.

To give this strategy every chance of success and
to help the population to take charge of its own future,
the United Nations must intensify its efforts to engage
in genuinely participatory dialogues with local
stakeholders, with a view to promoting power-sharing,
consolidating democratic practices and creating the
appropriate capacities to address the unique
characteristics of every conflict situation. That means
also that, when neighbouring countries are involved,
they must support the effort.

Furthermore, including post-conflict peacebuilding
elements in the mandate of peacekeeping operations
should be seen as an operational measure - in other
words, a move aimed at supporting the peacekeeping
effort and preventing any conflagration or resurgence
of the conflict.

We note with concern that funding for
peacebuilding has not yet been placed on a solid and
reliable footing. The mobilization of adequate financial
and technical resources by the international financial
institutions, and in particular by the World Bank,
should be encouraged and pursued on a regular basis in
order to ensure significant support on the part of those
institutions for the international community's efforts.
The other programmes and agencies of the United
Nations system should continue to play an important
part in providing expertise and resources while seeking
better to coordinate their activities.

While the Security Council has the primary role
in the context of operational activities, including in
terms of the need for rapid decision-making, we must
note that peacebuilding activities cannot be the sole
responsibility of the Council. The General Assembly in
particular has a crucial role which it must play, as does
the Economic and Social Council, which must be
brought in whenever the issues involved are related to
social and economic development. Such collaboration
would not only be consistent with the prerogatives that
the Charter accords to each organ; it would also enable
a greater number of Member States to contribute,
leading to a more rational and effective handling of the
issue.

However close such collaboration might become,
it cannot - as experience has shown - satisfactorily
meet the multiple, simultaneous and diverse challenges
facing countries emerging from conflict. An
intermediary organ between the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council that would work
closely with them - an organ created, set up and given
a mandate by the General Assembly - could
undoubtedly much better address the many dimensions
of peacebuilding-related problems than the
aforementioned organs have been able to thus far. The
Peacebuilding Commission, which what we are dealing
with here, is an organ that must be created. The sooner
we can agree on its mandate, its composition and its
place within the Organization, the better.

We must also note that efforts to coordinate
peacebuilding, the mobilization of resources and the
strengthening of the capacity of United Nations staff -
or, in general terms, the creation of an international and
local environment that is favourable to this type of
action - are crucial components of any peacebuilding
operation.

The regional dimension of peacebuilding calls for
the same level of attention. The contribution of
regional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
Charter is of key importance, for peacebuilding is
closely linked to conflict prevention.

In that context, the African Union, which is
making an invaluable contribution to the prevention
and settlement of conflicts on the continent, must be
fully involved in any attempt to stabilize or build peace
in Africa, because its experience, its skills and its
knowledge of the local peoples and terrain as well as of
the causes of conflict make it more qualified than any
other entity to play an effective and useful role.

However, those requirements, however necessary
they may be, should not overshadow another equally
important imperative - consistent and scrupulous
respect for the independence and sovereignty of the
States involved in the process, principles that are
clearly enshrined in the Charter of our Organization. If
those principles are observed, United Nations missions
will garner greater support throughout the world, and
would gain, through such legitimacy and support,
greater credibility and effectiveness.

