Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I would like to welcome the presence among us
today of the Vice-Minister of External Relations of Angola.
I would also like to thank him for the statement he made
this morning.

Allow me also to express our thanks to the Secretary-
General for his valuable report on Angola (S/2000/23),
which was presented to us today by the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Kieran Prendergast. We
thank him for his briefing on the very alarming
humanitarian situation in Angola.

I would like to express our special thanks to
Ambassador Fowler, Chairman of the sanctions
Committee on Angola, for his detailed report on his visit
to Angola to find ways and means of supporting the
sanctions imposed on UNITA in order to prevent it from
getting the weapons and supplies it needs to continue
fighting.

We would also like to thank the troika for the report
presented by the Russian Federation. We commend the
troika's efforts to find a settlement to this conflict and
bring about reconciliation in Angola.

The tragic situation in that African country is a
cause for serious alarm for us because of the human
suffering that exists there. The continuation of military
action has led to an increase in the number of refugees
and internally displaced persons. Mrs. Sadako Ogata, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, told us
last week that refugees and internally displaced persons
comprise 20 per cent of the population of Angola, and
that nearly 10 million anti-personnel landmines have been
placed in Angola. This in itself threatens in particular the
security of the population - especially that of
children - and the peace and security of the country in
general. One of the first priorities, therefore, is to put an
end to hostilities and return to the negotiating table in
order to make it possible for the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to provide
assistance.

We would like to express our satisfaction with the
Angolan Government's recommitment to the Lusaka
Protocol as a valid basis for the peace process. We urge
UNITA, which we consider the party responsible for the
continuation of the conflict, to unambiguously
demonstrate that it intends to comply with its
commitments under the Lusaka Protocol. The negotiating
option is the best means of finding a solution to the
ongoing conflict in Angola. In this context, we encourage
the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Security
Council, to undertake further efforts with the parties
concerned, and we hope the Council will continue this
process.

We would like to express our satisfaction with the
appointment of Mr. Ibrahim Gambari as the Secretary-
General's Special Adviser on Africa. We hope that he
will take up his functions quickly in order to find a
settlement to the ongoing tragedy in Angola so that it will
be able to dedicate its natural resources to development
and not to war.

 

Today more than ever before, we are called upon to
put pressure on UNITA to put an end to its defiance of the
international community and to respect international
legitimacy and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the Organization of African Unity. We wish to
reaffirm once again the need for the unconditional
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and the importance
of the sanctions imposed against UNITA. We call on all
parties, both in Africa and elsewhere, to respect those
sanctions and to stop UNITA from selling diamonds to buy
weapons. We have seen that when sanctions are actually
implemented, the forces of UNITA are forced to pull back.

The Security Council is called upon today to take
practical steps towards a final settlement of the Angolan
conflict, which has gone on for so long. Tunisia, which
continues to support the efforts of the international
community to put an end to hotbeds of tension, reaffirms its
intention to continue to search for a settlement of conflicts
in Africa. We are determined to continue to work through
the Security Council towards this goal and to offer our
support until the parties in conflict choose to follow the
peace process and to respect resolutions of international
legitimacy, including those of the Security Council and the
Organization of African Unity.

In conclusion, I would like to thank you, Mr.
President, for organizing this debate on Angola.

