Ms. Laohaphan (Thailand): It is a pleasure, Sir,
to see you presiding over the Council for this month.
Like preceding speakers, I would like to thank you for
convening this public meeting on Timor-Leste. My
thanks also go to Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for presenting
the progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) (S/2004/ 888).

Thailand welcomes the progress that has been
steadily achieved over the past two-and-a-half years in
Timor-Leste, and commends the sustained efforts of
UNMISET, United Nations programmes and agencies,
the Bretton Woods institutions, non-governmental
organizations and international donors, and, not least,
the hard work and determination of the Timor-Leste
Government in trying to build a self-reliant nation that
is safe, stable, economically viable andjust.

Timor-Leste has embarked on a long and difficult
journey to fulfil its aspiration for statehood and can
rightly be proud of its many achievements to date. Yet,
numerous challenges still await this budding nation,
and the international community must remain actively
engaged in helping this country advance alongside the
community of nations.

Thailand concurs with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that UNMISET should maintain its
presence in the country, with the same composition and
size, until 20 May 2005 in order to consolidate its
gains and, more importantly, to ensure the
uninterrupted functioning of the Timor-Leste civil
administration after UNMISET's withdrawal. It has
always been Thailand's view that in any peacekeeping
mission, there should be a clear and well-mapped-out
exit and transition strategy to ensure a smooth and
effective functioning of the affected country's
administrative institutions. With respect to Timor-
Leste, my delegation would like to underscore the
following three points.

First, the conclusion of UNMISET's mandate in
Timor-Leste does not imply Timor-Leste's readiness or
its ability to effectively run its public administration.
Timor-Leste will continue to rely on the support and
the assistance of international experts in strengthening
its institutional capacity in various areas, summarized
in the three programmes, as set out in the report,
namely, the public administration and justice system,
law enforcement and security.

The second point I wish to emphasize is that the
international community must be realistic about certain
expectations that we harbour in relation to Timor-
Leste. I refer specifically to paragraph 8 of resolution
1543 (2004), which calls upon the Serious Crime Unit
to complete all trials relating to human rights abuses
that occurred in East Timor in 1999 by 20 May 2005.
While we fully support upholding the rule of law and
fighting impunity, it is highly improbable that Timor-
Leste could actually implement that provision of the
resolution in time, given the accumulated backlog of
cases, the limited availability of judges and the
shortness of time. Therefore, the Council might wish to
revisit that issue. I should also like to point out that the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
has been doing an outstanding job and should be
commended for its efforts. The selection of the
Provedor for Human Rights and Justice, which the
international community eagerly anticipates, is an issue
that should be finalized as soon as possible.

Another issue on which the international
community might wish to reassess its expectations
relates to the integration of veterans into civilian life.
The initiative to draft legislation on the recognition of
veterans seems to be heading in the right direction, and
just two weeks ago, the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste
requested the diplomatic corps in Dili to help Timor-
Leste reintegrate those veterans and ex-combatants into
civilian life and to create employment for them.

That brings me to my third and final point. The
vital role of development in contributing to durable
peace in post-conflict nation-building cannot be
overstated. The United Nations and the international
community have already made laudable efforts in
laying a firm foundation for peace and stability in
Timor-Leste, but more work and assistance is required
to help Timor-Leste pursue its economic and social
development. If we want to see Timor-Leste survive
and thrive on its own, we must ensure that peace and
security continue to prevail and become irreversible, as
a safe and secure environment is a precondition for any
country to embark on successful economic and social
development.

The United Nations system, especially the World
Bank, the United Nations Development Programme
and UNICEF, will be needed more than ever in Timor-
Leste, a fledging democracy that is still plagued by
rampant poverty, an inadequate health system and a
high birth rate, where unemployment and illiteracy
remain prevalent and half the population is below the
age of 15 and cannot contribute productively to the
growth of the economy.

The scheduled date of closure on 20 May 2005
and the eventual withdrawal of UNMISET will
coincide with the third anniversary of Timor-Leste.
This three-year-old nation is but an infant compared to
most countries that have centuries-long experience in
civil administration and wealth accumulation.
Nevertheless, Timor-Leste has promising potential,
especially in oil and gas resources development, and,
in the long run, the international community can
benefit from having another strong and stable country
contributing further to the world economy. The
international donors' conference, scheduled to be held
in March of next year, will be an occasion for us to
reaffirm our steadfast support, both bilaterally and
multilaterally, for Timor-Leste.

For its part, Thailand has concluded a Technical
Cooperation Programme with Timor-Leste for a three-
year period, from 2003 to 2005, focusing on training
programmes in 10 different areas.

