Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset we should like
to congratulate the German delegation, which, in
recognizing the urgency and concern the international
community has attached to this serious problem, has
presented us with some highly expedient proposals and
expeditiously convened this meeting. The fact that we have
gathered here today demonstrates that we share a high
measure of awareness of the problem, as well as a definite
political will to find solutions.

We believe that although much progress has been
made in the field of land-mine awareness, when recalling
the many meetings and conferences that have preceded this
meeting, much remains to be done. Experts have identified
mine-clearance problems, and mine-clearance operations in
various countries have enabled us to accumulate a great
amount of knowledge, which has in turn been used to
outline possible solutions. More extensive prohibitions and
restrictions on land-mines have been agreed to, and some
countries have gone a step further by banning
anti-personnel mines from their weapons arsenals. These
are all steps in the right direction which, we believe, will
eventually enable us to achieve the common objective of
eradicating this weapon completely.

Unfortunately, this does not take away from the fact
that 85 to 110 million anti-personnel and other mines lie
uncleared in many countries around the world. As the
Council may be aware, the Republic of Croatia is directly
affected by this problem. According to current estimates,
approximately 3 million land-mines were laid on 13,000
square kilometres of Croatia's territory, or 2,300 mines
for every square kilometre. This land-mine problem is
exacerbated by the mine-like risks of more than 100,000
unexploded artillery shells and ordnance scattered over
the same area.

For Croatia the eradication of land-mines is not only
desirable - it is absolutely necessary. According to
rough estimates based on recent experience, it will take
2,000 men directly engaged in mine clearing from eight
to ten years to completely demine this territory. Until that
time, and to quote the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs at the International Meeting on
Mine Clearance at Geneva on 6 July 1995:
"Where villages are mined, refugees and displaced
persons cannot return home; where agricultural fields
are mined, farmers cannot plant and harvest crops;
and where power lines, highways and irrigation
systems are mined, development cannot move
forwar ."

While Croatia is working towards returning its
refugees and displaced persons to their former places of
residence, it will be some time before these people regain
their normal way of life. We should like to point out that
demining should become an integral part of the post-
conflict restoration process and, therefore, inseparably
linked to peace-keeping operations, be they United
Nations operations or not. Taking into account the fact
that demining is very important not only for the safety of
peace-keeping troops and returning civilians, but also in
restoring the fabric of a war-shattered economy, the
overall success or failure of a peace-keeping operation
can hang in the balance if significant progress is not made
in demining during that time. Peace-keeping operations
cannot facilitate the return of refugees and the displaced
and the nominal functioning of civil order, as well as

 

facilitate the distribution of aid, if territories are not
demined.

Croatia welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
and the Secretary-General in establishing international
mine-clearance centres where necessary. In this regard,
Croatia is now in the process of discussing the
establishment of a mine action centre in Zagreb.

Through the mine action centre, Croatia hopes to share
not only its experiences and successes but also its
shortcomings with regard to the mine-clearing process. In
this way we believe that others will gain by implementing
for themselves, in their national environment, measures that
have proved successful and efficient in Croatia, while at the
same time avoiding the shortfalls. To this end Croatia is
prepared to work with other national mine-clearance
programmes so as to improve reciprocity with regard to
education and training. We believe that any aid, be it
financial or technical, which can expedite the mine-clearing
process will be well met.

Furthermore, we should like to propose that the United
Nations, acting through its current and former peace-
keeping operations, become the global coordinating centre
for demining activities. In this way, a United Nations
coordinating body for demining could facilitate the
exchange of data on the various types of mines used,
together with the best and most efficient way of
approaching the defusing of those mines; the exchange of
technical personnel responsible for demining; and the
exchange of equipment and other materials that have proved
necessary for demining.

The demining process in any country is long and
arduous, and it becomes more laborious and dangerous if
the right technology, equipment, education and training are
not present. In this regard, the leading military Powers
should also consider making available to less developed
countries, by loan if necessary, sophisticated equipment that
will make the demining process more efficient and
comprehensive. Norway's mine-clearance programme,
announced at this meeting, sets the right example and
should be highly commended.

Taking all these factors into consideration, Croatia
extends its full support to the initiative calling for a
comprehensive international ban on anti-personnel mines.
As a first step in this direction, we are pleased to note that
Croatia has acceded to the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
and is prepared to sign the revised mine Protocol included
therein.

As the international community is developing its
understanding of the land-mine problem, anti-personnel
mines are becoming a matter of priority for Governments
as well as for inter-governmental and non-governmental
organizations. Let us hope that the pooling of resources
and common will will allow us to complete our much-
desired objective.

Allow me once again to express my thanks to you,
Mr. President, for your efforts in convening this meeting
and my sincere wishes for its success.

