Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor once again at
the conclusion of today's important meeting of the
Security Council.

Nothing can justify terrorism. My country
resolutely denounces terrorism, regardless of its
manifestations, the motives behind it or the
justifications made for it. That is the consensus legal
position of the international community endorsed in the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. My country
actively participates in the Strategy and played a part
in its adoption.

With regard to the nonsensical and futile attempt
of the representative of Israel to confuse the
international phenomenon of terrorism, which
everyone condemns, with the right of peoples under
foreign occupation to resist, it deceives no one. As the
Council is well aware, the main objective of that effort
is to distract attention from the terrorism carried out by
the State of Israel in occupied Palestinian territories,
occupied Syrian Golan and the remaining occupied
Lebanese territories.

In a historic resolution, the United Nations has
acknowledged that foreign occupation is the worst
form of aggression. Moreover, the Charter guarantees
the right of peoples to freedom and liberation from
occupation and colonization. Thus, the representative
of Israel's insistence that Palestinian refugees - who
have been expelled from their homeland by Israeli
terrorism and dispersed in neighbouring territories and
throughout the world - should be considered to be
terrorists is a futile attempt to push the clock back and
to restore a colonialist mentality to international
relations. This undermines the United Nations Charter.

The millions of Palestinian refugees in
neighbouring countries and throughout the world have
the right of return to their homeland, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948.
My country and the overwhelming majority of
Members of this international Organization support the
right of those Palestinian refugees to return to their
homeland. My country insists on the full
implementation of the rules of international law and
the relevant United Nations resolutions.

The world has witnessed the extent of Israeli
State terrorism against the Palestinian population in
Gaza, against the Lebanese and against the Syrian
residents of the occupied Syrian Golan. The United
Nations has adopted hundreds of resolutions that
condemn Israeli occupation and call for an end to it.

Memories are not so short, and everyone knows
perfectly well the true face of terrorism in our region.
The United Nations archives are full of evidence and
proof of the extent of Israeli terrorism. If that terrorism
had not enjoyed protection by some parties through the
privilege of the veto, wielded on dozens of occasions,
the representatives of Israel would be most reluctant to
appear before the Security Council and address it on
terrorism. They are the masters and the custodians of
terrorism.

