Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate to consider
the situation in the Middle East. We are overwhelmed
by what is happening in Gaza.

In these trying times, I wish to start by commending
the efforts of and expressing our appreciation to all of
those who are engaged in efforts to bring an end to
the suffering of the Palestinian people, particularly
in Gaza. In that regard, I would like to mention the
Secretary-General, the Egyptian Government and the
United States Secretary of State.

Since 7 July, a new military aggression has been
conducted against the population in Gaza. What has
been happening since that day is all the more shocking
and appalling to millions around the world. More than
600 citizens have been killed, and the toll continues to
rise, thousands have been wounded or maimed, lives
have been destroyed, while homes, mosques, schools
and hospitals have become military targets and reduced
to ruin. Even olive trees - how symbolic - have been
uprooted and burned in the tracks of armoured trucks.

Whatever the pretext for the new escalation, it
remains a mere pretext. How can anyone justify the
brutal shelling, aerial and maritime strikes, missiles and
drones over densely populated areas? How can anyone
bear the images of the children who have been torn from
the sanctity of their innocence, while the world watches
in horror as their impossible playground is turned into
the open-air graves of those whose terrible guilt seems
to be only that they are Palestinian?

In other areas there are other children, including
Algerians. I have to mention one of them - a young
Algerian three years of age, Abdullah Drage Yusuf,
who was killed with his mother in a home that was
struck by a missile. It cannot be said that the home was
a militant base. He was buried with other Palestinians
in Rafah cemetery.

How can anyone describe the situation from a legal,
political or human rights angle? Where are the borders
between what we see and the notions of collective
punishment, mass killing and war crimes? I will leave
it up to the conscience of each member of the Council
to think about and maybe to take a stand.

Is the international community going to turn a
blind eye to the situation and turn its back on all of its
values and rights? Let us mention the basic one, namely,
the right to life. The internatinoal community and the
Security Council are promoting it and rightly defending
it, including through lectures around the world.

What type of example are we setting? Are there
exceptions among the universal rights? I do not wish to
add to the comments of my colleagues and to that which
the whole world is witnessing. Today urgent action is
needed to put an end to the ordeal.

Our action - the Council's action - is called
upon. It is needed individually and collectively for the
sake of peace throughout the world. Let us not forget
that Gaza is under blockade; or should I say, beleagured
for the past seven years in terms of food, medicine, gas,
money, salaries and sometimes even water, which are
heavily rationed, restricted or prohibited.

We must not forget that the unfulfilled promises, the
ever-failing initiatives for the so-called establishment
of peace, have added to the dwindling commitments
and resulted in the mounting frustrations, helplessness
and despair that represent flammable ingredients for a
bleak future that certainly will not benefit any of the
peoples or States of the region.

Let us not forget that the Palestinian territory
is under an illegal, oppressive and extremely brutal
occupation. Occupation is the core of the issue. The
Secretary-General rightfully mentioned in the morning
that the root causes, putting an end to the occupation and
materializing the national legitimate rights in a viable
State for the Palestinians is the only way out - through
negotiations.

For the time being, our urgent duty - moral,
political and legal - is to protect civilians.
We - the international community and the
Security Council - should act urgently and be aware
of an important issue. The current aggression will
contribute only to an even greater widening of the gap
between the aspiration for peace and security for all.
Security cannot be built upon aggression. It would be a
terrible illusion to think that security will prevail one
day in the absence of peace or prospects for peace. We
should not try to test the "How late is too late?" theory.

The lack of a conclusion to the international
community's endeavour, or inaction on the part of
the Council according to its responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations, could become part of
the problem. It is our hope that we will overcome the
problem before then.

