Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We are grateful to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto for his briefing and personal contribution
to achieving the goal of peace and prosperity in
Afghanistan. We applaud the work and dedication of
his able team. We are also grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Mahmoud
Saikal, and Afghan youth representative Ramiz
Bakhtiar for their statements.

The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/824) provides a realistic assessment and
important insights into the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
United Nations country team. It includes constructive
recommendations that the United Nations system and
the international community need to implement right
away. At this critical juncture, it would enable us to
leverage the comparative advantage of global and
regional stakeholders in support of reconstruction and
redevelopment in Afghanistan. My delegation would
like to make the following key points.

First, with regard to the political process, we share
the view of Kabul that the process should be Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned. Kazakhstan firmly supports
the reconciliation and reintegration efforts undertaken
by the Government of Afghanistan and its continued
commitment to addressing the increasing political,
economic and security challenges. That is strong
testimony of Afghanistan's aspirations to achieve
national unity and stability, which could contribute to
regional security. We welcome President Ghani's recent
ceasefire initiative and regret that counterparts have
not accepted it. That means that hopes for peaceful
elections is under threat. We are equally concerned
about the statements made by some political parties
in Afghanistan that intend to boycott the elections.
Therefore, we encourage the Government to work with
political parties and encourage them to participate in
the elections. On the other hand, it should not lead to
a delay in the holding of the elections, as it would lead
to further deterioration of the situation in Afghanistan.

On the security track, despite some noteworthy
developments, the situation is fragile and volatile and
continues to deteriorate, in particular in the northern
provinces. Major losses have been incurred among the
civilian population, law enforcement and the military
as a result of terrorist acts and clashes by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh and the Taliban. It
is cause for serious concern as it could have a negative
impact on the holding of free and successful elections
in the country. We therefore urge the Government to
implement its progressive strategies, such as the plan
on security sector reform and many others in other
areas, which, in our View, will further strengthen the
capacity of national institutions.

With regard to international cooperation, my
delegation commends the ongoing efforts to counter
various threats, including the scourge of terrorism,
trafficking and narcotics in Afghanistan. We believe
that at this stage it remains imperative that the United
Nations and the international community continue to
provide assistance to Afghanistan. We will further
support the Kabul process, the efforts of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) and regional
initiatives, as well as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process and the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan. We also welcome the
work of our partners from Central Asia, in particular
the holding of the Tashkent conference in March and
the efforts of the Russian Federation on the Moscow
format, while underlining the importance of the SCO
Afghanistan Contact Group and the Afghanistan-
Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity. We have
great hopes for the forthcoming Geneva ministerial
conference on Afghanistan, which will ensure that
the Government of Afghanistan is on track to deliver
on its reform commitments and discuss prospects for
international support.

On the development track, we are heartened to see
that it is the policy of the Afghan Government's to put
emphasis on social and economic development. The
core of our efforts is to help Afghanistan become an
attractive partner with great potential. In that vein, we
believe it is necessary to proceed in line with provisions
of this year's presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/l) on
prevention and sustaining peace and the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/2) on modelling regional
partnership in Afghanistan and Central Asia. The
country needs joint projects, job creation and regional
connectivity. All Central Asian States are committed
to long-term cooperation with our Afghan partners and
intraregional connectivity in the areas of infrastructure,
transit and transport, energy and other fields.

It is necessary to ensure that Afghanistan
be included in our region's trade and economic
cooperation efforts as part of a new model of relations.
My delegation therefore proposes a new strategy, based
on the interlinkages of development and security,
combined with a revamped regional approach and an
innovative whole-of-system United Nations approach to
enhance efficiency, transparency and accountability. It
is based on our assumption that economic development
will create the prerequisites for a political settlement
and a solution to security issues. In that regard, we
support all projects to empower that idea, such as the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline,
the Lapis Lazuli Corridor and the One Belt-One Road
initiative, which could not only bring about economic
growth and prosperity, but could also enhance security
and stability in the region. Kazakhstan will continue
to contribute to bilateral, regional and multilateral
action for the recovery, stability, peace and progress
of Afghanistan.

With regard to the human dimension, Kazakhstan
is deeply convinced that women, along with youth,
occupy a central place in the entire cycle of conflict
prevention. In that vein, earlier this month in Astana,
we organized a regional conference on the theme
"Empowering women in Afghanistan", which focused
on achieving sustainable economic growth by expanding
the capabilities of Afghan women and developing their
business activities through regional cooperation, with
emphasis on the role of education and new knowledge.
Its outcome declaration envisages ways of improving
the living and educational conditions of Afghan
women and girls, as well as expanding their rights and
opportunities, including in the political and economic
spheres. As for results, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and the
European Union will soon launch a joint pilot project
to provide training for Afghan women in Kazakh
and Uzbek universities. In addition, the Government
of Kazakhstan has decided to allocate additional
scholarships for Afghan women for the period 2019-
2020, which is a continuation of Kazakhstan's initiative
to educate 1,000 Afghan civilian specialists through a
$50 million special educational programme.

The plight of Afghan children remains severely
affected by the escalation of the conflict. To that
end, the Government of Afghanistan has taken many
commendable steps to ensure that its national security
forces are child-free. It is also promoting age-assessment
guidelines that we hope will be widely implemented.
However, Kazakhstan is alarmed about the fact that
the current reporting period again recorded a high
number of child casualties, with the use of boys who
were reportedly recruited by terrorist organizations.
We therefore welcome the joint efforts of UNAMA and
UNICEF to address that challenge.

Finally, my country is pleased that UNAMA, the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community have continued to maintain a close
partnership, which is vital to ensuring sustainable
peace and stability in the country. Kazakhstan will
continue to support the brotherly people of Afghanistan
in fulfilling their aspirations for peace, prosperity
and security, and believes that the timely holding of
parliamentary elections will promote the conditions for
achieving such goals.

