Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the presence of Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, Mr. Rodolfo Nin
Novoa, at this meeting today. It is a privilege to have
him in the Council.

I would also like to acknowledge the statements by
the Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Ms. Christine Beerli, and Mr. Bruno Stagno
Ugarte, Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy of
Human Rights Watch. The three briefings were very
important, not only because they touched the hearts of
those of us in this Chamber, but they also touched the
crux of the problems that our Organization in general
and the Security Council in particular are facing in
this area.

Unfortunately, war has taken on a brutal dimension.
Practices and dynamics have developed that, according
to the report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2017/414), have affected
the lives of 65 million innocent people in various parts
the world. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs in Yemen, over 21 million
people need assistance or protection to satisfy their basic
needs as a result of the conflict. In Syria, 13.5 million
people need humanitarian assistance and 6.3 million
have been displaced. In Libya, 2.4 million people need
humanitarian assistance. In the same vein, the number
of civilian fatalities - both because of terrorist attacks
and confrontations among forces and parties to the
different conflicts around the world - has increased
owing to the indiscriminate bombing by various
coalitions of hospitals, medical facilities, humanitarian
assistance facilities, religious sites and even wedding
celebrations, which are of no military importance but
remain targets nonetheless. In accordance with the
information provided by the Secretary-General in
his report, in 2016 there were 108 attacks on medical
facilities in Syria, 17 attacks in the Central African
Republic and 19 attacks in Yemen. Moreover, the report
indicates that every month around 30,000 people are
injured in Syria alone, which is the equivalent of almost
42 victims per hour.

In that connection, on 3 May 2016, at the initiative
of Uruguay, Egypt, Japan, Spain and New Zealand, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2286 (2016), which
seeks to protect civilians in armed conflict; protect
humanitarian personnel and guarantee their deployment
with complete security; and protect humanitarian
infrastructure, among other things. However, despite
the resolution, we still bear witness to violations of
international humanitarian law through attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure and denial of
access to medical assistance in armed conflicts, which
is often not the result of an error, but rather a method
of war. We urge States to ratify the Rome Statute, first
in order to ensure its universality, and secondly to end
impunity for such attacks.

We believe it important to recall here the Declaration
made by the Heads of State and Government of the
Movement ofNon-Aligned Countries at their seventeenth
Summit, held in September 2016 on Margarita Island,
Venezuela, which condemned the increasing attacks
on humanitarian personnel and related facilities. We
support it, needless to say, and firmly condemn all
attacks and threats against civilians, hospitals, health
facilities, water and power infrastructure, as well
as attacks on the doctors who give their lives to help
civilians trapped in armed conflicts, in what is cold-
bloodedly referred to as "collateral damage" but which
actually constitutes a war crime whose perpetrators
must be brought to justice.

We urge all parties to any conflict to protect the
civilian population and their property and health
facilities, as well as humanitarian missions deployed
on the ground. International humanitarian law and its
principles of impartiality, neutrality, humanity and
independence were created in response to violence in
armed conflicts and must be complied with in political
and military disputes. Bolivia calls on the international
community to take concrete action and to implement
the commitments made by all members of the Security
Council and of the United Nations generally to ensuring
the safety of civilians in armed conflicts, especially
women and children, who are the most vulnerable in
situations of extreme violence. Bolivia also advocates
for using peaceful means to resolve disputes - the use
of good offices, preventive diplomacy, multilateralism,
non-interference and respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States - all
of which are universal principles recognized by the
international community and are effective tools for
avoiding the scourge of war.

In that context, we call on Member States to
support the Agenda for Humanity proposed by the
United Nations, which is based on a five-point plan
to guide the international community's efforts to
alleviate humanitarian suffering and reduce risk and
vulnerability. The five points are, first, preventing and,
of course, ending conflicts; respecting international
humanitarian law; ensuring that no one is left behind;
changing the way we work so as to meet people's needs;
and investing in humanity. That cannot be achieved as
long as armed conflicts continue to erupt and innocent
civilians continue to be seen as military targets, and
as long as technology is used for war and destruction
rather than peace.

The relevance or uselessness of this Organization,
its success or failure, is measured by our ability to save
lives. Every life lost, every person who is wounded
or displaced, every refugee embodies our failure. We
must share best practices and gather more and better
information to prevent such events from happening
again. We must bring those responsible to justice,
punish them and put an end to impunity. We must
work on the underlying causes of conflict in the areas
of development and civil, political, economic, social
and cultural rights, and we must strengthen the rule of
law and institutions. But apart from all of that, as you
rightly said, Mr. President, we should stop feeding the
monster of war, the enormous business of war. We must
end interventionism and the logic of regime change,
which have brought humankind so much pain.

