Mr. Nesho (Albania): Mr. President, it is a great
pleasure for me to see you back in this Chamber, and I
wish you every success in your new responsibilities.

My delegation welcomes the participation of the
Foreign Minister of Macedonia, Mr. Srgjan Kerim, and
has listened with great interest to his statement.

I should like to read the statement of the Albanian
Government adopted in response to the events that took
place in Tanusevci.

"The Albanian Government has observed
with attention and concern the latest
developments in different parts of our region, as
in Kosovo and southern Serbia. It is deeply
concerned over the latest violent episode in the
village of Tanusevci, in Macedonia, where,
according to a news agency, three Macedonian
soldiers were killed. Expressing its regret over
the Victims of the violence, the Albanian
Government reiterates its denunciation of the acts
of violence of extremist groups or individuals,
acts which run counter to the aspirations of
Albanians and Macedonian Albanians throughout
the region. We believe that the Macedonian
Government will continue to show proper
restraint and wisdom in treating and resolving the
situation created. The Albanian Government has
constantly supported the resolution of the
Albanians' problems in Macedonia through
institutional and democratic means.

"The Albanian Government has commended
the positive step taken by the Macedonian
Government during the past year aimed at the
affirmation of the Albanian population's rights, in
the spirit of tolerance and cooperation. In this
light, the acts of violence run counter to the
interests of the Albanians and the position of the
Albanian political faction in Macedonia. Such
acts are aimed at damaging the image of the
Albanian people all over the region and at
depriving them of the international support and
sympathy won during the war in Kosovo.

"Therefore, the Albanian Government calls
upon all Albanian political parties, in Macedonia
as well as in Kosovo, to distance themselves from
such extremist acts wherever they occur and
whoever their perpetrators are. In the meantime,
the Albanian Government shares the concern of
the international community and expresses its
high consideration for the commitment of the
international community to the peaceful solution
of the problem in our region. Finally, the
Albanian Government will continue to commit
itself to the democratic stability of Macedonia
and of the whole region, in cooperation with the
international community, the Governments of the
countries of the region and the Albanian political
forces in Macedonia, Kosovo, Montenegro and
southern Serbia."

