Ms. Zerrougui: I would like to begin by thanking
the United Kingdom presidency of the Council and the
Luxembourg chairmanship of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict for holding this important
debate on children and armed conflict.

Council members have before them the twelfth
annual report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2013/245). The report reflects
developments from January to December 2012 and
relevant updates. Although the reporting period saw
marked progress, especially in relation to dialogue with
parties to conflict and action plans, disturbing new
trends and concerns for children have also arisen.

As new conflicts emerged or deepened in the course
of the past 18 months, children continued to pay a heavy
toll - perhaps the heaviest. The evolving nature and
tactics of armed conflict have created unprecedented
threats for children. The absence of clear front lines
and identifiable opponents, and the increasing use of
terror tactics have made children more vulnerable. I
would also like to highlight the fact that, as in previous
years, non-State armed groups constitute the vast
majority of listed parties. They account for 46 of the
55 perpetrators listed in the annexes. In addition, I
would like to highlight that half of the parties listed
are so-called persistent perpetrators, meaning that they
have been on the list for five years or more. I welcome
the efforts of the Working Group to devise innovative
ways to address this issue, and I look forward to the
outcome of these discussions.

In Mali, which has been included in the report
for the first time, children were recruited by all
armed groups active in the north. We also received
information that boys and girls were associated with
pro-Government militias in performing various tasks,
including participation in combat. As the country is
transitioning towards stabilization, it is crucial to ensure
that no children are integrated into the regular armed
forces or forgotten in the reintegration process, and
that measures to prevent the recruitment of children be
put in place. On the other hand, we continue to receive
worrisome information on children being detained
by the Malian security forces for alleged association
with armed groups, as well as children hiding in their
communities in fear of being arrested for association
with armed groups. I call upon the Malian authorities
to treat such children in line with international norms
and standards.

In addition, accountability for all other violations
committed in Mali, such as attacks on schools and
hospitals, the killing and maiming of children and
sexual violence, needs to be sought as a matter of
priority. The international community has an important
role to play to assist the Malian authorities in that crucial
endeavour. I also wish to call upon all stakeholders to
ensure that in the context of the ongoing peace talks in
Ouagadougou, the needs and best interests of children
are adequately taken into account.

The conflict in the Central African Republic has
also had a disproportionate impact on children. In a
country where children have been deprived of a normal
life for so many years, it is particularly alarming to see
that two thirds of the children separated from armed
groups in 2012 were re-recruited by the Seleka coalition
at the beginning of 2013.

Many children were killed and injured during the
clashes in Bangui in April 2013. Children continue to
be affected by the ongoing insecurity and the lack of
humanitarian access. More than 2 million children in
the Central African Republic lack basic services, and
hundreds of thousands lack access to education. Those
children have suffered from repeated violations for
too long, and it is now time to consider what further
action, including targeted measures, should be taken
against perpetrators to enhance protection and justice
for children. I also call upon all relevant stakeholders to
ensure that child protection remains central to ongoing
discussions around the implementation of the Libreville
Agreement in the Central African Republic.

It has been two years since the beginning of the
conflict in Syria, yet we are no closer to saving the
lives of children. As the conflict rages on, it affects me
deeply that grave violations against children continue
to be committed on such a massive scale.

Since my last briefing to the Council on children
in Syria (see S/PV.6838), scores of them have been
killed, injured, maimed, detained, tortured, recruited
and forced to witness or to commit atrocities. If not for
those children, then for whom will the Council act?

It is my intention to visit Syria and the region in the
coming days to assess first-hand the consequences of
the conflict on children. I will also reiterate my call on
all parties to the conflict to take all possible measures
to ensure that children are protected in the course of
military operations, and to abide by international law.
I look forward to briefing Council members on my
findings upon my return.

As I mentioned earlier, new areas of concern for
children have emerged and need to be addressed as
a priority, including the military use of schools, the
detention of children for alleged association with
armed groups, and the impact of drones on children.
I encourage Council members and all Governments
concerned to carefully consider the recommendations
put forward by the Secretary-General in that regard.
The report also highlights the progress that has been
made in the past 18 months with regard to the protection
of children in conflict. Though we have made progress
with a number of non-State armed groups, this year
has brought remarkable success with the Governments
concerned. I very much doubt that this would have
been possible without the support of the Council. Those
Governments have accepted the framework that has
been put in place by the resolutions of the Council and
have engaged with the United Nations on measures to
enhance child protection in conflict. One indicator is
the growing number of inter-ministerial committees
established by the Governments concerned to work with
the United Nations on children affected by conflicts.

Another indicator is the development of legislation
that criminalizes violations against children, as well as
regulations and guidelines. In that regard, I welcome
the efforts of the Governments of Chad, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Philippines, which have
made notable progress during the reporting period.
In the same vein, I would like to commend those
Governments that have ratified the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict since the
most recent report of the Secretary-General, in April
2012 (S/2012/261). Those are most welcome steps
towards universal ratification, as intended by the Zero
Under 18 Campaign.

Additionally, there has been progress with regard to
the engagement of regional organizations on the issue
of children and armed conflict during the reporting
period. NATO has adopted child-protection guidelines,
including training materials prepared with the United
Nations for constituent troops and partners.

Cooperation with the African Union is ongoing;
my Office recently obtained a preliminary agreement
to secure child-protection expertise within the Peace
and Security Department. I also look forward to further
strengthening our cooperation in mainstreaming child
protection within the African Union and its regional
peacekeeping activities, such as in Somalia or in the
context of actions against the Lord's Resistance Army.

In 2004, the Council unanimously requested
all parties listed in the annexes to the report of the
Secretary-General to enter into dialogue with the United
Nations to prepare and implement action plans as a
unique tool to put an end to violations against children.
In 2012 alone, four action plans to end the recruitment
and use of children were signed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Myanmar, Somalia and South
Sudan. In addition, in line with resolution 1882 (2009),
an action plan on the killing and maiming of children
was also signed with the Government of Somalia, and
provisions on sexual violence against children were
included in the action plan signed with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also
like to inform the Council that the Government of Chad
has redoubled its efforts towards full compliance with
the action plan signed in 2011.

It is worth noting that all of those action plans were
signed with Governments to put an end to violations
committed by their armed forces. That allows the
United Nations to support those Governments not only
in identifying, releasing and reintegrating children
present in their ranks, but also in building their
capacities, enacting more adequate legislation and
preventing further violations.

Thanks to the Council's efforts, we have reached
a seminal moment in the history of that mandate. I am
happy to announce today that all armed forces listed in
the annexes for recruitment and use of children have
entered into an action plan process. Six have already
signed an action plan, and the remaining two are in the
final stages of negotiation.

One of the key objectives of that mandate - the
end of the recruitment and use of children by armed
forces - is finally within reach. In that regard, with
the support ofthe Secretary-General, my Office will be
launching a campaign aimed at ending the association
of children with State armed forces in armed conflict by
2016. The campaign's objective will be to galvanize the
efforts of concerned Governments, interested Member
States and the United Nations system to turn the page
on the recruitment and use of children by Government
armed forces in armed conflict in the next three years.
That is an unprecedented and ambitious initiative that
therefore needs our full attention. UNICEF and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
have already agreed to join the campaign. In the
coming weeks, I will reach out to other United Nations
partners. I count on Council members to support those
efforts as well.

Before concluding, I would also like to stress that
my Office has continued to receive enormous support
from its partners since the creation of the mandate. I
would like to commend the invaluable contribution
of our trusted operational partners, including those
here today. From the very beginning, the Council
requested that child-protection expertise be included
in peacekeeping missions in order to mainstream the
issue of children and armed conflict. Since then, more
than 100 child protection advisers have been deployed
to carry out that agenda in peacekeeping contexts. In
the light of the immense protection concerns affecting
children in conflict, the deployment of child-protection
advisers must not only continue but also grow. In
that regard, I call on Council members to ensure that
provisions for the timely and adequate deployment of
child-protection advisers be included in all the relevant
United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
political missions.

The role of UNICEF cannot be overemphasized. Its
efforts continue to make this agenda a reality in the field.
Its work in ensuring that children formerly associated
with armed forces and groups are reintegrated and
rehabilitated is also critical. I will continue to advocate
for ensuring that UNICEF and other partners have the
support necessary to carry out those tasks.

I began my statement today by stressing that notable
progress had been achieved. However, we must not
be complacent. The time has come to reflect on what
works. Dialogue with non-State parties, engagement
with concerned Governments, a focus on capacity-
building, and the Security Council's strong commitment
have yielded significant results for children. I would
like to conclude with an appeal. The child-protection
agenda has made progress because eight years ago the
Council took a firm stand with resolution 1612 (2005)
and expressed its willingness to take all the necessary
measures to ensure that children will be protected, in
all contexts, from the consequences of war. Children
in armed conflict need to know that the Council is
listening and that all victims will receive the necessary
protection. Perpetrators must also receive the strongest
possible signal from the Council that their crimes will
not go unpunished and that impunity will end. I call on
the Council to continue to unite in that endeavour.

