Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing and you, Mr. President, for
having organized this open meeting on the
implementation of measures adopted in July 2006 to
improve the effectiveness and transparency of the work
of the Security Council and to enhance its interaction
with the other States Members of the United Nations.
France has always been concerned that the
working methods of the Security Council should enable
the Council not only to act effectively, which is
fundamental to its credibility as the principal organ for
maintaining international peace and security, but also
to maintain a transparent and interactive relationship
with the entire membership of the United Nations.

Fourteen years ago, in this same type of debate
on working methods, the Permanent Representative of
France noted that there was a certain "malaise" in
relations between the Council and other Member
States, and noted that the malaise was largely due to
the fact that the Council's work was being conducted
behind closed doors and without publicity. There was
frustration on the part of non-members with the lack of
information from Council members, who had little
opportunity to exchange information with Member
States with an interest in the agenda items. To improve
that situation, France proposed a return to the spirit of
rule 48 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council, where it says: "Unless it decides
otherwise, the Security Council shall meet in public".

That 1994 debate launched a real evolution. The
opportunities for public meetings were extended, with
the holding of policy debates, making it possible to
hear the Views of States interested in various ways in
the items under consideration, as well as the
organization of public exchanges of views among
Council members on subjects not warranting private
treatment. Since then, the Council has continued to
improve its methods and procedures in that spirit of
openness, and the note by the President of July 2006
was both the embodiment and amplification of those
efforts.

It is worth mentioning that that evolution
coincided with the development of the Council as an
active body, seeking to play fully its key role in
resolving issues of maintaining international peace and
security. That demonstrates well, we believe, that the
opening of the Council to the outside and the
enhancement of its transparency and its interaction
with the rest of the United Nations also responded to
the objective of effectiveness - which is in no way
opposed to openness. Quite the contrary.

The Council acts on behalf of all Member States
and can act effectively only if it respects two
conditions. It must take into consideration the concerns
of Member States but also be accountable to them,
which is possible only if there is openness and
transparency. Of course, as we already emphasized in
1994, effectiveness also requires an appropriate split of
Security Council activity between public meetings and

the private consultations that are necessary to the
conduct of negotiations and to the development of
compromises.

In that respect, we believe the figures given in the
President's concept paper (S/2008/528, annex) indicate
a good balance. They show that the percentage of
official Security Council meetings since 2006 has
always been slightly greater than that of consultation
meetings, while the proportion of official private
meetings is very low. That balance seems satisfactory,
in that it enables the Council to conduct the
negotiations necessary to prepare decisions, which
need a high number of informal meetings, and at the
same time to interact sufficiently with the other
Member States in official meetings.

My delegation also believes that the list of
possible formats for meetings in the annex to the note
(S/2006/507) gives the Council enough flexibility to
allow it to choose the best format depending on the
issue being considered. Once again, the spirit of rule
48 means that official meetings should be public as far
as possible.

My delegation should like to note that
consultations should remain what they are: informal
meetings for preparing decisions and for negotiations.
We do not believe it would be desirable to regulate
them more. On the contrary, they should remain
informal and interactive, in keeping with their purpose,
and not aim to replace the substance of official
meetings.

Still on the subject of transparency, my
delegation should like to recall the considerable
progress emphasized in the concept paper, which was
achieved thanks to the distribution of programmes of
work and meeting announcements through modern
means of communication. Direct informational notes to
non-members of the Council from the Council
President and the Chairs of subsidiary bodies are also
extremely useful in that regard.

Something more important than it might appear
and that should be explored is how we add and remove
agenda items on the list of matters of which the
Council is seized. The present modalities for removing
from the list items of which the Council is no longer
seized are most restrictive and in a very specific way
make it difficult to add certain items. Thus, the list is
not always as precise as it should be about the
substance of the Council's deliberations: either it

contains obsolete items or does not precisely mention
other items. I believe that we need a more flexible way
of managing the list to make it a better source of
information on the matters of which the Council is
seized.

On the question of interaction with all Member
States, the concept paper rightly notes the importance
of consultation with Member States not members of the
Council that are directly involved or specifically
affected when preparing and drafting decisions.
Measures making possible effective participation by
such States and by representatives of regional
organizations in official meetings of the Council would
also be very useful. My delegation believes that the
best possible use should be made of possible
procedural modalities to enhance the interactivity of
our meetings.

In conclusion, my delegation commends
Ambassador Arias for the manner in which he is
chairing the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. Under
his chairmanship, the Group has done useful work on
the list of matters of which the Council is seized. The
Working Group has accepted Ambassador Arias's
proposal that it should continue to work on that issue,
along with three other matters that are at the heart of
today's debate: the format of meetings and the
implementation of paragraph 26 of document
S/2006/507 regarding increased transparency of open
meetings and paragraph 35 on various options for
meetings; participation by Council members at various
stages of decision-making and negotiation, including
their association with the work of subsidiary bodies;
and the role of the President of the Council and the
Chairs of subsidiary bodies with respect to the broader
public and to documentation and procedure.

It seems to us that the programme of work
adopted by the Working Group should enable it to
engage in useful thinking on methods and procedures
with a view to presenting possible recommendations to
the Council by the end of the year. That could be one
of the outcomes of today's discussion.

