Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Mr. President, I
thank you for convening this important debate. I would
like first to take this opportunity to commend the
efforts of Japan to advance the Council's working
methods, including your role as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions now and in 2006. The Working
Group, of course, gave us the presidential note in
document S/2006/507, which we are considering here
today.

Australia supports a Council that better reflects
the modern world and that is well placed to meet its
demands. This, of course, involves reforming the
composition of the Council. But improving the
Council's working methods, including transparency, is
an integral part of working towards that goal. We
appreciated the point made this morning by the
representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
representing the Caribbean Community, in regard to
the particular needs of the small island developing
States. His is a sentiment that we share, together with
our colleagues from the Pacific region.

The basic mindset of the Council should be one
of active accountability and deliberate transparency.
We, the Members of the United Nations, expect the
Council to regard the need to justify its decisions, to
share information, to consult widely and to accept
input not as burdensome or optional extras, but as core
elements of its working methods.

With this in mind, we recall the last debate on the
Council's working methods in August 2008 (see S/PV.5968), and in particular we recall Costa Rica's
suggestion that Member States should convene at least

every two years to monitor progress on reform of
working methods. The idea of the Ambassador of Costa
Rica, as I remember it, was that every elected member
should have at least one opportunity during its term to
participate in such a debate. When we heard Costa
Rica's idea, we immediately endorsed it. It is therefore
very pleasing to note that Japan has acted to bring this
about. The next step, we would suggest respectfully, is
to ensure that this debate be institutionalized on at least
a biennial basis.

There are things to welcome and there are plenty
of things to do more of. Monthly briefings by the
Council President are appreciated; their quality has
improved in recent years. We welcome recent
innovations to improve the quality of consultations
with troop- and police-contributing countries. Informal
interactive dialogues do seem to have been useful,
although Council members must keep in mind the need
to provide transparency to others when it uses such
closed-format vehicles. The innovations with regard to
the process pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the
creation of an ombudsman are also welcome.

As we have heard from so many speakers,
including the representative of Canada most recently,
greater interaction with the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) is important. But as we mentioned in this room
just last week, we consider it vital that peacebuilding
needs be considered at the inception of a peacekeeping
mission. This will demand a closer and more organic
relationship between this Council and the PBC
throughout the Council's consideration of a situation.
The precise modalities for achieving that should be the
subject of further discussion between the Council and
the PBC.

We welcome the Council's engagement with the
Chairs of the respective PBC country-specific
configurations in its mandate renewal deliberations.
This is a good first step. But how should broader
peacebuilding considerations be brought to the
attention of the Council when there is no PBC country-
speciflc configuration? How does the Council, in
planning a peacekeeping mission, engage with all
interested peacebuilding actors - including members
of the United Nations family, the international financial
institutions and the relevant regional and subregional
organizations - to ensure that all these actors are
working in unison and that the early peacebuilding
tasks undertaken by peacekeepers are part of a
coherent, integrated plan? These are the sorts of
questions the Council will need to address.

We join others who believe that there is much
more that needs to be done. The work by the so-called
group of five small countries, for example, is
impressive and we agree with their recommendations,
including ensuring, as the representative of
Liechtenstein said earlier today, that briefings by
United Nations officials are, as far as possible,
accessible to all Member States. We also agree that
consultations with non-members should take place as
part of the standard operating procedures, and draft
resolutions and presidential statements be made
available to non-members of the Council once they are
introduced in informal consultations. We think that the
points made by the delegation of Jordan in regard to
interaction with troop- and police-contributing
countries were very well made.

We continue to believe that, fundamentally, the
Council needs to commit to a vision of active
accountability and deliberate transparency. It needs to
establish metrics, qualitative and quantitative, and
assess progress against them with a more effective
annual report, although the earlier remarks this
morning in praise of the annual report we think were
entirely apposite. It should also keep in mind external
assessors, such as Security Council Report, and harness
technology, not just to bring the Council into the
twenty-first century, but to look ahead as to how it
should operate in five or 10 years time.

It is true that the Council's efficiency depends in
part on the performance of we the non-members. We
should contribute to open debates in an interactive and
responsive manner rather than just read statements
prepared days in advance that too often exceed time
limits and disrespect our fellow members.

On this question of open debates, we were
particularly struck by a suggestion made just before
lunch by the Ambassador of Portugal. He suggested
that, in these open debates, perhaps non-members
should speak first and Council members last. We would
encourage Council members to consider this. We
would certainly encourage Council members to listen
more attentively when non-members speak, perhaps
even at the level of permanent representative. It would
afford an opportunity for Council members to reflect
and comment on the ideas they have heard in the
course of the day at the end of the day. We think that
would be interesting, and we would appreciate the
Council's thoughts on that idea.

In conclusion, there is a tradition in the
Australian army that the officers eat only after the
troops have been fed. Perhaps that could be food for
thought.

