Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the February presidency of the
Security Council. Please be assured of the full support of
the delegation of Ukraine.

I would like also to thank Mr. Vieira de Mello for
his comprehensive briefing, which provided us with a
clear and objective picture of the situation in East Timor
and the related activities of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). It
is good to see him here and we wish him every success.
I am sure that his personal determination can leave no
doubt of the further achievements of the very difficult
mission which he is heading.

I wish to make just a few brief remarks. We are glad
to note that the internal security situation in East Timor
has greatly normalized, especially due to the efforts of the
International Force in East Timor (INTERFET) and
UNTAET. We believe that the United Nations Force
should adopt a firm posture in maintaining security
throughout the Territory. We note with satisfaction the
establishment of the National Consultative Council of
East Timor, through which the representatives of the East
Timorese can participate in the decision-making process.
It is an important step on the path to reconciliation and
the further development of the Territory, as well as
evidence of the very good relations between UNTAET
and the East Timorese.

 

We also welcome the positive developments in
relations between East Timor and Indonesia. This will
provide a good basis for future stability in the whole
region.
We are glad to note that UNTAET has established the
basic elements of the administrative structure and is
actively coordinating humanitarian assistance efforts. As the
devastating effects of the systematic destruction and
violence of last September and the consequent disruption of
civil and public services will continue to be serious
impediments for the foreseeable future, we believe that the
establishment of the basic governance and public
administration component must remain among the main
priority tasks of UNTAET.

We are deeply concerned over the conditions of the
refugees in the camps in West Timor and we are also
concerned by the serious problems of refugees in West
Timor who need to return to East Timor, as well as by their
ongoing intimidation by the militia. Unfortunately, there
have been a number of violent clashes and incidents on the
border between East and West Timor. In this context, we
welcome the signing on 12 January by the Indonesian
armed forces, INTERFET and UNTAET of a memorandum
regulating their cooperation in the border areas, including
the handling of incidents. We also note that the UNTAET
civilian police component has undertaken several immediate
measures to ensure a satisfactory level of law and order and
to prevent such events.

We are deeply concerned that the crime rate in East
Timor has increased, which is a serious threat to internal
security and stability in the Territory. Deep poverty and
unemployment are the cause of growing frustration in East
Timorese society and should therefore be addressed as a
major problem faced by UNTAET.

As far as the issue of human rights violations is
concerned, our delegation is carefully studying the two
reports by the International Commission of Inquiry on East
Timor and the Indonesian Commission of Inquiry. We are
encouraged by the fact that the Indonesian Government has
taken concrete steps and shown a real interest in supporting
the investigation and prosecution of the perpetrators through
its domestic accountability mechanisms.

