Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Yesterday
the Permanent Representative of Libya made to this
Council a moving appeal for assistance. France
welcomes the fact that the Council has today
unanimously and forcefully responded to that appeal.

In the face of the continued brutal and bloody
repression and the threatening statements made by the
Libyan leadership, the Security Council has reiterated
its demand for an immediate stop to the use of force
against the civilian population. As the High
Commissioner for Human Rights said, and as recalled
in resolution 1970 (2011), crimes against humanity
may be being committed in Libya. That is why we have
decided to refer the matter to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court so that he can initiate an
investigation and so that the Court might judge thee
principals responsible for crimes. Today, faced with the
atrocities we have seen, impunity is no longer an
option. The International Criminal Court in this matter
once again finds justification for its existence.

We have also decided to impose an embargo on
arms - the arms that President Al-Qadhafl has chosen
to turn against his own people. We have, finally,
decided to sanction the individuals who are at the head
of a regime that has chosen to commit atrocities.

The text, unanimously adopted today, recalls the
responsibility of each State to protect its own
population and of the international community to
intervene when States fail in their duty. We hope that
the responsible parties of the Libyan regime will hear
the message of the international community and put an
end to the unacceptable violence committed against
5
their own people, who have the right to democracy,
freedom and justice.

A wind of liberty has arisen south of the
Mediterranean. The Security Council had to meet this
date with history on the side of the Libyan people. That
is the historic significance of the vote this evening - a
vote that we hope will open, beyond Libya, a new era
for the international community as a whole.

