Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing today. We renew our support for the
work entrusted to him.

We express our full confidence in the follow-up
actions initiated by the Lebanese Government at the
request of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), which has thus far confirmed the existence
of four tunnels close to the Blue Line in northern
Israel, according to its 17 December press release. We
welcome the fact that the construction of those cross-
border tunnels between Israel and Lebanon is being
thoroughly investigated by UNIFIL and the Lebanese
Armed Forces. The investigation must strictly adhere
to the principles set out in paragraph 8 of resolution
1701 (2006).

Bolivia reiterates its emphatic condemnation of
any action that results in the violation of the territorial
sovereignty of Lebanon or the State of Israel. During
the two years we have occupied this seat as an elected
member of the Council, we have insisted that both
parties must base all their actions on the provisions
of resolution 1701 (2006), with full respect for the
Blue Line. That is why we reject Israel's persistent
violations of Lebanese airspace and territory. Israel's
presence in the northern part of Al-Ghajar village and
the adjacent area, north of the Blue Line, must cease
immediately. We also urge the Israeli Government
to refrain from the actions it has carried out since
4 December - the excessive mobilization of its defence
forces and the use of inflammatory rhetoric, both of
which are flagrant violations of resolution 1701 (2016)
and Lebanese sovereignty.

The situation on the ground remains relatively
calm; there have been no clashes or skirmishes between
the military forces on either side. On the contrary, an
investigation is ongoing and efforts are being made to
maintain clear and credible channels of communication
with both parties, so as to avoid misunderstandings that
might turn into regrettable situations. We highlight that

both parties have indicated that they have no intention
of escalating tensions along the Blue Line and will
therefore continue to work with UNIF IL to that end.

We also express our full support for the work of
UNIFIL, which in 2019 will continue to support all
efforts to defuse tensions through dialogue and seek
every opportunity for confidence-building. All parties
must be aware of the possibility that a relatively minor
incident could quickly become more serious, with
unintended consequences.

Therefore, we reiterate our call to the parties to
promote the establishment, between the Blue Line and
the Litani River, of a zone free of any armed personnel,
assets and weapons other than those of the Government
of Lebanon and of UNIFIL, with a view to preventing
the resumption of hostilities.

My delegation is deeply concerned that, despite
Israel's participation in the meeting in Naqoura of the
tripartite mechanism of senior officials - together
with the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Head of
Mission and Force Commander of UNIFIL - in which
the parties expressed their willingness to honour the
provisions set out in resolution 1701 (2006), it continues
to flagrantly violate said resolution. Nevertheless, we
hope that today's meeting will serve to ensure that calm
prevails in the coming weeks.

In conclusion, Bolivia rejects Israel's persistent
violations of Lebanese airspace, which are a flagrant
violation of resolution 1701 (2006), and we are
convinced that the perpetuation of such illegal actions
only generates instability in the region. We urge
the Government of Israel to immediately cease its
occupation of the northern part of Al-Ghaj ar village and
the adjacent area, north of the Blue Line, as it violates the
resolution and, more important, Lebanese sovereignty.

