Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the briefing he provided us on
the work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
MINUSTAH, Ms. Sandra Honore Braithwaite, for her
briefing and especially for her work and dedication.

Uruguay aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered by the Permanent Representative of Peru
on behalf of the Group of friends of Haiti.

In reading this report of the Secretary-General
on MINUSTAH (S/2017/604), we find much to be
heartened by and other news that continue to cause
us concern. We are pleased to learn that Haiti has
continued to forge ahead in strengthening its democracy
and stability. It is positive that President Jovenel Moise
has put together a road map to guide the Government
with a focus on security, justice, energy, education,
health and agriculture and containing a strategy for
decentralization. We note that the Haitian National
Police has continued to boost their ability to provide
security and to ensure that the law is upheld throughout
the country. Moreover, we were also pleased to learn
about the decrease in suspected cases of cholera and
related deaths as a result of the efforts carried out by
the Government of Haiti and its international partners.

We are nonetheless concerned by the fragile
socioeconomic situation of the country and the
vulnerability of its people. Mitigating these realities
will require the Government's efforts and resources
to be concentrated in the areas identified as priorities.
According to the report of the Secretary-General, as
of 19 May 2.35 million people in Haiti were living in
a situation of severe food insecurity and more than
143,000 are suffering from acute malnutrition.

Given such enormous needs, we need to be very
clear and sincere in expressing that we are seriously
concerned that the Haitian authorities are even thinking
about remobilizing the Haitian Armed Forces, which
would clearly divert human and financial resources
away from the areas that require urgent attention.
Priority should be given to all those initiatives that
generate direct benefits for the Haitian people and
strengthen the State's institutions. The shear cost in
terms of investment and operationalization of restoring
these Armed Forces in Haiti at a time in which the
country has so many pressing needs to deal with must
not be overlooked.

We believe that energy and resources must be
focused on further strengthening and training the
Haitian National Police so that it can fulfil to the letter
the task of ensuring national security. To date, national
and international efforts have been focused on this and
that must continue to be the case if we are to avoid
compromising the gains achieved in the area of security
over the course of the 13 years of MINUSTAH's
presence. It would be regrettable if those achievements
were to be undone because of tensions caused by
unresolved socioeconomic problems, coupled with
other weaknesses in the country's institutions, such as
deficiencies in the judicial institutions and the human
rights situation. We endorse the calls made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, by
the Independent Expert of the Human Rights Council
on the situation of human rights in Haiti, and by civil
society organizations to the Government of Haiti to
establish a separate ministry for human rights.

We note that the actions carried out in the context
of the withdrawal of MINUSTAH are proceeding
smoothly and have not had any visible adverse impact
on the general security situation in the country.
Uruguay's own troops stood down on 15 April, bringing
to a successful end a 13-year phase of support and
assistance to Haiti and its people on the ground, which
began with the establishment of MINUSTAH in 2004.
Today, our objective is to keep our hard-won gains and
improve the general situation of the country by seeking
out other possible avenues for cooperation.

The adoption of the transition plan between
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team,
which identifies priority needs and objectives for
Haiti, reflects the planning work carried out in order
to ensure the orderly handover from MINUSTAH to
the new Mission. As far as plans for the organization
and operationalization of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), the report
of Secretary-General provides us with a wealth of
information thereon, demonstrating the professionalism
of the work the United Nations is carrying out in
consultation with the Haitian authorities.

The mandate of the new Mission will entail
assisting the Government of Haiti in strengthening
the institutions of the rule of law; supporting and
strengthening the Haitian National Police; and
monitoring, reporting and analysing the human rights
situation, thereby addressing the current needs in Haiti.
MINUJUSTH will only be successful in its mandate if
it enjoys the full support of the Haitian authorities.

