Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Ijoin other speakers,
Mr. President, in commending you for convening
this important debate. I wish to express my personal
pleasure at seeing you presiding over this body.

Sri Lanka associates itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

The year 2014 will be a critical one for the
Middle East. We made a good start by launching the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, on 16 January, and the second Geneva
Conference on Syria, to open in Montreux. We hope
that the launch of the International Year will generate
further support for the realization of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and, with it, statehood
for the Palestinians.

We are encouraged by the diplomatic engagement
by the international community. Peace negotiations
need to be conducted expeditiously and be consistent
with the principles of international law and the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
As has been stated during this debate, we also believe
that the cost of failing to reach a peace accord could
very well bring another round of serious violence,
with tragic consequences. We hope that the parties
concerned will not let go of this opportunity to achieve
a sustainable peace when there is much international
goodwill supporting the process.

The ongoing settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law, need to end at the earliest
possible date for a sustainable solution in that region.

The situation of the blockade of the Gaza strip is
an obstacle to the peace process. The recent floods,
which displaced approximately 10,000 people, inflicted
extra misery on a population already under strain.
Gaza is also suffering from serious fuel and power
shortages. Although partially relaxed, there is an urgent
humanitarian need to lift more comprehensively the
restrictions on imports of essential supplies of food and
medicines and construction material. We reiterate the
call for the full implementation of the resolution 1860
(2009), and underline our strong support for the work
of United Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.

The security needs of the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples must also be respected. Indiscriminate attacks
against civilians will only enhance feelings of suspicion
and insecurity and widen the gap between the parties.
We encourage both parties to exercise the utmost
restraint for the sake of the safety of civilians and for
the greater goal of peace.

We welcome the recent release of long-term
Palestinian prisoners by Israel, which will contribute
positively to the ongoing negotiation process. We also
hope that the issue of the detention of children, which is
linked to broader, long-standing concerns regarding the
detention of Palestinians, will be urgently addressed.

The President of Sri Lanka, His Excellency
Mr. Mahinda Rajapaksa, during his recent visit to
Israel, Palestine and Jordan, reiterated his strong hope
for a peaceful and sustainable solution to the Palestinian
question and an independent Palestinian State. He was
particularly encouraged to observe that the people
of Palestine are persevering with determination, in
the midst of much hardship, to realize their goal of
statehood. Agreements were signed between Sri Lanka
and Palestine to establish a Sri Lanka-Palestine Joint
Commission and a vocational training centre.

Sri Lanka supports the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions regarding the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to statehood and the attainment
of a two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.
Sri Lanka is hopeful that both Israel and Palestine will
utilize the opportunities presented during this year to
achieve a historic peace agreement in the interest of
their future generations.

