Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I would like to thank the head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), Mr. de Mistura, for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Iraq and the
work of the United Nations there (S/2008/688), and
also for his leadership of the United Nations Mission in
the very complex conditions of today's Iraq.

We also note the statement by the Permanent
Representative of Iraq, Mr. Al Bayati, who talked about
the work of his Government to stabilize the situation in
the country, the progress achieved and the remaining
problems. We are also grateful to the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America,
Mr. Khalilzad, for his briefing on the activities of the
Multinational Force.

Overall, we think that the report of the Secretary-
General objectively reflects the general political,
security and socio-economic situation in Iraq, and we
agree with most of its conclusions. We note with
satisfaction the drop in violent incidents undermining
stability in the country and the consolidation and
improved performance and effectiveness of the Iraqi
Security Forces, as shown by the United States military
command's transfer of control of Babil and Wasit
Provinces and their capitals, Hilla and Kut, to Iraqi
forces in October.

The fact that only 5 out of 18 governorates are
under the control of the coalition forces reflects the
positive dynamic in the country's security situation.
What has been achieved is, to a large extent, the result
of the measures taken by the Government of Iraq, led
by the Prime Minister, Nuri al-Maliki. Nevertheless, it
is a little early to toast victory, because there are still
sources of tension that continue to have an impact on
strengthening stability in the country.

In that regard, we would like to express our
concern with respect to the flare-ups of violence that
have occurred recently in Mosul, Baghdad, Baqubah
and other Iraqi towns, causing the deaths of dozens of
peaceful civilians. That seems to confirm the view of
the Secretary-General on the fragility of the situation
in the country. We strongly condemn those acts of
violence. We emphasize that it is impossible to achieve
the long-term stabilization of Iraq by force alone. Steps
are needed to strengthen inter-Iraqi dialogue among all
forces that reject terrorism as a way to solve political
problems.

In that context, the amendments to the provincial
election law adopted on 3 November are of particular
importance. They guarantee national and religious
minorities a mandatory quota of representation in local
councils, as well as an increase in the number of
women in Government structures.

We note the active role of UNAMI in achieving a
consensus among the different political forces in Iraq
on that important issue. We believe that elections to the
local councils will be an important step towards
retaining the unity and territorial integrity of the
country and achieving national harmony and
reconciliation among all Iraqis.

Together with the Secretary-General, we call on
the Iraqi forces to take decisive steps to enhance the
system of human rights protection in the country so as
to guarantee respect for the rights of all Iraqis. We
welcome Baghdad's ratification of the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment. We welcome the efforts of
UNAMI to solve the problem of refugees and
internally displaced persons. Unfortunately, that
situation in that respect remains difficult, and we
would like to thank the Governments of Syria and
Jordan for having welcomed many tens of thousands of
Iraqi citizens on their territories.

We welcome the efforts of UNAMI to encourage
the development of relations between Iraq and its
neighbouring countries, which has led to the opening
of several embassies in Baghdad and, in a broader
context, encouraged contact between the leaders of Iraq
and their counterparts in the countries of the Near and
Middle East.

Against that background, we consider that the
recent operation undertaken by United States forces in
Iraq, which violated the borders of Syria and conducted
a raid on the outskirts of Abu Kamal, considerably
undermined efforts to achieve stabilization in Iraq and
the Middle East as a whole.

Iraq faces the serious challenges of nation-
building and national reconciliation. In the near future,
it will have to decide on the future nature and status of
the presence of international forces on its territory. In
that regard, the Russian Federation is sympathetic to
the legitimate demands of Iraq for guaranteed
sovereignty over its territory.

We support the efforts of the international
community to provide economic assistance to Baghdad
in the context of the International Compact with Iraq. It
is well known that Russia is providing bilateral
assistance to Iraq in rebuilding its economy. I would
like particularly to emphasize that Russian experts are
currently present on the ground in Iraq, despite the
very complicated conditions and risks in the country,
and are working on building and rebuilding Iraqi
energy facilities.

At the same time, we are convinced that any
plans of the international community to promote Iraq's
economic recovery will face serious difficulties unless
they are bolstered by additional political steps aimed at
ensuring sustainable normalization of the situation in
the country.

