Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I should like to
thank you, Sir, for having organized this very
important discussion. I am very glad to see the Under-
Secretary-General and the Force Commanders here in
our midst.

As one of the most active participants in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, India attaches very
great significance to United Nations peacekeeping and
its role in the maintenance of international peace and
security.

The context of United Nations peacekeeping is
changing, and this changing scenario demands changes
in our response. It is therefore good that we are having
across-the-board discussions on United Nations
peacekeeping in different forums. Our delegation has
engaged constructively and made meaningful
contributions to the evolution of the policy discourse
on United Nations peacekeeping.

India's experience in United Nations
peacekeeping is unparalleled and our credentials can be
matched by few others. We have been present in
virtually every United Nations peacekeeping operation.
Today, we are present in significant numbers in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL),
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.
Recently, in response to a request from the United
Nations, we have tripled our police contribution to
MINUSTAH.

Indeed, as I speak here, more than 8,000 Indian
soldiers and police personnel are deployed in United
Nations peacekeeping. It is they who are converting the
Council's words into action, and they do so in
exceedingly challenging circumstances and situations.

I am happy that in the long tradition of
supporting United Nations peacekeeping by providing
senior leadership, we have just seconded Lieutenant
General Chander Prakash Wadhwa of the Indian Army
to be the Force Commander of MONUSCO. I am
happy that he is here in the Council today.

The role of women in peacekeeping has been a
key focus for the Security Council. We have
endeavoured to meet the Council's aspirations in this
regard, too. I have the honour to draw the attention of
the Council here to the Indian female formed police
unit in Liberia, which has not only brought credit to
United Nations peacekeeping but has also added
possible new and very much required dimensions to the
scope of the efforts of United Nations peacekeeping.
We are also working on the possibility of increasing
the number of such female peacekeepers.

The nature of the Security Council's mandates
and the manner in which they are generated is an area
that needs to be looked at carefully. In today's context,
mandates have been found to be too broad and
detached from realities on the ground. It is important
that mandates be clear, achievable and in keeping with
the available capabilities and resources. This is
particularly true for uniformed personnel, who, by
virtue of their organizational culture, are used to clear
instructions and objectives. Unrealistic mandates also
lead to situations in which missions start asking
contingents to undertake tasks and utilize contingent-
owned equipment in a manner that is inconsistent with
the framework of their deployment agreed between the
contributing countries and the United Nations. This, of
course, demands the substantive engagement of the
countries that contribute manpower and resources to
the peacekeeping operations, and we can only reiterate
the absolutely critical imperative that such
consultations be substantive, meaningful and result in

views of troop contributors providing the bedrock of
the mandate decision. There have been improvements
in this regard, but much more needs to be done. For
example, we have yet to be briefed in detail about
recent developments in the UNIFIL operational area
despite our troops being there. We have also had
occasions in recent times, in terms of specific events in
a United Nations operation in West Africa where we
have peacekeepers, when we have been concerned by
command and control issues on the ground and have
had concerns in terms of keeping us in the loop in New
York.

Peacekeeping, for a long time, was essentially
about Blue Helmets and establishing a measure of
security. In the type of crises that we face today we
need a much broader array of responses than the pure
security one. Today's peacekeepers have come to play
a critical role in humanitarian emergencies and are
often thrust into the midst of civil wars. Frequently
they are called upon to protect civilian populations
when they have been uprooted from their homes. Law
and order challenges have added the civilian dimension
to peacekeeping operations. Disarming combatants and
reforming the security sector have also become
essential to a peacekeeping strategy.

In such circumstances we need to be particularly
concerned about ensuring a high degree of operational
support. Lack of equipment and spares and inadequate
living conditions are critical areas that rarely receive
attention. Forces are not given sufficient time to
prepare for operations on the ground. Hence, I think it
is very important that there be a clear recognition that
better peacekeeping requires more resources, human
and material, including command.

In closing, I salute peacekeepers from my country
and fellow nations who have laid down their lives for
United Nations missions. India reiterates its
commitment to working with the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

