Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this wrap-up session, which provides us
with an opportunity to assess the work of the Council
in the month of November.

The first briefing by heads of police components
of three United Nations peacekeeping missions was
a notable development in the month (see S/PV.7317).
The briefing offered Council members and the wider
United Nations membership an opportunity to hear
directly from the police commissioners responsible for
carrying out the peacekeeping mandates authorized by
the Council as they concerned police components. With
the mandates of peacekeeping missions becoming more
multidimensional, the police components are taking on
a more complex role. The police commissioners briefed
on three important topics: challenges in building
whole-State institutional capacity, having the necessary
requirements to effectively execute Council mandates,
and the role of police components in the protection of
civilians. The interactive nature of the meeting proved
very useful, as Council members had the opportunity to
ask questions, seek clarification and make suggestions
on issues concerning policing and peacekeeping.

We commend Australia for the leadership role
it played in the adoption of the Council's first ever
stand-alone resolution on policing and peacekeeping
(resolution 2185 (2014)). This, in our view, was one
of the most significant developments in the Council
in November. The resolution highlights the increased
complexity of United Nations policing. It also
recognizes the need for the United Nations to allocate
adequate resources to police components in order to
enable them to meet the challenges they face on the
ground.

The Council's debate on Ebola (see S/PV.7318)
presented an opportunity for the stocktaking essential to
assessing the progress made in our collective response to
the scourge. The debate revealed that indeed the global
response is yielding results and that important progress
has been recorded on the ground. That was attributed
in part to the crucial contributions of regional States
that had led the response to the Ebola outbreak. The
contributions of the international community, as well as
non-governmental organizations, were also recognized
as being very important. Nevertheless, more needs to
be done to achieve our ultimate goal of eradicating
Ebola. This is a global medical emergency and notjust a
regional problem. For that reason, the sustained support
of the international community remains essential. We
are confident that, with the leadership of the United
Nations, the current momentum will be sustained. We
pay tribute to the men and women on the front line who
put themselves in harm's way fighting that scourge.

Mr. President, this being the last scheduled
meeting under the presidency of Australia, the Nigerian
delegation congratulates you and your delegation on
the able manner in which you have presided over the
affairs of the Council in the month of November. We
also take this opportunity to extend our best wishes
and full support to Chad as the delegation prepares to
assume the presidency of the Council for the month of
December.

