Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to Mr. Chambas for
his briefing and his good offices. We also support and
commend the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) for promoting peace and
stability in the region.

We note that the security situation throughout the
majority of West Africa and the Sahel has remained
relatively stable. This trend is reflected in the holding
of peaceful elections in the region, as well as political
dialogues and gradual progress in the implementation
of agreements. In this context, we wish to refer to three
fundamental issues.

First, regarding the security situation, we regret
that attacks on civilians and security forces by terrorist
groups, criminal networks and militias continue
to be recorded in Burkina Faso, Mali and the Lake
Chad basin. We acknowledge the efforts undertaken
by Governments and communities in their actions to
minimize violence; however, the security sector needs
to be reformed and strengthened in order to combat
this scourge. Deeper cross-border cooperation is
also required.

Only with regional commitment to enhancing the
capacity of the authorities to prevent and investigate
terrorist and Violent acts will it be possible to reduce
attacks, sever armed groups from their livelihoods and
reduce impunity. The security situation has not only
caused deaths, but has resulted in massive population
displacement, food insecurity and malnutrition and has
decimated education and health services.

The second point I wish to highlight is the grave
humanitarian situation in certain parts of the region. We
echo the appeal made by the humanitarian community,
which has requested $1.6 billion but so far has received
only 23 per cent of this figure.
Thirdly, turning to the environmental issue,
despite the initiatives carried out by UNOWAS, we
remain concerned about the effects of climate change
in the region, especially in the Lake Chad basin. This
could contribute to the more frequent occurrence of
natural disasters that reduce the means of subsistence
for the population. We encourage the international
community to pursue its efforts in the implementation
of strategies that enable risk assessment and contribute
to strengthening the resilience of the most affected
sectors. In that context, we must also establish channels
of information and collaboration with local communities
in order to expand early warning mechanisms to assist
with joint planning.

West Africa is facing great challenges and, in order
to overcome them we need a comprehensive regional
analysis ofthe root causes ofthe conflicts. Based on the
results of this analysis, we must implement sustainable
and inclusive strategies that are focused on providing
greater investment for the training of security forces.
A collective political commitment with a road map
and clear and realistic benchmarks is also essential.
To that end, we look forward to the conclusion of the
analysis and recommendations of the UNOWAS study
on pastoralism and security in West Africa and the
Sahel, as well as a road map that addresses the drivers
of conflicts between herders and farmers.

It is critical to strengthen United Nations strategies
for the entire region, to offer more opportunities for
young people and women and to provide livelihoods
through development and education. These are
indispensable factors in order to achieve lasting peace
and meet the Sustainable Development Goals in West
Africa and the Sahel.

