Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): On
29 July the Council called on the military leaders in
Bujumbura,

"to restore constitutional government and processes,
including the continuation of the elected National
Assembly and civil institutions and respect for human
rights." (S/PRST/1996/32, second paragraph)

Regrettably, there has been no progress towards these
objectives. The leaders of the 25 July military coup d 'e'tat
in Bujumbura have taken no apparent steps to restore
democracy, and the indiscriminate killings on both sides
have continued.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General points
alarmingly to the further worsening of the situation in
Burundi and to the failure of both the civilian and military
leaders either to resolve their differences or to heed clear
warnings given by the Secretary-General, the Security
Council and numerous world leaders.

The United States applauds the efforts of the States of
the region to bring pressure to bear on the coup leaders. We
will seek above all to support the objectives of Arusha in
calling on the new regime to undertake immediate and
unconditional negotiations with all parties inside and
outside the country, to return to constitutional order and
legality, to restore the National Assembly, and to unban all
political parties. We also strongly support the stated
intention of these States to cooperate fully with the United
Nations and work towards measures aimed at avoiding a
humanitarian catastrophe in Burundi.

 

The Arusha States have also imposed economic
sanctions on Burundi. We strongly support this step and
believe it indicates the determination of the regional
States to achieve the goals I mentioned earlier. We also
hope these sanctions will convince the coup leaders that
they have no alternative but to halt the fighting and
initiate a political dialogue. If this does not work, the
Security Council is willing to consider further action in
support of cessation of hostilities, or to compel cessation
of hostilities. Such action could include an arms embargo
or targeted sanctions against faction leaders, as the
situation warrants. All sanctions must be carefully
implemented to permit continued humanitarian relief so
that they do not injure the already suffering innocent
civilians in this crisis-torn country. And, of course, we
should stand ready to support any genuine opening to
peace and dialogue.

Further measures both at the United Nations and in
the region must be carefully calibrated to events in
Burundi. The fate of Burundi is today, more than ever, in
the hands of the Burundians. We are sending a very
strong message to both the present regime and insurgents
inside and outside Burundi that the international
community will not tolerate genocide and the threat this
poses to peace and security of the Great Lakes region as
a whole. All parties must commit themselves to a
cessation of hostilities and a dialogue aimed at
establishing a lasting cease-fire, an end to killing and a
comprehensive political settlement.

The Secretary-General's report correctly observes
that the conflict in Burundi is not susceptible to a military
solution. The factions in Burundi must overcome their
deep-seated distrust and fears in order to identify and
establish an effective political mechanism for themselves.

The United States commends with great appreciation
the efforts of the Secretary-General and his staff; the
work of the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Faguy; the Organization of African Unity and its
Secretary-General, Salim Salim; former President Nyerere
of Tanzania; the regional leaders from Kenya, Rwanda,
Tanzania, Uganda, and Zaire, who met in Arusha on 31
July; and other representatives of the international
community who have, worked tirelessly to avert a further
worsening of the situation in Burundi.

The Secretary-General's report notes that the
Secretariat has continued to facilitate contingency
planning for a rapid humanitarian response to a crisis in
Burundi. While we will continue to attach our highest
 

priority to promoting a peaceful solution based on political
dialogue, my Government welcomes finalization of the
Emergency Operations Plan for Burundi, which ensures that
United Nations agencies can function together to provide
the maximum level of emergency assistance in the event of
a serious escalation of the conflict. The United States has
worked closely with the United Nations Secretariat in its
two-track approach to military contingency planning and
continues to urge that other Governments support this
effort. The international community must always allow for
the possibility that the worst may happen in Burundi. The
international community must avoid a replay of the horrors
that befell Rwanda. The international community must do
all it can to be ready to act if the need arises.

The Security Council must therefore take further
action. To that end, we will be working with other
members of the Council this week to produce a resolution
that sends an unmistakable and frank message to leaders of
the Burundian factions: stop the killing now and initiate an
immediate dialogue. Without timely progress towards these
goals, it will be difficult to act to avoid a humanitarian
crisis. But with progress can come a return of international
support.

