Mr. Akram (Pakistan): On behalf of the
delegation of Pakistan, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the Chinese delegation on the
skilful manner in which you are guiding the work of
the Security Council this month. I also wish to
congratulate Ambassador Mayoral and his delegation
on the successful Argentine presidency in March.

This meeting was convened to consider the latest
acts in the tragedy of the Palestinian people. The
delegation of Pakistan endorses the concern expressed
in the statements delivered on behalf of the Chairman
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Non-Aligned Movement by the Permanent
Representatives of Yemen and Malaysia, respectively,
regarding the bombardment conducted against the
Palestinians in recent days and the measures that are
being taken by Israel that increase the suffering and
deprivation of the Palestinian population. Equally, I
would like to express our condemnation of the act of
terrorism today, which resulted in death or injury for
several Israeli civilians.

Events over the last three months have
transformed the hopes for peace in the Middle East into
foreboding and fear. Hopes for peace ran high in recent
years, with agreement that a final settlement to the
Palestinian-Israeli dispute should be based on the
principle of land for peace, the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the Madrid terms of reference and the Arab
Summit initiative of 2002. The process to achieve a
two-State solution was spelled out in the Quartet's road
map. Despite questions about the illegal separation
wall, West Bank settlement activity and the frequent
illegal execution of Palestinians by Israel, as well as
acts of terrorism against Israelis, hope for
implementation of the road map remained alive.
Palestinian groups had agreed to halt anti-Israeli
violence. Suicide attacks declined. Most important,
Israel withdrew completely, even if unilaterally, from
Gaza. The Palestinians then elected Abu Mazen as
President.

The positive trends and optimistic mood have all
but evaporated following the Palestinian parliamentary
elections, which were encouraged by the international
community and were free and fair. It is a supreme irony
that this democratic exercise - of a kind so widely
encouraged in the developing world, and especially in
the Middle East - has led to a situation where the
prospects for a peaceful settlement have dimmed

almost to darkness.

The challenges before the international
community are three.

The first is how to end the massive human
suffering of the Palestinian people and prevent chaos in
Gaza and the West Bank, when revenues and assistance
to the Palestinian Authority have been terminated and
targeted killings and artillery bombings continue.

The second is how to maintain peace between
Israel and the Palestinians and resume negotiations,
given the wide gulf that has now appeared between
their positions.

The third is how to prevent actions being taken
by Israel that could unilaterally create realities that
would make a negotiated settlement based on the
principle of land for peace far more difficult, and
perhaps impossible.

There are of course no ready answers to those
questions, for the moment. Yet, one fact should be
evident: the United Nations, including the Security
Council and the Secretary-General, must now play the
central role in responding to those challenges. The
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
has a direct responsibility in this conflict, flowing from
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Moreover, other interlocutors have, in one way or
another, themselves excluded their ability to intercede
with all the concerned parties. The United Nations is
the only player that can fill the role of mediator,
facilitator and peacemaker.

First, therefore, in order to meet the basic human
needs of the Palestinian people and to prevent the
breakdown of law and order in the Palestinian
territories, the United Nations and its agencies should
maintain and enlarge their assistance to the Palestinian
people, not terminate or restrict it. Although others
have ended assistance to the Palestinian Authority, the
United Nations and its agencies can work out
arrangements to channel such assistance as is available
multilaterally and bilaterally in ways that can
strengthen political cohesion and order rather than
heighten division and disorder. In particular, the
political authority of President Abbas and the
Palestinian Authority should be preserved and
strengthened. We hope that the Secretary-General and
concerned agencies will take urgent steps to identify
the human and humanitarian needs of the Palestinian
people and the urgent requirements of the Palestinian
Authority, and to mobilize a coordinated response from
the world community.

Secondly, arrangements need to be elaborated to
preserve peace between Israeli forces and Palestinian
security forces, as well as other armed groups and
militias. Here again, if other interlocutors are
unavailable, the United Nations can and must play a
central role in evolving arrangements for maintenance
of a durable ceasefire and non-violence, including
respect for the Fourth Geneva Convention. We trust
that the Secretary-General will authorize the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and his Personal Representative, Mr. Alvaro de
Soto, to help the parties in evolving such arrangements
for the maintenance of peace.

The Special Coordinator could also be helpful in
exploring the basis for the resumption of negotiations
between Israel and the Palestinians and in resurrecting
consensus on the elements and process for a final
settlement. The new Palestinian Government, led by
Hamas, has been well advised to respond to the ground
realities, especially the existence of Israel and existing
agreements, and to eschew resort to violence.
Obviously, recognition of realities is a mutual process.
Neither Israel nor the international community can
ignore the Palestinian reality either, including the
democratic choice of the Palestinian people. And if the
Hamas Government were to emerge - hopefully
soon- as a responsible player in a negotiating
process, there would surely be justification for
reconsidering its description by some States as a
terrorist organization.

Thirdly, Israel and its newly elected Government
will, we hope, be equally persuaded to desist from
plans for a unilateral solution. Unilateralism, as we
have witnessed elsewhere, is unlikely to promote a
stable or sustainable peace in the Holy Land.
Therefore, in the process of mutual confidence-
building, Israel should halt the further construction of
the separation barrier and Israeli settlement activity in
the West Bank. Those actions will jeopardize the
objective of creating a viable, democratic, sovereign
and contiguous Palestinian State living side by side
with Israel in peace and security. It would also
jeopardize the resolution of final status issues,
including, importantly, the status of East Jerusalem and
the holy places.

The Palestinian tragedy - including the
occupation of some of Islam's holiest sites in East
Jerusalem - is at the heart of the turmoil in the Middle
East. It is also the principal root cause of the
humiliation and anger in the Arab and Islamic world -
anger which breeds extremism and often spawns acts
of terrorism. A just solution for Palestine is not just a
regional imperative; it is a primary precondition for
global peace and security.

