Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2014/163) and Special Representative Jan Kubis for
his briefing today. I also thank Ambassador Tanin for
his remarks this morning.

This is the first opportunity for the Council to
express directly to Special Representative Kubis
and his team the sadness that we all felt at the tragic
loss of the lives of four United Nations colleagues on
17 January. That appalling attack was a stark reminder
of the dangers that international civilian staff face, and
we pay tribute to the efforts of Mr. Kubis and his team
in Afghanistan.

The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption
of today's resolution 2145 (2014), which renews the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). UNAMA plays a vital role
in peacebuilding in Afghanistan and will continue
to do so in 2014. I will focus my statement today on
four key areas: security, elections, the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework and the United Nations
future engagement in Afghanistan.

First, with regard to the security situation, we
should be proud of our achievements. The determination
and dedication of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and the Afghan National Security Forces
have allowed the Government of Afghanistan to build
the foundations of a stable and democratic country.
The Afghan National Security Forces have risen to
difficult challenges since taking full responsibility for
Afghan security in June 2013, and we are encouraged
by polling that shows growing confidence in their
work. We expect the first all-female cohort of officer
cadets to commence training in June. That is another
significant achievement. However, we know that the
support of NATO and the international community will
continue to be vital in ensuring long-term security in
Afghanistan. As a sign of our enduring commitment, the
United Kingdom will contribute moer than $100 million
a year until at least 2017 towards sustaining the Afghan
national security forces. The United Kingdom also
looks forward to hosting the NATO Summit later this
year, which will provide the international community
with an opportunity to reflect on ISAF's legacy and to
set out NATO's post-2014 engagement in Afghanistan.

Secondly, on elections and the political transition,

Afghanistan is entering the final phase of campaigning
and technical preparations for elections. The presidential
and provincial council elections are now less than four
weeks away. This is truly a groundbreaking moment
in Afghan politics, as Afghanistan moves into its
transformation decade. The most recent figures show
that over a third of those taking part in top-up voter
registration are women. That is good news and will
contribute to the inclusiveness of the elections. The
United Kingdom has pledged $11 million to build the
capacity of the women elected to provincial councils
to ensure that their voices are heard in the democratic
process. Transparency and inclusiveness are vital to
ensuring the credibility of the elections. In that regard,
we welcome the recent decision of the European Union
to send an election assessment team to Afghanistan.
The United Kingdom encourages the Government of
Afghanistan to give all election observers the access
they need to the electoral process so that, when the
time comes, they can provide informed reports on the
process.

Thirdly, I would like to address the issue of
the next steps on the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. The Framework, which was agreed in
2012, remains the blueprint for the international
community's development efforts in Afghanistan.
Progress in priority areas such as the role of women
is essential for long-term development and to sustain
donor funding. We encourage UNAMA to assist in
monitoring, coordinating and reporting on progress
over the coming months, as requested in the resolution
we have adopted today (resolution 2145 (2014)). The
United Kingdom looks forward to co-chairing, with the
Afghan Government, the development conference to be
held later this year, which will be an opportunity for the
international community to assess progress against the
Framework and set our ambitions for the future.

Finally, the United Kingdom firmly supports a
strong United Nations presence in Afghanistan. The
United Nations will have an essential role next year,
working with the Government of Afghanistan, to lock
in the gains made by the international community over
the past decade. We want the United Nations to have the
resources it needs to enable a country-wide presence and
carry out its responsibilities in line with the mandate
endorsed today. But we urge the United Nations and its
agencies to work more closely together, share resources
and work with NATO and other relevant organizations
to spot the opportunities and tackle the challenges of
the post-2014 environment.

One of the main challenges for Afghanistan, and
indeed the work of the United Nations, is human rights,
specifically the rights of women and girls. Women and
girls in Afghanistan continue to face huge challenges,
and the gains made are fragile. We encourage the
United Nations to continue working closely with the
Government of Afghanistan, international partners and
civil society to improve the status of women and girls.

Afghans are taking charge of their security and
their democracy. Afghanistan is changing fast, with a
growing economy, a young population and a revolution
in access to the outside world through social media.
Despite the many challenges, therefore, 2014 is a year
full of opportunity for Afghanistan. We pledge to
continue our support to the Government of Afghanistan
as it seeks to build a more peaceful, democratic and
prosperous future for all Afghans.

