Mr. White (Australia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate.
Australia also wishes to express its thanks to the
Secretary-General for his thorough report
(S/2011/634*) and presentation this morning. We also
look forward to participating actively in the high-level
meeting on the rule of law in September.

Australia supports the Council's increased role in
promoting the rule of law, which is essential to
building confidence in institutions of governance and
to underpinning economic and social development.
Support to justice and security institutions and to
ending impunity is central to the peacebuilding task of
the United Nations and to reducing the risk of relapse
into conflict.

Over the lifetime of the United Nations, our
collective understanding of the rule of law, including
criminal accountability for serious crimes, has
deepened. We have come to understand the challenges
and risks that rule of law deficits pose to international
peace and security. We now know that complex
situations in which a rule of law deficit exists require
multidimensional, well-coordinated and specifically
tailored responses. Those responses take time. They
require long-term commitment to establish the
foundations for peace and for legitimate governance.
The majority of peacekeeping missions now have
rule of law mandates. That in itself makes clear the
Council's acceptance of the importance of the rule of
law to the maintenance of peace and security. The
Council should continue to provide strategic direction
on the implementation of those mandates in order to
ensure that they are coordinated and properly
sequenced. Of course, issuing a mandate is not the end
of the story. Rule of law mandates must be maintained
and properly implemented to be effective.

As emphasized in the Secretary-General's report,
the successful implementation of rule of law activities
requires a coherent approach, particularly through
increased field coordination, stronger policy
development and strengthened support from various
parts of the United Nations system. The importance of
planning is reflected in the latest strategy for
peacekeepers from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support, which
seeks to provide guidance in relation to the
prioritization and sequencing of early peacebuilding
tasks, many of which are related to the establishment
of the rule oflaw.

The Council can make a vital contribution to the
strategic implementation of the rule of law on the
ground by ensuring that its mandates are adapted in
response to changing circumstances. Working closely
with other parts of the United Nations system,
including the Peacebuilding Commission, the Council
should ensure that rule of law mandates evolve over
time to reflect current and specific needs across the
justice sector, as well as to ensure that programmes
appropriately address the needs of societies as they try
to rebuild their institutions following conflict.

It is essential that the Council continue to play a
leadership role in encouraging a culture of
accountability. Accountability is a necessary guiding
principle for States trying to develop robust national
institutions that enjoy the confidence of the citizens
they are established to protect. Australia's experience
is that accountability and justice need to be led by
national institutions. It is both the sovereign right and
the responsibility of individual Member States to
develop the administrative, judicial and security
institutions necessary to underpin sustainable peace. It
is the role of the international community to enhance
the capacity of those national institutions, which are
not only key to accountability but are also critical for
deterrence, and therefore to breaking cycles of violence
and instability.

In our own region, Australia has worked in
partnership with the Pacific Islands Forum to support
the Solomon Islands Government's efforts to
strengthen its rule of law institutions. The focus of that
effort has been not only on the investigation and
prosecution of those responsible for crimes committed
during the 1998-2003 ethnic conflict, but on
strengthening the entire judicial system, including by
ensuring that accused persons have access to adequate
legal representation. The work of the United Nations in
supporting the investigation of serious crimes by the
Prosecutor General of Timor-Leste is another example
of a case where the international community enhanced
accountability at the national level through support for
national institutions. However, Australia also
recognizes that while the responsibility for promoting
accountability and the rule of law primarily lies with
national Governments, the Council should also
continue to encourage cooperation with established
international accountability mechanisms, such as the
International Criminal Court.

In conclusion, it is clear that weak justice and
security institutions place already vulnerable people in
post-conflict or fragile societies at greater risk. It is
necessary for all of us working within the United
Nations system to promote the development of robust
judicial and rule of law institutions that effectively
protect citizens in post-conflict societies. That
protection underpins the stability and security
necessary to allow societies to develop. It should
continue to be core work for the Council.

