The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting on a very
important subject. At the outset, I am very pleased to
welcome Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union (EU).

The fathers of the Charter of the United Nations
showed great foresight by envisaging a global and
collective security architecture that clearly defined
a place for regional agreements. Today in the area of
security, the United Nations is working closely and in
various ways with different regional structures. We
share the burden, provide support for and take the lead
in operations ifwe are asked to do so. The challenges are
too complex for one organization or one nation to meet
alone; hence the need for partnerships and innovation.

The strategic partnership between the European
Union and the United Nations is deeply rooted. Our
organizations share the same values and are both
committed to the collective and peaceful management
of security issues in order to prevent conflicts. In a
time of multiple crises, it is more necessary than ever to
strengthen this partnership for peace, human rights and
sustainable development. It is also more necessary than
ever that Europe overcome the frictions and internal
difficulties it faces if it is to remain effective in the
major missions it undertakes beyond its borders.

(spoke in English)

In recent years, the United Nations and the EU have
made significant strides in working together for peace
and security around the world, but we still encounter
difficulties in mobilizing early action before a situation
visibly deteriorates. Rapid and effective political
engagement remains the single most important element
for success in our preventive diplomacy efforts. The
EU, which has helped to prevent conflict within its
own borders, helps others to resolve their differences
peacefully. It is a key actor in many international
negotiations, such as the P-5+1 nuclear negotiations
with Iran, the Middle East peace process and the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. EU support for United
Nations diplomatic efforts in Libya has been invaluable.
I also appreciate the EU's support for mediation and
its funding for the United Nations stand-by team of
mediation experts.

The European Union is also one of our strongest and
most reliable regional peacekeeping partners, together
with the African Union (AU). The implementation of
the EU's 2012 plan of action to enhance support to
United Nations peacekeeping has played an important
role. We look forward to working with the EU on a
follow-on action plan for the next few years.

The Central African Republic, Mali and Somalia
are excellent examples of the comprehensive and
complementary nature of the United Nations/
EU partnership. In Mali, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali is working very closely with the EU Training
Mission and Capacity Building Mission for the Sahel
and Mali. We are also benefiting from the uniformed
contributions of 13 European Member States.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
has been working effectively with the EU-led
peacekeeping force, and we are on track for a seamless
handover by mid-March. This experience shows the
tremendous potential for EU operations to deploy as
bridging mechanisms to United Nations missions. In
Somalia, building on the positive experience of the
security strategy designed with AU and EU support in
2013, the Security Council has mandated another joint
planning exercise to take place in 2015. I look forward
to continuing our joint efforts to assist Somalia in
advancing along the path charted in Vision 2016.

The United Nations and the EU are not acting alone
in Africa. The African Union's partnership with both
organizations and its role in addressing conflict are key
components of the peace and security architecture on
the continent. Our three organizations are also playing
important roles in addressing the threat of Ebola in
West Africa.
The EU, with the capabilities of its Member States
as well as the standing capacity of the EU Battlegroup,
is also an indispensable partner ofthe United Nations on
rapid response. Given the magnitude of the challenges
we face, it is our responsibility to continue exploring
scenarios where we can put our combined efforts to
use. Both of our organizations are engaged in important
reviews this year. Our peace operations review is under
way, and the panel engaged in European consultations
last month. Member States are also evaluating the
Organization's peacebuilding architecture, and there is
a 10-year review of progress on resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security. The European Union,
in turn, will be undertaking a comprehensive security
and foreign policy review of its own.

Allow me take this opportunity to once again express
my condolences to the families of the victims of recent
terrorist attacks in Paris and Copenhagen. Terrorism
requires a global and holistic response that upholds
human rights and does not exacerbate the problem.
I value the United Nations-EU High-level Counter-
Terrorism Political Dialogue and our cooperation to
prevent violent extremism through capacity-building
initiatives in challenged regions and countries. I am
also grateful for the financial contributions that the
European External Action Service has made to key
United Nations counter-terrorism capacity-building
initiatives. Europe must look both outwards and
inwards in order to foster global peace and security.

The United Nations is strongly committed to
working with the European Union and all other players
in helping to discourage the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters, who pose dangers within and beyond
Europe. We must also collectively work towards a
peaceful, political resolution to the conflict in eastern
Ukraine, which threatens not only the country, but
the broader European region and even international
peace and security. While we all recognize that much
remains to be done, our joint work over the past years
has developed a solid foundation on which to build and
deliver results for the people we serve.

