Mr. Pleuger (Germany): We welcome the fact
that the Council has adopted resolution 1564 (2004). It
addresses a situation in Darfur that was dramatic when
the Council adopted resolution 1556 (2004) and is still
dramatic today.

Since the end of July, we have seen some
progress on the part of the Sudanese Government. It
has to be said, however, that this progress was limited
in scope and that, more important, there was no
verifiable progress in key areas of resolution 1556
(2004), such as the disarmament of the Janjaweed, the
prosecution of human rights violations and the overall
security situation for the population and the internally
displaced persons in Darfur.

In this resolution, we again call on the
Government of the Sudan to fulfil its responsibility
towards its own population and its commitments under
resolution 1556 (2004). We are convinced that we need
to apply - and to continue to apply - pressure to
achieve that goal, but we also want to pursue a
dialogue with the Sudan on the best way to honour
those commitments.
In that regard, we would like to commend the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Jan
Pronk, for their work, which has been an arduous
attempt to find the right balance between pressure and
dialogue.

We believe that the present resolution also strikes
that right balance. That is why Germany decided to co-
sponsor the resolution. We are convinced that we need
to maintain pressure that includes the threat of
sanctions without creating any automaticity. Going
back behind resolution 1556 (2004) in that respect
would have undermined the Council's credibility and
served the suffering people of Darfur very badly.

We also believe that there is a necessity to
establish a commission of inquiry to end the culture of
impunity in the Sudan and help restore some measure
of trust that justice will be done. We further believe
that this is not only important for now, but that doing
justice is also a prerequisite for the phase of rebuilding
the country and for reconciliation, as we have seen in
other crisis areas.

The main point of the resolution, however, is to
support the role of the African Union in solving the
Darfur crisis and to obtain the cooperation of the
Sudanese Government with an expanded African Union
mission. We sincerely appreciate the willingness of the
African Union to assume an even greater role in Darfur
and in offering its cooperation to the Sudan. The
Government of the Sudan should make use of this
opportunity very rapidly and demonstrate that it is
prepared to take up that offer. It has already taken one
step in that direction in its letters to the Council; now it
must follow up with action. Germany and the European
Union are presently considering further substantial
support for the African Union mission.

In the coming weeks, we will have to keep
developments in the Sudan under very close scrutiny.
At the end of the month, the Secretary-General will
again report to us. In deciding what further steps to
take then, we have to bear one thing in mind. Our goal
is to save lives, to hold parties to the conflict to their
obligations, and to achieve lasting peace in the Sudan.
We must be prepared to do whatever serves that goal
best.

