The Secretary-General: The situation in the
Middle East - between Israel and Palestine and across
the Blue Line - continues to deteriorate. All parties
risk making serious miscalculations about the effect
that their actions will have on one another. Such
miscalculations can all too easily draw the region into
greater and greater danger, whether intended or not.

My purpose in addressing the Security Council
today is to call on all members of the international
community to consider urgently how best to intercede
with the parties to persuade them to draw back from
their present course.

In the Palestinian-Israeli arena, Security Council
resolution 1402 (2002) provides the elements needed to
begin to de-escalate the present crisis, and resolution
1397 (2002) provides the framework for a permanent
settlement. We all need to intensify our efforts to see
that those resolutions are implemented without further
delay.

Israeli actions since the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1402 (2002) do not bode well for
stabilizing the situation and renewing political talks.
On the contrary, the Government of Israel appears to be
moving in the opposite direction to that prescribed by
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) - a sure path
to further escalation. Israel has justified its acts as self-
defence and counter-terrorist measures. However, we
need to be very clear that self-defence is not a blank
cheque. It is important to understand that responding to
terrorism does not in any way free Israel from its
obligations under international law; nor does it justify
creating a human rights and humanitarian crisis within
the occupied Palestinian territory. There is an urgent
need to comply with all provisions of international law,
particularly those that ban indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force as well as the humiliating
treatment of a civilian population.

Forcing Chairman Arafat into exile would be
reckless. He is the legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people and his exile would only lead to
even more violence and chaos. Deportation is
specifically prohibited by the Fourth Geneva
Convention. It would be a miscalculation of
monumental proportions to believe that removing
Chairman Arafat from the political scene and
dismantling the Palestinian Authority would create
conditions where Israel can achieve security for itself.

I understand the bitterness, anger and disillusion
felt by Israelis. But, the military route taken by the
Government of Israel will not pacify the Palestinians.
Nor do I see how this approach can bring peace and
security to Israel. Only a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement can do so. If we have
learned anything from history, it is that it is a grave
mistake for the more powerful party to believe that
power alone will ultimately subdue the weaker party. In
fact, what we are witnessing is an increase in the
resolve and unity of the Palestinians, as well as
increasing public anger across the Arab and Islamic
world and beyond.

I am not arguing that the spiralling violence is to
be blamed on one party alone. The Palestinian
Authority seems to believe that failing to act against
terrorism and inducing turmoil, chaos and instability
will cause the Government and people of Israel to
buckle. They will not. As we are seeing, this approach
is only spurring on the Israeli Government in its
present course; it also unites the Israeli public behind
the military option. We should not forget that it was not
so long ago that this same Israeli public was supportive
of peace efforts by a large majority.

Under direct assault from the Israeli military,
Chairman Arafat and the Palestinian security services
are seriously limited in their ability to contain
terrorism. However, even now, Chairman Arafat has
the capacity to exercise political leadership - to set
the course for the future of his people. Terrorism is
never justified. The Palestinian leadership must
acknowledge this and the Palestinian public must
accept this.

I would like to take this opportunity to call on the
Government of Israel to give the "quartet" full access
to the compound of Chairman Arafat and to the
Chairman himself. Together with General Zinni's
mission, the "quartet" arrangement could be used as an
effective instrument to pursue implementation of 1402
(2002).
There have been persistent reports about
limitations placed on access by humanitarian and
medical workers to those Palestinians in urgent need of
assistance. It is imperative that humanitarian workers
and agencies such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross, the Red Crescent Society and the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East be granted full access to
persons in those affected areas.

There is plenty of reason for pessimism. But there
is at least one recent positive development. The
promise represented by the Arab League's Beirut
Summit marked a significant turning point. We need to
ensure that the Saudi initiative, endorsed by the Arab
League, does not founder. Let us hold onto and nourish
that vision amid the encircling gloom and the worrying
rise in regional tension.

Here, I would like to express very serious
concern over events along the Blue Line. I recalled in
the Council recently that Israel's withdrawal from
Lebanon was in compliance with resolutions 425
(1978) and 426 (1978), and was recognized as such by
the Council itself. We must make sure that all sides
respect the Blue Line. Escalation along the Blue Line
could have serious consequences for peace and security
in the region - beyond Israel and Lebanon - as we
know from the past. There seem to be efforts coming
from Lebanese territory to deliberately create
instability along the Blue Line.

In addition to recent attacks by Hizbullah across
the Blue Line, this morning Hizbullah elements
assaulted a patrol of military observers from the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).

It needs to be made clear to Hizbullah and others
who may be involved that attacks across the Blue
Line - whether into northern Israel or into occupied
Syrian territory - are violations of Security Council
resolutions, and are not acceptable. I strongly urge
those with influence to ensure adherence to the Council
resolutions on this subject. The Government of
Lebanon will be aware that it is responsible for any
hostile actions undertaken from its territory.

In this connection, I have been in contact over the
last 24 hours with leaders in the region. Also, my
Personal Representative in Lebanon, Mr. De Mistura,
and the Force Commander of UNIFIL, yesterday met
with Council members who have representatives in
Beirut, as well as with the Lebanese leadership, about
the situation.
Let me conclude by saying that the building
blocks of peace, once broken down, are not easily
rebuilt. Recent events have had a further, severely
corrosive, effect on mutual confidence. On both sides,
bitterness and despair are at an all-time high. We all
need to cling to the conviction that, in the end, however
long it takes, there will one day have to be a peaceful
settlement of this conflict.

Third-party mediation is needed more than ever,
as the parties are unable on their own to find a way out
of the present situation. In this connection, I strongly
welcome President Bush's decision to send Secretary
Powell to the region.

The road back to the negotiating table will not be
easy or smooth. But all sides can take the first steps by
exercising maximum restraint so as to reverse the
current dangerous deterioration of the situation.

Resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002), taken
together, provide the vision for a permanent settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the immediate
security and political steps needed to move beyond the

present crisis. Our efforts need to focus on
implementing those resolutions.

