Mr. Bataineh (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and to the other members of the Council for urgently
convening this meeting, the second held today to deal with
questions relating to the Middle East. We express that
appreciation in the context of the worsening situation in
relations between Israel and our sister country Lebanon.
This sudden deterioration has resulted from the continued
and intensified acts of Israeli aggression and violence.
Israeli aerial and artillery bombardment has resulted in the
loss of civilian lives, the destruction of property and the
displacement of hundreds of thousands of people from their
towns and villages. As we learned from the representative
of Lebanon, the number of displaced persons has reached
almost 800,000. Those actions constitute a violation of
Lebanon's sovereignty and national dignity. They are
creating an indescribable human tragedy which cannot be
allowed to pass.

Regrettably, this military escalation is taking place at
a time when Lebanon, which has been subjected to various
kinds of violence over the past two decades, had started to
experience a degree of calm and to rebuild what had been
destroyed by war and violence. It had begun to rebuild its
institutions and civilian facilities, and stability and security
were beginning to return.

Jordan is greatly concerned at this escalation, which is
taking place at a time when all the peoples and States of
the region are looking forward to the initiation of a new
stage of coexistence, security, peace, cooperation and
understanding, when problems will no longer be dealt with
through force and violence. The resort to violence runs
counter to the principles of the Charter and resolutions of
the United Nations. It runs counter to the most elementary
rules of civilized international political conduct. It runs
counter to the basis of the peace process laid down in the
Madrid Conference.

We oppose and condemn all use of military force and
violence in dealing with any political dispute, especially
when such force is used against innocent civilians and
civilian installations. It is evident that the use of force
results in economic destruction and the continued
exacerbation of social tragedy. Such an approach will
have a negative impact on the entire peace process and on
the peace and stability of the region.

The Security Council must have decided to meet
urgently because it realized how grave the situation had
become. We believe that words such as "deplores" and
"condemns" will not suffice. The situation is much graver
than that. The tragic situation has resulted from the
continuing Israeli military actions against Lebanon. The
Council must use the means available to it under the
Charter to deal with the crisis, bring the hostilities to an
end, and stop the situation from deteriorating. The loss of
life and the destruction of property must be stopped,
wherever they take place.

It is incumbent on the Council to make the necessary
guarantees to stop the cycle of action and reaction, and to
resolve the situation definitively. My delegation adds its
voice forcefully to all the appeals heard during the debate
calling for precisely that. We believe that this is the
optimum way, the right path. It is necessary to go back to
the negotiating table and continue peace talks on the basis
of decisions made at Madrid and of resolutions of the
Council, especially resolution 425 (1978), which calls for
a full Israeli withdrawal from southern Lebanon. The
implementation of that resolution would establish the
necessary security atmosphere along the Lebanese-Israeli
border. Ending the occupation and negotiating peace is
the only way to limit and stop the violence. Using
violence to react to violence, prompting further violence
and widening the circle of tragedy, will lead to nothing
but desperation and bitterness. It will return the whole
region to an atmosphere of conflict, the consequences of
which are unpredictable, and from which we thought we
had emerged for good.

Jordan shares the suffering of the Government and
people of our sister country Lebanon, and affirms that we
stand by their side. We call upon the Council to make
every effort and use all available means to resolve the
situation and help Lebanon shoulder its responsibility to
deal with the consequences of successive tragedies and in
rebuilding its country and institutions. We call upon the
Council to support and protect the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and dignity of Lebanon. The progress towards
peace in our region, which we have all worked and
strived for, and which we consider to constitute the
guarantee of stability and growth, will not be achieved

 

except through dialogue and a bold, correct analysis of all
the manifestations of violence and tension. We must move
away from emotions, reprisals, collective punishment and
the unbridled use of force. History has taught us that these
methods are sterile and only deepen the wounds and widen
the gap between the peoples of the region. They will lead
only to the opposite result.

