Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation extends hearty congratulations to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. I also wish to use this
opportunity to express my delegation's appreciation to
Ambassador Nabil Elaraby for his excellent stewardship
of the Council in the month of June.

It is an honour and privilege for me personally to be
granted this opportunity to address the Security Council
for the first time. The honour to my country is doubly
significant when the issue under consideration is an
African issue, specifically, the fraternal country of
Angola. Allow me to join others in addressing the
Security Council as it considers yet again in a matter of
two months, a report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III).

We need not belabour the point that Angola, a
country so devastated by war and internecine conflict,

 

now deserves peace, peace-building, conflict resolution and
national reconciliation. It is on the basis of that conviction,
backed by the Bicesse Accords, the Lusaka Protocol and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, that the
international community remains and must continue to
remain seized of the Angolan situation until peace arrives
in this otherwise abundantly endowed African country.

Progress on the ground must primarily be predicated
on the imperative that the Angolans themselves must first
and foremost commit themselves fully to efforts aimed at
restoring peace and stability in their country. The role of
the international community must not be more than to
complement the demonstrable political will of all the parties
to the conflict, in particular the Government of the Republic
of Angola and UNITA, to bury the old hatchet and give
peace a chance at last.

Indeed, the very signing of the lengthily and arduously
negotiated Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994
symbolized the resolve of both the main parties to settle the
Angola question by peaceful means. Furthermore, it is at
the request of Angolans that the international community,
through UNAVEM. III, maintains an important presence in
that country to help facilitate the implementation of the
peace process.

Despite the many hurdles surrounding the painfully
slow peace process, it is an undeniable fact that the
presence of UNAVEM. III in Angola has contributed
enormously towards the return of relative calm in that
country. It is also through UNAVEM. III that the concerns
of the international community continue to be articulated,
daily goading the Government and UNITA to expedite the
peace process by fully honouring their undertakings to
implement all provisions of the Lusaka Protocol. The
current report of the Secretary-General points to some
positive achievements made on the ground. The cease-fire
is generally holding. These achievements should provide
more room for energizing and consolidating the peace
efforts of the Angolan people backed by UNAVEM. III.

It is most encouraging to read in the report that,
during the period under review, the pace of implementation
of the Lusaka Protocol has been improving. A few of the
high points are the Government's promulgation of the
Amnesty Law on 8 May, completion of the quartering of
the rapid reaction police, and the second phase of the
withdrawal of the Angolan Armed Forces from forward
positions. Some progress has also been made on the part of
UNITA in the quartering of its troops, and a start has been
made to the incorporation of UNITA military personnel
into the national army.

Apart from the Government's responsibility to fully
deliver on its obligations with regard to the peace process,
UNITA too clearly owes it to itself to do a lot to better
the pace of its current performance. It must cooperate
more with the Government and UNAVEM. III in
expediting the process of incorporating its troops into the
national army by the agreed deadline of the end of July,
and in facilitating the return of its generals to Luanda. At
the same time, UNITA must complete the quartering of
its remaining troops in a transparent manner. Last but not
least, UNITA must hand in heavy weapons and related
materiel to complete the quartering process.

Delayed action on whatever pretext or hidden agenda
will not be tolerated by the international community at
this critical stage in the Angolan peace process, especially
when the Secretary-General is working to recommend
additional resources to assist the incorporation process
and help Angola to recover from decades of war.

In commending these positive developments, the
Secretary-General points to the many as yet unfulfilled
tasks that should have been completed well before
yesterday. The process, which ought to have progressed
from a cease-fire through the demobilization of
ex-combatants and the formation of a new army, to
national reconciliation, still remains far behind schedule.

Time is running out. The agony and suffering of the
Angolan people continue. My delegation would like to
make a strong appeal to UNITA to give peace a chance.
A national effort is urgently required to address the
serious problems of reconciliation, mine clearance and
economic development.
The Secretary-General has warned that for the peace
process to succeed in Angola all the parties, and UNITA
in particular, must demonstrate greater readiness to
implement, without delay or prevarication, all the
commitments they have entered into. It is on this basis
that the international community will continue to support
the efforts of the Angolan people to restore peace and
stability to their country.

In conclusion, allow me to associate the Government
of Tanzania with the appreciation expressed to the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, to the
personnel of UNAVEM. III and to the various agencies
and non-governmental organizations which are doing

 

invaluable work in Angola in many fields under very
difficult conditions. Tanzania hopes that the international
community will remain steadfast in support of peace in
Angola without showing the least signs of indifference or
insufficient concern for Africa's longest civil war, which is
steeped in internal conflicts and sometimes fuelled by
continuing external interests.

In making these comments, Tanzania associates itself
with the draft resolution before the Security Council at this
meeting.

