Mr. Galaydh (Somalia): I want to seize this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
am confident that, under your wise leadership, the
Council will continue to be engaged in promoting the
principles of the United Nations Charter.

I am delighted to register the profound
appreciation of the people and the Government of
Somalia at the honour that has been bestowed upon the
Secretary-General and the United Nations. Indeed, the
award of the Nobel Peace Prize to the Secretary-
General is a recognition of his tireless efforts in the
search for durable peace in the world.

The events of 11 September alerted peoples and
Governments all over the world to the danger posed by
international terrorism. The Somali Government has
unequivocally expressed its outrage and disgust at the
heinous acts of terrorism perpetrated against the
Government and the people of the United States. It has
expressed its condolences and prayers to the President
of the United States and to the families of the bereaved.
The Somali Government firmly believes that the
international community must be united and strong in
the face of this menace. We reiterate our commitment
and determination to cooperate with the United
Nations, and on a bilateral basis, in the fight against
international terrorism.

That commitment and determination to combat
terrorism are reflected in recent decisions taken by my
Government. First of all, we fully support Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001). That resolution sets
out the legal framework of the fight against terrorism
and the obligations of Member States in that fight.

Secondly, the Somali Government has recently
established an anti-terrorism task force, which will put
together a national security and anti-terrorist action
plan. The task force will gather intelligence and
information, monitor the activities of potential suspects
and share information with the United Nations.
Thirdly, the Somali Government has engaged
ulma - religious leaders - from all sects and schools
in the country with a View to enlisting their support in
the fight against terrorism.

Fourthly, the Somali Government has also
engaged the owners of the money-transfer agencies
known as hawala, who have assured us of their
commitment to transparency. Hawala owners have
pledged to open their records to the United Nations and
other interested parties and to share any insightful
information with the Somali Government and others.

Finally, a joint committee of cabinet members
and members of the Somali Parliament has recently
been formed to review the penal code and other laws as
part of the country's national obligations under
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).

For the Government's programmes against
terrorism to be effective, it is incumbent upon the
international community to provide us with all the
assistance needed. That assistance can be in the form of
training and the provision of logistics for our security
services. Failure to do just that might lead to the
creation of a vacuum that could contribute to breeding
terrorism.

For our part, and for the purpose of enhancing
security, we have been able to put in camps over
25,000 militia members to be trained and reintegrated
into society. Moreover, 8,000 policemen drawn from
those 25,000 individuals have been deployed in and
around Mogadishu. I am happy to report that in the
capital city there are neither green lines nor
checkpoints run by the warlords.

The Somali national army is being re-established
to reinforce security and to strengthen peace and
stability within the country. Members of the national
army will also be instrumental in bringing about the
needed security within the framework of the
Government's plans related to decentralization and to
the devolution of power to the regions. In that context,
my Government has, for the first time in 11 years,
started collecting taxes in the capital, Mogadishu; this
has been supported enthusiastically by the public.

The progress made by our Government in the
continued pursuit of peace and stability in the country
was commended at the seventy-fourth ordinary session
of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), which was convened at Lusaka
in July 2001. In its decision on Somalia, the Council of
Ministers
"Expresses satisfaction at the progress made
by the Transitional National Government in the
establishment of peace and security in the country
and requests the OAU and the international
community to continue to assist the Government
in this regard." (CM/Dec.594 (LXXI V), para. 7)

On the question of national reconciliation, the
principles upon which that process is built include the
following. First, the outcome of the Arta peace process
will continue to be the basis for the pursuit of Somali
national reconciliation. Secondly, that process will
continue to be a Somali process, and the Somali
Government will welcome and embrace every positive
effort exerted by neighbouring countries and the world
community that can facilitate the process. Thirdly, the
engagement of those who are outside the Arta peace
process through sustained dialogue and negotiations is
a crucial component of the national reconciliation
endeavour.

In the light of those principles, the Somali
Government has succeeded in bringing on board two
out of the five factions based in Mogadishu which had
not supported the Arta conference. Intensive
negotiations are going on with the remaining factions
and with the northern administrative entities
"Somaliland" and "Puntland".

My Government has recently established the
National Reconciliation Commission stipulated by the
interim charter. The Commission will be operating
independently of the Government and it will be
composed of 25 eminent Somali political and other
prominent public figures. Its mandate will focus on
reconciling all the parties in Somalia, with a View to
attaining lasting peace and stability for all Somalis. It
is envisaged that the Commission will facilitate the
process of the establishment of a federal Government
which will reflect the desires of Somali society as a
whole.

My Government's policies with regard to the
National Reconciliation Commission are consistent
with resolutions adopted by the United Nations, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the OAU, the
League of Arab States and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. The decisions on Somalia
that emanated from the seventh-third and seventy-
fourth ordinary sessions of the Council of Ministers of
the OAU called upon member States and the
international community to assist the Government in its
endeavours pertaining to national reconciliation.

In paragraph 3 of the decision on Somalia
adopted at the seventy-fourth ordinary session of the
Council of Ministers of the OAU, the Council of
Ministers

"Reiterates its earlier call to the Transitional
National Government (TNG) to intensify its
efforts so as to bring about lasting national
reconciliation, building upon the outcome of the
Arta peace process, and supports the efforts
aimed at the establishment of the National
Reconciliation Commission". (Ibid., para. 3)

Lack of funds and resources has precluded the
beginning of the work of the Commission and
continues to constitute a major stumbling block. Given
the importance of this independent Commission and
the role it can play in bringing about lasting peace and
stability in Somalia, the international community is
called upon to shoulder its responsibility and provide
the resources needed to enable the Commission to carry
out its work.

In paragraph 9 of the decision on Somalia
adopted at the seventy-fourth ordinary session of the
Council of Ministers of the OAU, the Council of
Ministers

"Requests the Secretary-General [of the
OAU] to work closely with IGAD, the League of
Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the wider international
community to continue to support the Transitional
National Government in its efforts to sustain
reconciliation and reconstruction in Somalia."
(Ibid., para. 9)

It is with deep regret that I must report that the
warlords continue to be a major impediment to the
national reconciliation process. They orchestrated and
have been held responsible for the kidnapping of
humanitarian aid workers. That kidnapping perpetrated
by the warlords has been condemned by the United
Nations and by the European Union, and has
unfortunately caused a setback in the peace process.
Moreover, paragraph 8 of the decision on Somalia
adopted at the seventy-fourth ordinary session of the
Council of Ministers of the OAU strongly condemned
the warlords who persist in their stubbornness in
blocking the peace efforts in Somalia.

The Somali Government welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia
(S/200l/963). We thank the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat for the support they have extended to the
National Transitional Government of Somalia. We have
a historical link with the United Nations dating back to
the time when part of Somalia was placed under United
Nations Trusteeship. We also want to acknowledge the
role of the Secretary-General and his continuous
interest in my country. We believe that the Secretary-
General and the Secretariat are genuinely interested in
promoting peace and national reconciliation in
Somalia. We wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on the situation in Somalia.
However, I would like to highlight some points with
respect to this report.

We note with regret that the report does not
recommend the establishment of a peace-building
mission in Somalia. This decision is based on the result
of the security assessment carried out by some middle-
level field officers stationed in Nairobi.

We believe the failure to establish a peace-
building mission in Somalia will send the wrong signal
to the international community, particularly the
regional and subregional organizations, donors and the
warlords. This will further contribute to the vicious
circle of inadequate security and the perpetuation of the
benign neglect to which Somalia has been subjected
over a decade.

In our view, the establishment of a peace-building
mission in Somalia is imperative and critical at this
moment. We propose the dispatch of a high-level inter-
agency United Nations mission to Somalia, with a
mandate to critically examine the work of the security
office in Nairobi and to re-evaluate, in an objective
manner, the security situation in Mogadishu and the
whole of Somalia.

In his report, the Secretary-General expressed his
intention to consult all concerned on the feasibility and
usefulness of setting up a Committee of Friends of
Somalia to focus on ways and means of drawing
attention to Somalia's needs in the area of national
reconciliation, as well as to help mobilize funds for
rehabilitation and development. The Government
welcomes the idea of the establishment of this
Committee. It must, however, be fully engaged in the
consultations necessary for designing the framework
within which the Committee would function. Members
of the Committee must be supportive of peace and
stability in Somalia and be willing to play a
constructive role and have a genuine interest in
building upon Arta and its outcome. Furthermore,
during the process of the formation of the Committee,
we must take into account the lessons of experience
learned with respect to the mechanism of the
Committee of Friends, especially in countries like
Angola.
We must also address the issue of reconstruction,
rehabilitation and development concurrently. My
Government inherited a country that was in a shambles,
as is very well portrayed in the Secretary-General's
report, without financial resources and infrastructure.
For the past year, my Government has been operating
on a budget of only $14 million, despite the daunting
challenges. We believe that it is unconscionable for the
international community to wait and watch while we
struggle with such meagre resources.

Briefly put, Somalia has now moved from the
struggle for survival to the struggle for peace. We need
the United Nations and its partner aid agencies to
reflect this change by planning new initiatives. An
operational plan to support good governance and
peace-building in Somalia is urgently needed. Peace
and security are the key to the agenda of the
Transitional National Government (TNG) agenda, and
there can be no development without peace and
security.

This underpins a process by which the people of
Somalia would begin the work of putting the country
back together. The United Nations and the international
community's role are therefore vital for this endeavour.

I thank the Council very much for affording me
this opportunity to brief members on the recent
developments in Somalia and to share the ideas of my
Government for bringing lasting peace, stability and
development to our troubled country.

