Mr. Hume (United States): I too would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
detailed briefing on the progress of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in implementing resolution 1244 (1999). We commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Hans Haekkerup, for addressing some of the more
complicated issues in the process of establishing
provisional interim self-government in Kosovo.

At this time the upcoming elections are the top
priority, one that has the full support of my
Government. We support UNMIK's efforts to
streamline Kosovo's administrative bureaucracy as it
transfers authority to a democratically elected
government, as outlined in a legal, constitutional
framework.

Political changes over the last year have opened
the door to UNMIK to strengthen its relations with the
Serb community and to reassure Kosovo Serbs about
their rightful place in a democratic Kosovo. Kosovo
Serbs have begun to register for November's elections.

I would like to second the comments of the
Under-Secretary-General in stressing the importance of
progress on Serb returns and continued minority
interest in Kosovo, as well as their full participation in
the elections. The Yugoslav Government has helped
encourage this process by expressing in the clearest
terms its own support for resolution 1244 (1999).
UNMIK should continue its constructive dialogue with
Belgrade. We welcome the appointment of Deputy
Prime Minister Covic as the new chairman of the
coordination centre for Kosovo, and we fully support
Special Representative Haekkerup's efforts to build a
constructive relationship with Belgrade.

Council members were encouraged by their
discussions in Belgrade during their visit there in June.
I would like to reiterate my own Government's
encouragement to UNMIK to address fully the five
priority areas of the Yugoslav Government with regard
to Kosovo, which President Kostunica outlined during
the June visit. I am also pleased by the progress that
has been registered today, as already explained to us.

During the June visit the Council also discussed
with Foreign Minister Svilanovic resolution 1160
(1998), and I would like to note my Government's full
support for the lifting of the arms embargo at this time.

Public security and the rule of law continue to be
at the top of UNMIK's priorities. New regulations on
border control, on extremism and on the illegal
possession of weapons give UNMIK and KFOR
valuable tools for combating violence and preventing
its spread beyond Kosovo's borders. We understand
that UNMIK has made progress on another series of
regulations against organized crime, and we hope they
will shortly become law. UNMIK must also continue
its efforts to strengthen the judiciary and increase the
number of international judges and prosecutors. We
applaud the recent appointment of Jean-Christian Cady
as the head of the new law and justice pillar, and we
look forward to the appointment of a highly qualified
individual to head UNMIK's department of judicial
affairs. We also applaud KFOR for making full use of
these authorities by seizing weapons shipments and
detaining individuals who present a threat to peace and
order in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
as well as in Kosovo. The border interdiction mission
should be one of KFOR's and UNMIK's highest
priorities. In that regard, NATO's operation "Essential
Harvest" will complement KFOR's operations in
Kosovo and will address the same problem from the
other side of the border.

My Government has worked on numerous fronts
to reduce violence in Kosovo. President Bush has
issued executive orders to stop individuals in the
United States from supporting any violent groups in
Kosovo, and to deny entry into the United States of
suspected extremists. We have supported more rigorous
controls on the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) and
provided assistance to improve the KPC's internal
controls. We have encouraged Kosovo's leaders to
speak out against violence and to support the
Framework Agreement recently signed in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. The United States
Government will continue to support UNMIK and
KFOR in their efforts to fully implement resolution
1244 (1999) and to ensure that democracy and the rule
of law are the foundation for Kosovo's future.

