Mr. Ngung (spoke in French): I wish at the outset
to thank you once again, Madam President, for your
gracious invitation to the African Union to participate
in this workshop devoted to the Mano River subregion.
As you have requested, our statement will focus mainly
on the experience of Sierra Leone, which, in our
opinion, is an encouraging example in the framework
of efforts that must be deployed to help the countries of
the region.

For more than a decade the West African region,
particularly the Mano River subregion, has been the
theatre of bloody conflict with war in Liberia and
Sierra Leone. The situation of war in Liberia and Sierra
Leone over the past dozen years has always been cause
for serious concern for the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), which sent its special envoy to the
region to consult with the authorities of the countries of
the subregion.

Speaking at the sixty-sixth regular session of the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity, held earlier this month at Durban, South Africa,
the OAU Secretary-General - today Acting President
of the African Union Commission - said with regard
to the situation in Sierra Leone:

"1 am pleased to report that, since the last Council

session held at Addis Ababa last March, there

have been new developments in efforts to
promote lasting peace in Sierra Leone."

Indeed, completing the disarmament of ex-
combatants in Sierra Leone has facilitated deployment
of elements of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL). That contributed greatly to
improving the overall security situation, particularly
along the borders between Sierra Leone and Guinea.
As we know, on 28 March 2002, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1400 (2002), extending the mandate
of UNAMSIL for a further six-month period.

Arrangements were made during that period for
the holding of the first presidential and legislative
elections in Sierra Leone since the end of the civil war,
which lasted some 12 years. The OAU has worked
closely with international organizations, particularly
the Economic Community of West African States,
sending observers to monitor the elections and to
ensure that they were free and fair. The presidential and
legislative elections took place on 14 May 2002, and
the various observer groups said afterwards that they
had been held in a calm atmosphere and virtually
without incident. The outgoing President, Ahmad Tejan
Kabbah, was re-elected with a large majority of 70.6
per cent of the vote, for a new five-year term.

It should be pointed out here that, following
practices in other countries where there have been
cases of acts of impunity and flagrant violations of
human rights, a Special Court, proposed by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, and a Truth
and Reconciliation Commission were set up in Sierra
Leone. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission will
begin its public hearings on 1 September 2002.

In the meantime, the Secretary-General of the
United Nations has appointed the Prosecutor for the
Special Court and will be appointing its judges. The
Special Court will be trying persons responsible for
war crimes committed in Sierra Leone since 30
November 1996.

The humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone is
tragic. The country is emerging from a protracted war
and is facing many challenges, including rebuilding
infrastructure destroyed by the war. The other major
challenge facing Sierra Leone is rehabilitation and
reintegration of a large number of ex-combatants into
society.

It is true that the international community has
provided Sierra Leone financial assistance for the
demobilization process. It is also true that the situation
of refugees, displaced persons and repatriated persons
remains critical in that country. The African Union
appeals to the international community to provide more
consistent support for the reintegration of ex-
combatants into society and greater assistance for the
rehabilitation of repatriated persons. The international
community should also provide assistance to Sierra
Leone in training the army and police, which will be
ensuring security in the country in the future. It goes
without saying that stability in Sierra Leone will
depend on the situation in neighbouring countries,
including Liberia, which is still a victim of war.

The African Union, for its part, welcomes the
experience of Sierra Leone, which has followed
democratic processes. The African Union will continue
to cooperate with the Government of Sierra Leone,
ECOWAS, the United Nations, the European Union
and other organizations and entities to promote peace
and security in Sierra Leone and hence throughout the
subregion of West Africa.

