Mr. Wardono (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to congratulate the delegation of pakistan on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May and on having convened this
important meeting. It is our sincere hope that, through
your leadership and esteemed guidance, Mr. President,
the Council will carry out its tasks successfully and
make a concrete contribution to the critical issues on its
agenda.

We also wish to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, as well as to Sir Brian Urquhart, Ambassador
Jamsheed Marker and Mr. Nabil Elaraby for the
insightful and enriching observations they made this
morning on the topic under consideration today.

The delegation of Indonesia considers it an
honour to participate in this debate on the role of the
Security Council in the pacific settlement of disputes.
This discussion comes at a time when the credibility of
the Council and its responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security continue to generate
intense debate within the international community.
Thus, the Council's role in the pacific settlement of
disputes forms part of a broader and deeper
intellectual, diplomatic and political exercise of
practical concern to the peoples of the world.

As is well known, the Security Council often
relies on various chapters of the Charter in order to
fulfil its responsibilities for international peace and
security. In the settlement of disputes, it relies on the
powers accorded it in Chapters VI and VII of the
Charter. These confer authority on the United Nations
to conduct preventive and enforcement measures for
the purpose of maintaining international peace and
security.

Under Chapter VI of the Charter, the Council
enjoys both investigative and recommendatory powers.
It is empowered to investigate disputes with a view to
ascertaining whether or not their continuance is likely
to endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security, and to make recommendations for the
appropriate terms of a settlement. It is also empowered
to call upon the parties involved to settle their disputes

by peaceful means and to encourage the development
of the pacific settlement of disputes through regional
arrangements or by regional agencies.

If we were to consider the broad sweep of history,
it would be safe to say that, despite all the flashpoints
of conflict that we have experienced at the international
level since the end of the Second World War, we would
see that the world is, indeed, a safer, more secure place
today. The world is further away from war than it was
when the Charter was authored by the founding fathers
of the United Nations in San Francisco in 1945. The
Security Council can take some consolation from that
favourable development.

In my delegation's view, such relative peace and
security has a good deal to do with the work of the
United Nations and with the approach taken by
Member States to the determination to save the world
from the scourge of war, so eloquently expressed in the
Charter. In that connection, the work of the Security
Council has been critical, and its work has been given a
political foothold and legal authority through the
provisions of Chapter VI.

It is now widely acknowledged internationally
and politically that development is the flip side of the
coin of peace. In the View of my delegation, in every
situation - non-conflict, conflict or post-conflict -
the currency with the greatest impact is the currency of
development. Unless there is development, there can be
no justice - and injustice, in turn, is always certain to
unravel what amounts only to false peace.

It is also important for the Security Council to
fulfil its Charter obligations by being conscious of
these imperatives and by being guided by them.
Investigations and interventions by the Council can
influence law and governance beyond the immediate
arena of the United Nations. Thus, it cannot afford to
treat them with a sense of levity. Resolutions and
statements by the Council must be indexed according
to the spirit and letter of the Charter, and must offer the
highest assurances of justice to the parties to a dispute.
In this regard, the evolution of international legal
arrangements has continued. In 1982, for instance, the
General Assembly, in helping to enhance the
effectiveness of the role of the Security Council in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, adopted the Manila
Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International
Disputes. In it, the General Assembly called upon
Member States to

"strengthen the primary role of the Security
Council so that it may fully and effectively
discharge its responsibilities, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, in the area of
the settlement of disputes or of any situation the
continuance of which is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security."
(General Assembly resolution 37/10, annex)

The principles of the Manila Declaration were
further elaborated in 1988, in the Declaration on the
Prevention and Removal of Disputes and Situations
Which May Threaten International Peace and Security
and on the Role of the United Nations in this Field; and
in the 1991 Declaration on Fact-finding by the United
Nations in the Field of the Maintenance of
International Peace and Security. In this regard, an
important area of concern and emphasis in these
developments has been the balance between the right of
States to settle their disputes on the basis of the
principle of free choice of the means towards that end,
and the Security Council's responsibility concerning
pacific settlement.

Unfortunately, it can hardly be said that the
Council has always maintained the highest standards
with regard to these or other responsibilities or that it
has lived up to these high ideals. There have been
instances when parties to a dispute or Member States of
the United Nations have pointed accusing fingers at the
Council for what were perceived as double standards or
disparities in its response to a variety of situations. No
case can rise beyond the confidence that the character
of its presiding judge brings to it, and in the pacific
resolution of disputes it is critical that the impartiality
of the judge be beyond reproach or dispute to begin
with; that is a basic requirement.

Before concluding, I would like to say that it
must also be remembered that the broader issue of
Security Council reform remains before this body and
the wider membership of the United Nations. In our
view, these issues can be taken either separately or
together - but they must be addressed. Thus, the
United Nations must demonstrate an ability to speak
with one voice, to work together and to abide by agreed
principles.

