Mr. Laurin (Canada) (spoke in French): The
Security Council has an important role to play in
facilitating and enforcing international efforts to
control the pervasive impact of the proliferation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons. Canada is
encouraged by the progress made in that regard,
particularly the establishment of mechanisms to assess
the implementation of sanctions regimes and the
strengthening of arms embargoes. Nevertheless, this
issue deserves the Council's sustained attention, given
that small arms and light weapons continue to threaten
international peace and security.

This debate provides an invaluable opportunity to
recognize the progress that has been made, to consider
lessons learned and, most important, to renew efforts to
focus on the many aspects of the small arms issue. The
Secretary-General's report (S/2005/69) will be useful
in guiding our future efforts, especially given its
recommendations on how the Council could usefully
contribute to combating the illicit trade in small arms
in all its aspects.

Compliance with arms embargoes and sanctions
regimes is central to international peace and security.
We urge the Council to continue aggressive
implementation and monitoring of these regimes, and
welcome its engagement with regional initiatives, such
as the Nairobi Declaration and the Economic
Community of West African States moratorium.

Canada encourages the Council to utilize such
tools as reports and recommendations from monitoring
groups and expert panels to ensure greater transparency
and cooperation with sanctions regimes. We urge the
Council to support the recommendations made by high-
level and monitoring groups on the need to address
gaps in legislation on brokering and to strengthen
transfer controls. The Council must call on Member
States to exercise the highest degree of responsibility
in the transfer of small arms. An effective global
response to small arms must address control of
transfers between States as well as transfers to non-
State actors.

The establishment of an international instrument
on the identification and tracing of small arms and
light weapons would also help the Council in its efforts
to enforce arms embargoes and to control the illicit
trade in order to ensure the protection of civilians.
Canada is committed to seeing a successful conclusion
of these negotiations and we welcome the High-level
Panel's recommendation of a legally binding
instrument.

We urge the Council to consider its role in
improving international cooperation with respect to
tracing small arms in conflict and post-conflict
settings. Peacekeeping operations and sanctions
committees should receive the appropriate mandates to
initiate traces that will assist States to identify those
who knowingly violate arms embargoes. Furthermore,
we encourage the Council to consider increased
cooperation with the International Criminal Police
Organization in order to improve identification of
diversion points in the trade of small arms.

(spoke in English)

Small arms proliferation must be considered as
part of the broader context of international peace and
human security, including initiatives to strengthen
peacebuilding and conflict-prevention efforts. Those
weapons continue to interfere with conflict prevention
measures, undermine the provision of humanitarian
assistance, exacerbate armed conflict and insecurity,
threaten security in refugee camps, and frustrate the
sustainability of peace processes and peacebuilding
efforts.

Increased interaction between the Council and the
General Assembly would allow for creative approaches
to the small arms issue from a broader peacebuilding
and human security perspective. Canada supports
further cooperation between the two organs to develop
and implement immediate and long-term strategies.
Greater results will be achieved through more decisive
and substantive action by both bodies.

The Security Council, through such resolutions as
1521 (2003) on Liberia and 1533 (2004) on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, has recognized and
made efforts to address the link between the illicit
trade in small arms and the illicit exploitation of
natural and other resources. Canada urges the Security
Council to take stronger measures - including the
enforcement and monitoring of targeted sanctions - to
break the cycle between arms shipments though illicit
channels and the exploitation of natural resources.

Canada welcomes progress made to date on the
inclusion of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) planning in integrated
peacekeeping missions, as well as the development of
policies, guidelines and procedures for the planning
and implementation of DDR in a peacekeeping context.
We urge the Council to adopt comprehensive and
regional approaches to DDR, to include those
approaches in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, to provide financing for DDR under the
budget for peacekeeping operations, and to give due
consideration to reintegration to ensure sustainable
socio-economic development.

We call for a continued emphasis on the parallel
implementation of community development and DDR
programmes, taking into account all members of the
community - men, women, boys and girls - and to
include strategies for children affected by armed
conflict. In line with our obligations under resolution
1325 (2000) on women, peace and security, Canada
urgently calls for the full and equal participation of
women in the design and implementation of all DDR
programmes and activities, as actions and decisions on
DDR have a direct and specific impact on the lives of
women and on the possibilities of achieving
sustainable peace.

It is Canada's view that the international
community has fallen short on commitments to make
people and their communities safer from armed
violence. This is a devastating situation with real and
lingering impact that continues to undermine
international efforts to establish peaceful and secure
environments where humanitarian and development
initiatives can take root and yield results. Our
collective responsibility is to take meaningful action
that will result in improved and safer lives for girls,
boys, men and women in all regions of the world. Now
is the time for action. The next 18 months hold
important opportunities for concerted action against the
easy availability and misuse of small arms. The July
2005 Biennial Meeting of States and the 2006 review
conference on the United Nations Programme of
Action provide platforms to evaluate our success and,
more importantly, to determine the way forward.

It is imperative to ensure that a more
comprehensive approach to the small arms issue be
pursued at the 2005 and 2006 meetings. Aspects of the
issue that were neglected in the 2001 Programme of
Action must receive adequate attention, including those
related to the human and humanitarian impact of small
arms.

The challenge now for the Council and Member
States, alongside their partners in international
organizations and civil society, is to replace words with
action and to deliver on this urgent agenda. The
problem is complex, but the solution is not beyond our
reach. We have the means to take constructive action to
achieve our common goals. We should do so now.

