Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): Like the
previous speaker, I associate my delegation with the
European Union statement to be delivered later today
by Ireland.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2004/43l). I particularly thank Mr. Egeland for his
very compelling briefing. He and his team are doing
outstanding work in focusing the international community
on protection issues. We are also very grateful to you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting. The Secretary-
General initiated this discussion five years ago. The
Security Council adopted resolution 1296 (2000) four
years ago. Today's discussion provides us with a
necessary opportunity to take stock of our collective
achievements and failures and to agree a common
agenda for future action. Like Under-Secretary-General
Egeland and the Chilean and French delegations, we
believe that this future action should be reflected in a
further Security Council resolution.

The Secretary-General calls for a culture of
protection. We agree. How can we promote that
culture? Mr. Egeland's proposal for a ten-point
platform provides the Council, we think, with an
excellent start, and in his report, the Secretary-General
identifies many ways in which we can build on that
proposal. Within this helpful framework, I would like
to outline five of the areas where the United Kingdom
sees scope for taking work forward.

First, on access, which everyone has dwelled on,
the United Kingdom believes it is important for the
Council further to develop a toolbox of options in order
to provide a flexible approach to the wide range of
situations where access is denied. We are learning to
use some new tools, perhaps, in the context of Darfur.

Regional organizations have a particularly
important role to play in time-critical settings, as
demonstrated by the deployment of the Economic
Community Of West African States (ECOWAS)
Mission in Liberia (ECOMIL) in August 2003. We
should continue our work on supporting regional
organizations. The Council has discussed that in
previous debates, and we look forward to taking
forward our thinking again under Romania's
presidency next month.

On the issue of rapid response - such as
repairing critical infrastructure to facilitate access -
we believe there is scope for greater cooperation with
regional organizations, such as the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and its Rapid
Expert Assistance and Cooperation (REACT) teams.
We should also look at how Security Council missions,
such as that to West Africa next month, can add value
to the protection agenda.

Secondly, the protection needs of women and
children must be reflected in the planning and
implementation of peace support operations, and the
training of peace support personnel prior to deployment is
essential. Progress has been made. But we also believe
that the compliance of peacekeepers with the United
Nations code of conduct on the prevention of sexual
abuse and exploitation must be insisted upon and
appropriate enforcement mechanisms considered.

Thirdly, on the security of humanitarian
personnel, the scope of the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
must be expanded. Equally important, of course, is to
encourage those that have not already done so to ratify
the Convention as a matter of urgency. We also believe
that the Security Council should be more readily
disposed to issuing a declaration of exceptional risk
under the relevant provisions of the 1994 Convention.

On the issue of impunity and compliance - my
fourth point - the United Kingdom shares the
importance stressed by many delegations this morning
of maintaining international humanitarian law. We are
greatly encouraged by the decision to appoint a Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide. We strongly
support the work of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), and we agree that there is potential for the
Security Council to consider referrals to the Prosecutor
of the ICC for investigation under article 13 (b) of the
Rome Statute. We regard re-establishing judicial
mechanisms and the rule of law in war-torn societies as
crucial and have devoted some considerable attention
to that. We eagerly await the Secretary-General's report
on that issue and look forward to working with partners
on the recommendations.

Fifthly, on small arms and light weapons, we
welcome the fact that the report of the Secretary-
General focuses on the risk of diversion. In that
context, the United Kingdom is supporting the transfer
controls initiative, which aims to raise awareness of the
need to strengthen controls on small arms and light
weapons transfers. We also support the call for arms
embargoes to include military services. My
Government is a keen supporter of the marking and
tracing initiative, and we look forward to participating
in the first session of the Open-ended Working Group
on this question, which starts today.

I have responded to some of the proposals in the
Secretary-General's report; I should also like to
comment on the way in which we address the
protection of civilians in the work of the Council.

We need to continue to mainstream protection
concerns into the Council's country-specific work. We
are making progress here, as Chile has reminded us,
especially in the context of peacekeeping missions and
mandates. But we need to be making better use of the
aide-memoire launched under the Norwegian

presidency in March 2002 as a protection checklist and
reference tool.

Getting protection concerns reflected in Council
resolutions is simply the beginning of a much wider
process. We then need to know whether our actions are,
in fact, making a difference at the country level.
Effective feedback to us is therefore absolutely crucial
if we are to learn what works well, what does not and
what we need to do next to address protection gaps. As
a result, the United Kingdom looks forward to
receiving an outline for monitoring and reporting in
December 2004, as mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report. We look forward to Mr. Egeland's
work on this.

Angola has reminded us of the responsibility to
prevent. We need to consider how we address
protection concerns in countries that are not formally
on the Council's agenda. In that context, we have
greatly valued the recent briefings to the Council by
Mr. Egeland on the situations in northern Uganda and
in Darfur. The United Kingdom is certainly open to
more briefings of that kind. Let us not forget that
Security Council resolution 1366 (2001) on the
prevention of armed conflict encourages the Council to
invite the Office of the Emergency Relief Coordinator
to brief us on emergency situations which it deems to
represent a threat to international peace and security.
We believe we need to make better use of such
mechanisms in the Council's work.

Finally, and in conclusion, we need to recognize
the fact that, if we do not set clear priorities in this
area, which represents an extremely broad and
challenging agenda, there is a risk that our actions will
be too widely dispersed and have only a limited
impact. Under-Secretary-General Egeland's proposal
for a 10-point platform helps take us in a more strategic
direction. We believe it is important for us to look at
the protection agenda in that way. We hope that we will
be able to work together to develop an even more
strategic approach through the adoption of a consensus
resolution on this important subject later this year.

