Mr. Ludin (Afghanistan): It is an honour to have
the opportunity to address the Security Council of the
United Nations for the first time. I convey the gratitude
of the Afghan people to all Council members, and the
countries they represent, for their commitment to a
peaceful Afghanistan, and for maintaining a focus on
the evolving situation in my country.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his
useful and comprehensive briefing and for spending an
extended period of time in Afghanistan on his recent
visit. It was a pleasure to join him, and Mr. Heitman,
who is also present here, in Kabul recently for the
launch of the work of the mandate review team for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

The year 2011 has been a year of significant
milestones for Afghanistan, and we Afghans are proud
to have been successful in most of the steps we have
taken in partnership with the international community.
Of course, as in the years before, every bit of our
achievements has come at a price. Terrorism remains a
strong threat, and Afghans have continued to make
huge sacrifices for the vision of a peaceful, prosperous
and democratic Afghanistan. However, no threat or
demand for sacrifice will deter us from achieving our
vision, and we truly appreciate the crucial help of our
international friends and partners in this historic
struggle.

Having always aspired to achieve self-reliance,
this past year we finally took the crucial step of
beginning the transition process, which will see
Afghanistan's National Security Forces take full
responsibility for security in the country by the end of
2014. With the implementation of the second tranche
of transition, announced last month by His Excellency
President Hamid Karzai, Afghan forces are taking
charge of security for over fifty percent of the
country's population.

Allow me to emphasize that for the Afghan
people, transition is not an imposed deadline or a mere
operational benchmark. Transition is truly the
manifestation of our determination to succeed and to
stand on our own feet. It is the guiding framework for
all our efforts, and in a fundamental sense it is the
ultimate goal of the partnership we Afghans are blessed
to have had with the international community for the
past ten years.

Transition, however, is not just about security. As
we move to take full responsibility for defending our
country and securing the lives of our people, we are
also assuming greater ownership of affairs on the
civilian front, including the political process and the
development agenda. Therefore, to make transition
meaningful and to build the capacity of our security
forces, we are redoubling our efforts to take the peace
process forward, improve governance, fight corruption
and build the requisite capacities of our Government
institutions to carry out their sovereign functions
effectively and transparently.

Speaking of the political solution, I wish to
reassure the Council that the Afghan Government
remains committed to the Afghan-led peace effort that
is aimed at reconciling members of the armed
opposition and enabling them to live a peaceful life in
society. The Council is aware that, in recent months,
our peace efforts have faced a number of setbacks,
notably the tragic assassination of Professor
Burhanuddin Rabbani, former President of Afghanistan
and Chairman of the High Peace Council. Nonetheless,
at the consultative Loya Jirga held last month in Kabul,
the Afghan people unanimously reaffirmed their
commitment to the peace process, giving it renewed
impetus. The national gathering conveyed the Afghan
people's desire for the continuation of an inclusive
Afghan-led national reconciliation and reintegration
process.

Through the peace process, we will continue to
reach out to the armed opposition and reconcile with
those willing to renounce violence, break ties with
terrorist organizations and live peaceful lives under the
Constitution. We believe that the process may benefit
from the establishment of an office, within or outside
Afghanistan, which could facilitate formal talks
between the relevant Afghan authorities and
representatives of the armed opposition, including the
Taliban. Furthermore, we will continue to rely on
support from regional countries, in particular the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Without whose support
our peace efforts will not produce the desired results.

The role of the region surrounding Afghanistan
remains central to the peaceful and prosperous future
that we Afghans envision for our country. The common
threats that we share, including the menaces of
terrorism, narcotics and so on, will not be defeated, nor
will peace in Afghanistan ever be achieved, in the
absence of constructive, results-oriented cooperation at
the regional level. Therefore, over the past 10 years,
we in Afghanistan have placed regional cooperation at
the heart of our vision for the future and we will
continue to do so in the years to come.

Thanks to the leadership of the brotherly
Republic of Turkey, the Istanbul Conference for
Afghanistan: Security and Cooperation in the Heart of
Asia, held early in November, represented a visionary
step forward towards cooperation and confidence-
building across the region. We are both hopeful and
optimistic that the Istanbul Process on Regional
Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable
Afghanistan will help to bring about a new regional
environment that is characterized by cooperation,
integration, confidence and shared efforts to achieve
security and prosperity. That vision has eluded us for
far too long. We will follow up the Istanbul Conference
with another ministerial-level conference, to be held in
Kabul in June 2012, the preparation of which has
already begun in earnest.

As the partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community evolves during and after the
transition phase, Afghans need reassurance that our
friends in the region and beyond will continue to
support our progress towards peace, stability,
prosperity and democracy. Thankfully, that reassurance
was given, in very strong terms, two weeks ago in
Germany, where over a hundred countries and
international organizations gathered for the
International Afghanistan Conference in Bonn. I wish
to express our sincere appreciation to the Federal
Republic of Germany, Afghanistan's long-standing
friend and partner, for hosting that historic conference.

The true significance of the Bonn Conference
was that it reflected a crucial consensus on the
international level to support a peaceful, sovereign and
prosperous future for Afghanistan. That consensus was
expressed in strong language of support and
commitment, particularly in setting out the concept of
the Transformation Decade of 2015-2024 as a solid
basis for the international community's enduring
engagement and support beyond transition.

The Conference also reaffirmed the Kabul
Process as the framework for the international
community's cooperation with Afghanistan as we
continue to transform our country from a war-
dependent to a self-reliant economy. In that context, we
look forward to the Tokyo Conference, to be held in
July next year, as an opportunity to focus on
Afghanistan's future economic agenda. I thank our
Japanese friends for their friendship and for organizing
that crucial conference.

If the Bonn Conference was a demonstration of
consensus at the international level, the consultative
Loya Jirga, held from 16 to 19 November in Kabul,
was its mirror image within Afghanistan, reflecting the
unanimous desire of the Afghan people for partnership
and engagement with the international community.
More than 2,000 Afghan representatives from all
segments of society and all corners of the country came
together and, in a historic manifestation of democratic
will, resoundingly affirmed the Afghan Government's
efforts to forge long-term, strategic partnerships with
the United States and other countries within and
outside the region.

In that context, we have finalized a strategic
partnership agreement with our old and historic friend,
the Republic of India, and are in the process of
negotiating similar agreements with our other friends
and partners, based on the principles of mutual respect
and the fundamental equality of sovereign nations.
Those partnerships will be the building blocks of
Afghanistan's future relations with the international
community. They cannot, and will not, represent a
threat to any other country in the region or beyond.

As we move forward, the role of the United
Nations will remain crucial to Afghanistan's
partnership with the international community. We
expect that the ongoing review of the UNAMA
mandate will ensure a more coherent and responsive
United Nations role in Afghanistan. In that context, I
welcome the recent visit of the review team to
Afghanistan. I look forward to continued dialogue
between Afghanistan, in Kabul and in New York, and
the United Nations in the context of the review, which
should reinforce the principles of Afghan ownership
and leadership through the transition and beyond.

Speaking of the United Nations, I would have
requested Under-Secretary-General Ladsous to convey
to Mr. Staffan de Mistura - but since Mr. De Mistura
is present via videoconference, may I convey directly
to Mr. De Mistura the deep gratitude and appreciation
of the Afghan people for his dedicated service and
excellent leadership of the United Nations in
Afghanistan. We thank him for all he has done. I
personally have enjoyed working with Mr. De Mistura
and wish him every success in his future endeavours. I
also take the opportunity to congratulate Mr. Jan Kubis
on his appointment as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. His
distinguished career, and the trust invested in him by
the Secretary-General, assures us of the continued
effective leadership of the United Nations in
Afghanistan.

As we meet today, at the end of the tenth year of
what has been a truly historic collaboration between
the Afghan people and the international community,

allow me to reaffirm Afghanistan's unwavering
determination to achieve a peaceful, prosperous and
democratic future in close partnership with the world.
Of course, we have recorded tremendous achievements
together, and we are all aware of the challenges that lie
ahead and the imperatives for continued commitment
and cooperation.

Today, with the tremendous success of the Bonn
Conference fresh in our minds, I am here to express
appreciation for the international community's
recommitment to Afghanistan's future, as expressed in
Bonn earlier this month. I also thank the Council for
standing behind the Conference's conclusions. As
Afghanistan moves from transition to the
transformation decade, the Council's guidance and the
international community's commitment remain as
crucial to our future as ever before.

