Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to convey our gratitude to the members
of the Security Council for their ongoing efforts and
attention to the issue of Yemen through their scrupulous
following of the peace process in my country. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who has paid
particular attention to the crisis in Yemen through his
Special Adviser on Yemen, Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
and his working team.

Significant efforts have been undertaken to ensure
the success of the political talks in Kuwait in order
to make progress on a comprehensive solution to the
conflict and to prevent any backsliding. The Government
of the Yemeni Republic has extended an olive branch
and worked in a constructive manner to support United
Nations efforts to achieve a lasting peace and put an
end to unilateral measures that undermine the political
solution, a process that has been organized by the
United Nations since 2011. Today, we are working with
the United Nations team to ensure the success of the
talks with the putschists, which are to be held in the
brotherly country of Kuwait in the days to come. Those
talks, in the eyes of the Yemeni people and observers,
are the last chance for peace in the country.

The convening of the Yemeni talks in Kuwait are
symbolic in many ways. Kuwait is an active member
of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), which has not
abandoned Yemen in its darkest hours. It has organized
numerous inter-Yemeni dialogue events during the
conflict in Yemen. Our patient and resilient people await
the talks in Kuwait in order to achieve lasting peace
and agreements that bring new life to the changes under
way in the country, in the light of the GCC Initiative,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, namely, resolution 2216
(2015).

Our people support the urgent humanitarian actions
undertaken to begin the rebuilding and economic
recovery period to put an end to this coup d'etat
nightmare, which has ripped apart the country's social
fabric and led civilians to flee.

We reiterate the Yemeni Government's support
for the efforts undertaken by the Special Adviser and
his team. We call upon the international community to
provide all forms of support necessary to the efforts
of the Under-Secretary-General and his Office. The
process conducted by the United Nations is the only
one we support because of its clear agenda and terms
of reference, which were drawn up together with the
GCC Initiative; the outcomes of the National Dialogue
and Security Council resolutions, such as resolution
2216 (2015); and other relevant United Nations
resolutions, which summarize the outcomes of the
Bonn negotiations.

After five days of the cessation of hostilities, the
De-escalation and Coordination Committee began
its work in Kuwait on 3 April. It has received several
reports regarding attacks perpetrated by the Houthi
and pro-Saleh militias against Ta'izz City and its
inhabitants, which are aimed at forcing them to submit
and which target civilians and densely populated cities
with Katyusha rockets and mortar fire. The Al-Wazia
region in Ta'izz has been besieged by putschists and
Houthis, who continue with their goal of opening a new
fronts. This demonstrates clearly to the international
community that these individuals refuse the transition
to peace and think that violence can benefit them at the
negotiating table. However, that is an illusion.
The same thing is happening in Sana'a, the beloved
capital of Yemen, which has been transformed by
putschist militias into an open-air prison. Thousands
of people - be they politicians, military officers,
intellectuals, journalists and activists - have all fallen
subject to many forms of physical and psychological
torture. We are waiting for the Houthis and pro-Saleh
elements to act in good faith, before the talks in Kuwait
begin, and free prisoners, as this nightmare has lasted
far too long. On behalfofmy people, the resilient Yemeni
people, we ask the Houthis and the pro-Saleh elements
to choose peace and put an end to the bloodletting in
order to save my country, Yemen.

As we head to Kuwait, we wait for peace to return
to Yemen and for the militias that control the State
to return to the negotiating table. A society built on
the rule of law, a unified State, a State of justice and
equality must not accept a State within a State or the
existence of militia bearing arms in Yemen.

We call upon the Security Council and the United
Nations to reject the interference of Iran and its
terrorist affiliates in the region, which seek to interfere
in Yemen's affairs and to destabilize regional security.
Iran's interference is clear and hardly needs proof,
as heard in the statements of high-ranking Iranian
officials who encourage violence by sending weapons
to Houthi rebels and to Ali Abdullah Saleh. The most
recent examples of that were three arms convoys on
27 February, 20 and 27 March, incidents that were
reported by the American authorities and which
included Kalishnikov rifles, missiles, shells, rocket
launchers and other equipment used to perpetuate
the conflict and sow chaos in Yemen and the region,
in flagrant violation of the arms embargo pursuant to
resolution 2216 (2015).

It has become clear to everyone that there is
a relation between the Houthi and Saleh militias.
Investigations have been undertaken by the Security
Council sanctions committees with regard to the link
connecting terrorist networks, Al-Qaida and Da'esh
in particular, with regard to the sale of oil and arms
trafficking.

The Yemeni Government calls on the international
community to cooperate in its fight against that
terrorism, in particular with regard to the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters and the financing of
terrorism. Those two issues are the direct responsibility
of the international community. Not dealing with them
will result in providing additional resources to terrorist
activities in every region throughout the world.
It is appropriate for me to conclude by highlighting
the core nature of United Nations activities. There
is an extremely important issue at hand, that is, the
recruitment of children by the Houthi militias, which
put them in harm's way and use them as cannon fodder
for their unjust wars against the Yemini people. The
Houthi and Saleh coalition of death militias recruit
children in the regions that they control, which is an
assault on the youth and future generations in Yemen.

Finally, I reiterate our gratitude for all of the efforts
that the Council is carrying out, and in Yemen we will
never forget those efforts and will record them in the
our history books.

The meeting rose at 3.40 pm.
