Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): I wish to extend my
sincere congratulations to you, Sir, and your country,
the Kingdom ofMorocco, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I also wish to align
Malaysia with the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

My delegation would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for the preparation of the report contained
in document S/2012/746, entitled "Peacebuilding in
the aftermath of conflict". My delegation welcomes
the report, its findings and conclusions. The report
is an invaluable reference on progress related to
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict. In this
regard, my delegation wishes to share some pertinent
views that Malaysia sees as important in relation to the
report.

Countries in transition from conflict have to
endure many challenges emanating from within and
outside their territory. Experience has proven that a
Government emerging from conflict and embarking on
institution-building, reconstruction and nation-building
will require the support of the international community.
Such reinforcement provides these countries with the
needed assistance to successfully leave conflict behind.
Navigating these challenges will determine the success
or failure of transition from conflict to peace.

Nation-building programmes and Government
reform cannot be imposed by external entities. Instead,
such sensitive political reform and nation-building
efforts must be inclusive and have strong national
ownership. This is important, as Governments of
countries emerging from conflict have the experience
and legal mandate to lead change for the nation. As
such, national ownership requires United Nations
peacebuilding efforts to play a supporting role in
nation-building and reform. Such partnership would
help to ensure sustainable peace in the country.
However, given that the challenges differ from country
to country, Malaysia shares a similar perspective on
the need to develop principles and guidelines in the
development of national capacity-building programmes.
Another pertinent issue in successful transition
experience is a strong national capacity-building
programme, which must be developed under a
coordinated peacebuilding programme. My delegation
wishes to underscore the importance of the various
fields of expertise, including justice, law enforcement,
institution-building, economic development and
inclusive social development programmes, which
are needed when assisting countries emerging from
conflict. In this regard, we stress the importance of
partnership with countries that have experienced
conflict as a source of potential providers of expertise
and partnership in the development of programmes and
module.

Countries emerging from conflict cannot be
successfully assisted without adequate financial
resources. Malaysia welcomes the pledges made
during the recent annual stakeholders meeting of the
Peacebuilding Fund. We share the view that continued
financial support is as important as political will in
successfully moving to peace. Recent peacebuilding
experience has shown that a successful recovery
of countries from conflict requires prolonged and
continued international financial support. While the
timeframe may differ, countries emerging from conflict
may require international support for up to 15 years or
until such time as their national institutions can fulfil
domestic needs in achieving political and economic
stability.

Malaysia wishes to reiterate the importance of
the role played by the Peacebuilding Commission
in developing strategies for peacebuilding, resource
mobilization and civilian capacity, which are central to
the success of peacebuilding initiatives. My delegation
believes that peacebuilding strategies must emphasize
the inclusion of civilian experts as the central pillar
in nation-building and institutional and economic
developments. While peacekeeping seeks to improve
security and stability, peacebuilding encompasses a
wider field in improving human security, economic
development, employment and nation-building.

An example of such experience can be seen in
South-East Asia. Malaysia has been actively involved in
facilitating talks between the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front and the Government of the Philippines. Since
2002, Malaysia has contributed observers, including
military, police and civilians experts, in the southern
Philippines. We welcome the recent signing of a
framework agreement on 15 October between the
Government of the Philippines and the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front. Through the concept of moderation
and constructive engagement, Malaysia will continue
to apply such important values and principle in its
approach in peacebuilding.

Malaysia is of the view that the development of
human capital is an essential element of peacebuilding.
As a member of the Guinea configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Malaysia plays host to over
300 Guinean students at various Malaysian universities.
Malaysia has been involved in the creation of
employment opportunities in Guinea, with investments
in the financial sector and direct participation
in Guinea's construction industry. Malaysia has
continued to provide training and technical assistance
in developing an inclusive national development
programme in Guinea. So far, 81 Guinean officials
have benefited under various human development
programmes conducted under the auspices of the
Malaysian Technical Cooperation Programme since
1993.

Malaysia has been an active participant in
international security and peacebuilding initiatives.
Malaysia is of the view that assisting countries
emerging from conflict entails the need for a well-
developed peacebuilding strategy. We look forward to
further contributing to the work on and development
of peacebuilding strategies, development initiatives
and the building of civilian capacities in support of
countries in transition to peace.

