Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
commend the Dominican presidency for organizing
this open debate. Your country, Mr. President, is on
the front lines of tackling climate change and you have
rightly made that issue a priority of your presidency. I
also thank our briefers for the excellent quality of their
statements. The mobilization of young people presented
by Ms. Getschel is an important glimmer of hope, and
we must not let that hope be lost.

The level of participation in this open debate
demonstrates, if there were ever a need, a broad
awareness among Member States that the impacts of
climate change on international peace and security must
be better understood by the United Nations and more
specifically by the Security Council. The consequences
of climate change on security is considerable. The
impacts of climate disasters on humanitarian aspects,
on food and health security, and more generally on
the economic, demographic and social balances of a
human community can be such that they contribute to
domestic crises, which in turn may lead to regional and
international crises or exacerbate existing conflicts.

Risks know no borders. We therefore share the
responsibility of managing them collectively. The Paris
Agreement on Climate Change shows us the way by
limiting global warming to 2°C, if possible 1.5°C, and
calls on us to increase our adaptability and resilience
to climate change, especially in the most vulnerable
countries, and make financial flows compatible with
limiting the global increase in temperature. The Paris
Agreement now has implementing guidelines, and I
commend the role played by the Polish presidency ofthe
twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.

We must endeavour to achieve our goals
collectively. The climate summit scheduled for
23 September comes at the right time to create the
conditions for achieving our heightened aspirations.
France will play an important role in that regard, since,
together with Jamaica, it has been entrusted with the
task of working on climate finance and funding. I am
sure that the summit will send a strong message to the
Council, which must address the risks that the effects
of climate change represent for our common peace and
security. We must take action to anticipate, prevent and
limit those effects. In this context, I would like to share
three of France's firm beliefs.

The first is that the risks to international security
posed by the impacts of climate change must become a
central element of the conflict prevention agenda. We
must develop preventive diplomacy that integrates all
destabilizing factors, including those related to climate
change and the collapse of biodiversity. The second is
that a rigorous and regular analysis of these risks is
necessary and in the international public interest. The
United Nations, and within it the Security Council
and the Secretary-General, must play a pivotal role in
this regard. The third belief is that this risk analysis
must be accompanied by preventive measures that will
be implemented by national Governments, regional
organizations, development partners and United
Nations agencies. Bolstered by those beliefs, France
would like to work with all Member States on several
proposals it has shared, including two main ones.

The first proposal aims to provide us with a tool
for collective analysis and early warning of the impacts
of climate change on global peace and security. Data
and analysis tools exist, but they are scattered in
think tanks, among States and even within the United
Nations among its various agencies. We must bring
them together in a central place and give them a voice.
What is missing is a guardian - a guarantor of the
scientific message that can build consensus on the links
between climate and security. France would like to see
the Secretary-General play this role by submitting an
annual report to the General Assembly and the Security
Council that assesses the risks to peace and security
posed by the impacts of climate change in all regions of
the world and within different timeframes.

It is also important to fully implement the request
put forward by the Council in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2011/15, of July 2011, adopted upon Germany's
initiative, that the reports of the Secretary-General on
the conflicts on the Council's agenda include contextual
information with regard to the impact of climate change
on those conflicts. In this way, we could anticipate and
implement appropriate responses to the threats to peace
and security that already exist in some regions, such as
the Sahel or island States, but also, in southern Africa,
Central America or South-East Asia, which may be
less immediate but could in due course have an equally

disastrous impact on security. At the national level,
France has initiated research programmes to develop
a typology of crises for the most vulnerable regions, in
particular in the Mediterranean and Pacific areas. This
work could feed into the Secretary-General's report.

The second proposal by France concerns the role
of the United Nations in developing recommendations
for concrete actions to prevent conflicts. Faced with
these risks for security, we must mobilize a wide range
of tools, from emergency aid to development policies.
In some cases, such as after an extreme weather event,
humanitarian measures will be urgently needed. In
other cases, it will be necessary to help communities
adapt to the inescapable rise in sea levels, drought
and soil degradation. Sometimes, it will be necessary
to give small farmers insurance mechanisms that will
enable them to restart economic activity quickly after
a climate disaster rather than having to migrate to
other areas. The United Nations can and should play
an important role in developing these recommendations
and in coordinating the efforts that will need to
be implemented.

At the national level, donor countries such as
France must adapt their development policies. In
this regard, France has initiated several projects,
including the Climate Risk and Early Warning
Systems initiative - with the World Meteorological
Organization, the Global Facility for Disaster Risk
Reduction and the United Nations Office for Disaster
Risk Reduction - that seeks to strengthen the capacity
of early warning systems in least developed countries
and small island developing States to deal with extreme
climate events. At this stage, nearly €40 million out of
€100 have already been disbursed, making it possible
to finance five national projects, three regional
multi-country projects in the Caribbean, West Africa
and the Pacific, as well as a post-disaster study in
the Caribbean.

Faced with these certain risks, we cannot take
refuge in denial or misinformation. We can anticipate
and respond to these risks and prevent conflicts. That
is the role of the United Nations and the role of the
Council. France is committed to working tirelessly
with all at this table to make this goal a reality in the
coming months.

