Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and the
important briefings by Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Mr. Mark Lowcock, who have both described a scenario
that requires the urgent support of the international
community and, in particular, of a united Security
Council. We would like to express our gratitude and
full support for the efforts they are making in their
fields to put an end to the worst humanitarian crisis
in the world today and bring the parties closer to an
inclusive political solution.

We also salute the Yemeni parties for their
willingness to negotiate and hold a dialogue, which has
made it possible for the Redeployment Coordination
Committee to meet three times and for some progress
to be made in the operational implementation of the
agreements reached in Sweden. We stress that this
progress is still preliminary and must necessarily
be complemented by urgent new measures, such as
defining the parameters for what constitutes a ceasefire
violation for the parties and determining the modalities
ofthe process. We should emphasize that the agreements
reached in Sweden constitute a turning point in the
bloody and prolonged conflict in Yemen, and that in no
circumstances should possible delays or breaches serve
as justification for abandoning commitments under the
Stockholm Agreement.

We therefore urge the Yemeni parties to reaffirm
their commitment to the inclusive political solution that
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General has launched
and to tackle the difficulties that this complex process
may bring carefully and in good faith, while avoiding
unilateral action that runs counter to the positive spirit
that should accompany it. We also encourage them to
continue to work on confidence-building measures that
contribute to a better climate of understanding. We
therefore welcome President Hadi's decision to pay the
salaries of the civil servants in Al-Hudaydah and look
forward to further developments in the area of prisoner
exchanges and the opening of land and sea routes. We
also look forward to a new round of consultations this
month and emphasize the importance of increasing the
participation of women and young people.

All of those efforts are all the more important, as
Mr. Lowcock reminded us, when many of the needs of
the people are still unmet and the risk of famine and
the spread of diseases such as cholera persists. We must
remain steadfast in honouring our responsibility to
support and protect them. That includes removing all
bureaucratic obstacles that restrict access to essential
goods. Humanitarian aid and access to it cannot and
must not be made conditional on any military objective.

We would like to conclude by highlighting the
professionalism and sense of duty of the humanitarian
personnel of the United Nations and other agencies
deployed in Yemen, and by underlining the importance
of ensuring that the parties guarantee their security and
provide the facilities they need for their work, including
the timely issuance of the appropriate visas. Peru
remains committed to achieving a political solution
to the conflict that brings the ongoing humanitarian
disaster to an end, ensures accountability for the
atrocious crimes that have been committed, improves
regional stability and makes it possible to achieve
sustainable peace in Yemen.

