Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate and for attending it in person today. This is a
valuable opportunity to take stock again of one of the
most important institutional relationships of the United
Nations, namely, its partnership with the African Union
(AU). I also thank the Secretary-General and President
Buyoya for their contributions this morning.

Let me start by underlining the United Kingdom's
horror at the Taliban's cowardly attack on a school in
Peshawar, which killed so many children. Our deepest
condolences go to the families and loved ones of those
killed or injured and to the people and the Government
of Pakistan.

There have been many shared successes of the
United Nations-AU relationship this year. I would like
to highlight four in particular.

First, we have seen close and professional
collaboration between the African Union and United
Nations teams in planning for the transition from an
AU to a United Nations peacekeeping mission in the
Central African Republic. The AU mission stabilized
the security situation, allowing for a smooth handover
to the United Nations peacekeeping mission in
September. That process worked significantly better
than the similar transition in Mali last year, reflecting
a gradually improving partnership between the two
organizations.

Secondly, United Nations-AU cooperation has led
to tangible results on the ground in Somalia this year.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
an African Union mission with United Nations and
European Union logistical and financial support, has
reflected some of the best of African peace operations:
a robust mandate courageously delivered, with real
success in driving back Al-Shabaab. Our shared
challenge now is to extend and preserve those gains.
In that context, we look forward to the joint United
Nations-AU review of AMISOM. next year.

Thirdly, we have seen the positive impact ofmutually
reinforcing political engagement by the United Nations
and the AU and its subregional organizations. The
United Nations, the AU and the Economic Community
of West African States worked in lockstep in response
to the political crisis in Burkina Faso in November. The
joint visit by envoys from the three organizations at a
pivotal moment showed united support for the transition
and prevented a slide into further instability.

Fourthly, we welcome the AU's collaboration with
the World Health Organization in deploying health-
care workers to West Africa to tackle the Ebola virus.

It is clear that the United Nations-AU partnership
is at its most effective when we have a shared vision
and shared goals, when we build on the lessons learned
from the past, when the two organizations work closely
together in assessments, planning and operational
delivery, and when both bring the appropriate
capabilities and expertise to the task.

I would like to pay tribute to the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the African
Union, Mr. Haile Menkerios, and to the expanded
United Nations Office to the AU. Its members are now
working closely with the AU Commission right across
the conflict cycle, from early warning and conflict
prevention or mediation - the importance of which
you highlighted this morning, Mr. President - to
deploying and sustaining missions and to post-conflict
reconstruction and development. That work can lead
to an even more effective and joined-up approach to
situations of developing instability.

Looking ahead to 2015, there will be major
challenges for the United Nations and the African
Union to surmount together.

First is the growth of asymmetric threats, non-State
actors and increasing collaboration between extremist
terrorist groups, which demands a united response from
us all. Both the United Nations and the AU are stepping
up activity to counter those threats. We welcome, among
other things, the African Union's strong stance against
kidnap for ransom, and the Nouakchott Process which
brings together the security and intelligence chiefs in
the Sahara and the Sahel.

Secondly, there are opportunities in the months
ahead to enhance further the joint United Nations-AU
partnerships. We look forward to the United Nations
review of the African Union/United Nations Hybrid
operation in Darfur (UNAMID), in collaboration
with the African Union. UNAMID is the only hybrid
AU-United Nations peacekeeping operation, and it
is not working as it should. Important decisions on
UNAMID's future lie ahead.

Thirdly, 2015 will see several important elections
in African countries. We welcome the African Union's
long- and short-term monitoring missions, which
help to promote sound elections that are carried out
in accordance with African countries' constitutions
and the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance. The African Union must not waver in its
commitment to those standards.

Finally, we need to continue to work together to
surmount the continued obstacles to effective African
Union peace operations, including financing and the
capabilities of troop-contributing countries.
African Union missions need access to adequate,
timely and predictable financing for peace support
operations. The United Kingdom is pleased that
other partners, including the European Union, have
stepped in with support where needed. But in the
long term, and as the presidential statement adopted
today reiterates - and as President Buyoya himself
has highlighted - regional bodies have to assume
their own responsibility to secure human, financial,
logistical and other resources for their organizations
(S/PRST/2014/27). We urge the African Union to act on
that in allocating more African resources for African
peace support operations.

Turning to the capabilities of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) , the African Union and the United
Nations share the goal of well-led, well-trained and
effective missions working flexibly to implement clear
mandates. We need to keep pushing collectively towards
the achievement of that goal, addressing shortfalls in
TCC training and equipment wherever necessary.

We hope that the Secretary-General's peace
operations review will look at all these issues and
provide recommendations for how best to address
them. In the meantime, we can all look back with
some satisfaction on a year that has seen the United
Nations-African Union relationship become closer,
more experienced, more operational and more vibrant.
We may not always agree, but we understand each other
ever better and remain firmly committed to our shared
goal of an end to all wars and conflict in Africa.

