Mr. Reina Idiaquez (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): Before beginning my statement I would like
to express, on behalf of Honduras, the most sincere
sense of solidarity with the Governments and peoples
of Myanmar and China at the recent loss of human
lives caused by natural disasters in those countries.

First, I wish to convey to the presidency the
appreciation of my delegation for convening this
timely special meeting of the Security Council to focus
on post-conflict reconstruction. Holding these open
meetings on a regular basis is a step forward in the
search for transparency and equality of opportunity for
delegations to participate in the work of this important
organ of our Organization. It should be an example to
follow.

This meeting, an initiative of the
United Kingdom, is an essential step in our discussions
about the Council and the need to reform and expand it
and, more than anything, to become aware of the fact
that currently, peacekeeping operations authorized by
the Council must always include political, economic,
social and humanitarian components so that the local
problems can be tackled after all hostilities have
ceased.

Reconstruction in post-conflict situations is
indispensable to avoid a return to deplorable situations
of armed conflict. My country, Honduras, at the heart
of the Americas, after turbulent events in the Central
American region that have fortunately receded into the
past, finds itself a democracy with regional institutions
for economic, political and social integration. The
Central American Integration System, the Central
American Parliament, the Central American Bank for
Economic Integration and the Central American Court
of Justice are among the most relevant. All that has
been achieved after many meetings and discussions at
the regional level, which led to the institutionalization
of Central American summits, which are held quite
often to resolve the most important problems in the
region. Honduras has made Central American
integration its standard, and today we wish to
contribute with our message to the experiences
acquired.

Central America has the most comprehensive
experience of successes when it comes to organizing
peace, because the United Nations set up the Observer
Group in Central America, the Observer Mission to
Verify the Electoral Process in Nicaragua, the Observer
Mission in El Salvador and the Verification Mission in
Guatemala in the region in a continuous and
thoroughgoing process, in full cooperation with the
Governments of the region.

My delegation has accompanied all recent
reforms of the international architecture undertaken

under the guidance of the United Nations and the
proposals of the Secretary-General, so now the
Peacebuilding Commission is a reality, the Human
Rights Council is operating, and the special missions of
the Economic and Social Council are contributing to
improving the prospects for resolving and preventing
domestic conflict and, further, making it possible to
take the necessary measures to help the local
populations to avoid new outbursts of violence.

It is precisely in preventing conflict that one finds
the best response to conflict. Military peacekeeping
operations per se are not so complex if we compare
them to the problems that remain in various States and
regions after an armed conflict.

Today we are facing greater challenges with the
current energy and food crises and the disruptions of
nature caused by the serious alterations of climate
change. My country recognizes the proposals in the
concept paper prepared by the United Kingdom for
consideration and analysis (8/2008/291, annex). It
contains elements of great value that require more and
better discussion. The proposals must be viewed in a
holistic manner, along with the concepts in the Brahimi
report on peace operations (S/2000/809). We should
also take into consideration the earlier resolutions of
this Council, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council that deal with humanitarian and
social affairs.

Any crisis will come with many perspectives and
facets, and the analysis of a crisis must examine
problems such as social inequality, massive violations
of human rights, lack of political participation, racial
discrimination, economic disparities and racial
segregation. These are just some of the elements that
generate armed national conflicts and transcend
international borders when they provoke a flow of
refugees.

Honduras considers that the Millennium
Development Goals are an indispensable tool for
averting conflict, and that is why we appeal to the
international community - in particular, what are
called the industrialized countries - to become aware
of their international responsibility for eradicating
extreme poverty and hunger in the world.

Millions of people in the world live on less than
one dollar per day. They are the first to feel the deadly
impact of the "silent tsunami", as some have called the
food crisis caused by the sudden rise in the prices of
food commodities. The world experienced a dramatic
increase in food prices in the first quarter of 2008, and
in real terms the prices of staple foods reached peaks
unheard of in three decades. This crisis will exacerbate
world poverty and malnutrition, so we must improve
coordination and increase the preventive and response
capacity of Governments and international bodies.

Innovative alternatives must be found to enhance
the establishment of integrated peace operations for the
benefit of humankind. The international community
cannot continue to ignore the pleas of the world's
dispossessed and to attempt to solve its problems using
military means as a priority, when the causes of those
problems are social and humanitarian.

