Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela is deeply concerned about the
serious humanitarian emergency of refugees, internally
displaced persons and migrants who are the result
of the tragedy of war, political instability, poverty,
terrorism and the widespread violence that plagues
important regions of Africa and the Middle East and
who are desperately trying, at the risk of their own
lives, to reach safer destinations. Our people express
their deepest solidarity with these thousands of human
beings who have been stigmatized and vilified. We
also vigorously condemn the existence of the criminal
organizations that profit from migrant smuggling
and human trafficking, taking advantage of their
desperation to protect their physical integrity or escape
extreme poverty and hunger.

This terrible phenomenon has been exacerbated in
the past two years to the same extent that the political,
economic and military situation in the Middle East and
North Africa has continued to worsen as a result of
foreign interference, military intervention and war.

Venezuela, like other Latin American countries,
has traditionally welcomed thousands of refugees and
migrants who, in different periods, have sought safety,
peace and opportunity in our land. We are a zone of
peace and a people deeply supportive and respectful of
human rights. That is why we believe that the current
humanitarian crisis of refugees, who are desperately
trying to cross the Mediterranean, cannot be tackled
with a military approach with the pretext of combating
international organized crime. This serious problem
cannot be resolved by building walls or by taking
military action.

This humanitarian crisis cannot be summarized
without acknowledging that the refugees remain
contained by the hundreds of thousands in the zone
of despair through the use of military action. This is
a humanitarian issue in which the continued flight
of hundreds of thousands of desperate refugees and
migrants, either from North Africa or the Middle East,
must be averted.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has decided to
abstain from voting on resolution 2240 (2015) on migrant
smuggling and human trafficking in the Mediterranean
Sea, which was adopted today by the Council, because
we believe that this serious problem is being addressed
in a completely wrongheaded way and that, far from
resolving the tragedy that is being experienced by these
human beings, it will instead deepen the problem by
addressing it from a military perspective and not from a
preventive and multidimensional perspective. Creating
the possibility of applying Chapter VII of the Charter
from which today's resolution is derived - that is, the
use of military force to deal with the humanitarian
situation of migrants - is a serious mistake; in so
doing, the Security Council sets a dangerous precedent
by turning its back on the General Assembly, usurping
the Assembly's authority and addressing issues that fall
within its competence.

Venezuela therefore rejects the notion of making
migrants, refugees and asylum seekers into a security
issue, as has been done on this occasion. The complexity
and multidimensional nature of this problem requires a
comprehensive approach that goes beyond the purely
military and security approach that some States
Members of this body seek to promote. We need to
examine the root causes that drive people to make
dangerous sea voyages and the reasons why some of
these people become victims of human trafficking and
migrant smuggling.

The resolution adopted authorizes the use of force,
which, in our view, is a disproportionate action that sets
a dangerous precedent for the treatment of the issue in
the future. We believe it is not through the use of force or
criminalizing the phenomenon that this human tragedy
will be resolved. It seems that, beyond the argument in
favour of fighting criminal gangs, the purpose of the
resolution is simply to prevent these human beings from
reaching a safer destination; in other words, it sets up
a policy of raising barriers, where, in the end, we will
have a world where the rich countries are surrounded
by walls that prevent them from seeing and feeling the
terrible reality of poor people battered by wars, most of
which have been supported and promoted by the power
centres in these rich countries.

The human rights of these citizens and their
humanitarian situation should prevail over material
considerations or a concept of security that endangers
the lives ofinnocent people who are essentially victims
of this drama, regardless of the causes that motivate
it. We must clearly state that one of the key causes
of the humanitarian tragedy of migrants that we are
seeing, which should be addressed in a broader and
more democratic debate within the General Assembly,
is the military interventions and wars in Iraq, Libya
and Syria, as well as the expansion of the phenomenon
of terrorism and the actions of non-State actors and
violent groups that have received training, funding
and weapons so that they can be used as instruments
of political destabilization to overthrow Governments
and respond to geopolitical considerations of the great
centres of power.

Moreover, the uncontrolled and growing flow of
small arms and light weapons, terrorist groups and the
chaos provoked in North Africa by the intervention in
Libya has exacerbated the political, economic and social
problems in countries in other regions of Africa, many
of them subject to sanctions, blockades and economic
hedges, where poverty is a chronic problem. All this
has done is increase the exodus of these African people
who are experiencing all kinds of tragedy in their
transit to the shores of the Mediterranean. Thus, the
resolution addresses only a tiny fraction of this complex
problem - the final installment of this sad story.

We would have liked to see this body participate
in a broader and more democratic discussion on this
issue, where actions could be coordinated at all levels
to alleviate the humanitarian situation. We would have
liked to see the African Union brought in as a key
player in dealing with this situation, as well as other
regional and subregional actors in the areas affected by
conflict. What the Security Council should do is put an
end to wars and terrorism. It should also demand that
the financing and arming of groups that has caused so
much damage to the peoples of the Middle East and
Africa be brought to an end.

Our country, Venezuela, has offered to take in
20,000 immigrants and refugees, and we hope that all
the countries that are able to will open their arms and
take in these human beings. We also hope that they stop
raising walls to keep reality out. We do not want to
see - nobody wants to see - any more tragic pictures
of children drowned off the coast of a world that has
denied them their right to live in peace.

