Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would like to join
my colleagues in welcoming Deputy Prime Minister
Guterres and thanking him for his important statement.
I further wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his extremely useful briefing.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union later today. Let me nevertheless
make the following specific points.
We were encouraged by the climate of calm that
prevailed during the celebrations on the occasion of the
tenth anniversary of the 1999 referendum. At the same
time, we would like to take this opportunity to
remember those, including members of the United
Nations Mission, who lost their lives at the time.

We salute the fact that the process of the return
and resettlement of internally displaced persons has
nearly been completed. We also wish to congratulate,
as others have done, the Government of Timor-Leste
on the successful conduct of the recent elections at the
community level.

We welcome the efforts to promote inclusive
dialogue and national reconciliation. For these
endeavours to be successful, some of the root causes of
the 2006 crisis still need to be fully tackled. Timor-
Leste continues to face important challenges in
reducing poverty and creating new employment
opportunities. The Government of Timor-Leste
therefore rightly stresses that there is an increasing
need to move from conflict prevention to a
comprehensive development agenda. The United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
can play a key role in that evolution. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has already
drawn the attention of the Council to the important
contribution provided by the European Union and its
member States in this regard.

We support the authorities of Timor-Leste in their
endeavours to build strong institutions that can fight
impunity for grave violations of human rights. As the
Secretary-General has reminded us, further - albeit as
yet incomplete - progress has been made in holding
accountable those responsible for criminal acts and
human rights violations during the 2006 crisis. In that
regard, we welcome the recommendations made by
UNMIT, in cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to
strengthen accountability for human rights violations,
and we hope for their rapid implementation.

It is important that the National Police of Timor-
Leste is making and continues to make progress in
resuming its primary policing responsibilities,
including through the police training academy. We also
welcome the swearing in, last week, of international
prosecutors and clerks who can support the judiciary of
Timor-Leste.
The successful re-establishment of a functioning
rule of law system is crucial for achieving long-term
stability. That requires the continued review and reform
of the security sector at all levels. It also calls for the
strengthening of the police and the judiciary, the
adoption of relevant legislation, such as the new penal
code, and a clear division of responsibilities and
competencies between the police, on the one side, and
the military, on the other. In our View, the military
could, for instance, place greater emphasis on areas
such as disaster relief and international peacekeeping.
Those are also fields in which my own country has
some experience and are areas of action where the
armed forces of smaller and medium-sized countries
might be able to provide appropriate training and
advice.

Since this is the last time for Mr. Khare to brief
the Council in his capacity as Special Representative,
in closing, I would like to join others in thanking him
for his important contribution to the peace process over
the past three years. We have seen significant changes
in Timor-Leste since 2006, also thanks to the work of
UNMIT under Mr. Khare's leadership. The benchmarks
that UNMIT has established will continue to provide us
with an excellent strategic framework to assess
progress in the four priority areas, and that in turn will
facilitate the review, as well as possible future
adjustments to UNMIT's mandate.

