Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I thank the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for their special
report (S/2019/816), which is before the Council today.
I also thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing
and members of the Council for their statements and
kind words addressed to my country and Government.
Their words will encourage us to work towards the
achievement of our objectives and to fulfil the vision
that motivated our glorious revolution.

We have examined the report before the Council
today. We agree with much of its analysis on the
history and nature of the conflict in Darfur in all its
aspects, including the political, security, economic
and social aspects. It can be said that the period under
review in the report has seen a great transformation
in my country, with the adoption of the Constitutional
Declaration and the establishment of such civilian
institutions as the Sovereign Council and the transitional
Government. This transformation is a new start for
the Sudan after the glorious December revolution and
a major step towards fulfilling the aspirations of the
proud Sudanese people for a democratic, free, just and
peaceful Sudan.

The transitional Government has committed to
addressing a number of priorities during the transitional
period, which will end in December 2022. At the top of
these priorities is the achievement of a comprehensive
peace across the Sudan. Meetings have already begun
between the representatives of the Government and
the armed movements with a view to reaching an
agreement on comprehensive peace. The Government
of sisterly South Sudan has played a key role in
launching the negotiations and hosted the first meeting
on 11 September, which led to the signing of the Juba
Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures and
the Preparation for Negotiation. Negotiations began
on 14 October in the capital of South Sudan and
were attended by Lieutenant General Abdel-Fattah
Al-Burhan, President of the Sovereign Council, the
Vice-President and a number of other members of
the Sovereign Council, leaders from countries of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and all
the signatories of the Juba Declaration. We hope to
reach an agreement that will herald a new era of peace
in the Sudan.

In our pursuit of comprehensive peace, on
30 September, in Paris, our Prime Minister, Mr. Abdalla
Hamdok, met the leader of the Sudan Liberation Army-
Abdul Wahid faction, Mr. Abdul Wahid Al-Nour.
We wish to emphasize the importance of convincing
Mr. Al-Nour to take part in the current negotiations. We
call on countries with influence to take every possible
measure to persuade him that dialogue and negotiations
are the only path to getting demands met.

We strongly condemn the flagrant violations
committed against children in areas in the Jebel Marra
controlled by Mr. Al-Nour, which, as detailed in the
special report, have been perpetrated by his forces.
The representative of the United States has also made
reference to these violations.

The special report details a number of options
relating to the future of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
We hope that any decision taken by the Council will
contribute to peace and stability in Darfur and pave
the way towards a transition to peacebuilding and
the strengthening of stability in Darfur. As Council
members are aware, the situation in Darfur today
should not be seen through the lens of Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, as it is no longer a
matter of peacekeeping, but rather of peacebuilding,
stability and development. Further, in order to enable
law-enforcement agencies in Darfur to do their jobs,
the Council must consider the recommendation set
forth in paragraph 49 of the report, namely, to lift the
sanctions imposed under resolution 1591 (2005).

We agree with paragraphs 38 and 39 of the joint
report, on the objectives and scope of the priorities
of the Government of the Sudan towards achieving
comprehensive peace not just in Darfur, but throughout
the country. The current negotiations in Juba will
address the root causes of the conflict in the Sudan in
order to end the era of infighting that has lasted too
long in the country. Efforts to achieve comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Sudan will be guided by the
Constitutional Declaration of 17 August and the Juba
Declaration of 11 September. Achieving peace entails
commitments and obligations, as well as international
and regional support. The peace process, which is set to
be implemented by the end of this year, requires, above
all, security arrangements, ceasefire monitoring, the
end of hostilities and urgent humanitarian assistance.

In order to ensure a seamless and effective
transition, there must be national ownership of any effort
requiring the assistance of the United Nations, whether
in Darfur or any other conflict area. Accordingly, the
following priority areas, all of which require United
Nations assistance, will be the subject of our focus.

First, the transitional Government's efforts aimed
at achieving comprehensive peace are essential and
need the Organization's support.

Secondly, to assist the Government in addressing
the economic situation, the economic sanctions need to
be lifted, and the Sudan needs to be removed from the
list of State sponsors of terrorism. It is important to
note that the Sudanese people have never taken part in
any terrorist acts.

Thirdly, for the rule of law to take hold, there must
be international support for our efforts to build the
capacity of competent national institutions.

Fourthly, the human rights situation needs to be
improved. In this regard, I would like to recall that
last month the Sudan signed an agreement to establish
a full-fledged Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the Sudan, to which we pledge our
full support.

Fifthly, support will be needed for sustainable
solutions and quick-impact projects.

Sixthly, the transitional Government requires
assistance in its efforts aimed at addressing the situation
of internally displaced persons and in disarming,
demobilizing and reintegrating former combatants, as
well as in issues related to land, transitional justice and
other aspects of peacebuilding.

The Sudan of today is totally unlike the Sudan
the Security Council has come to know over the past
three decades. It is a new country that seeks to join the
international community as a peace-loving member
that seeks international cooperation, is committed to
international law and respects the basic rights of its
citizens. As a first step in that direction, my Government
has focused on women by appointing the first woman
Chief Justice in the history of the Sudan and in the
history of the region. We have also appointed a woman
Foreign Minister for the first time in our history. The
Government has shown its respect for religious and
gender diversity by appointing a Christian woman
to the Sovereign Council and four women Ministers.
The number of women in the transitional legislative
assembly will soon exceed 40 per cent; the women of
the Sudan deserve this, and more.

Behind me today sit four young Sudanese women,
who are among the six female diplomats who have
joined the Sudanese delegation to the United Nations.
Sudanese women have contributed significantly to the
transition that has led to these changes. In the period
following the conclusion of the peace process, the
United Nations must appoint skilled and experienced
people to lead various United Nations agencies in
the Sudan in working in close coordination with the
Government of the Sudan, in line with the plans and
projects of our Government and its priorities.

In conclusion, we applaud the unwavering and
ongoing integrated efforts to bring a definitive end
to all manifestations of conflict in my country so that
the peace and development process in the Sudan may
be completed. The Sudanese delegation wishes once
again to express its gratitude to the Security Council,
the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and UNAMID. We commend the
sacrifices made by peacekeepers over the years and
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries.
Finally, we reiterate the Sudan's readiness to cooperate
with all regional and international partners to resolve
all UNAMID-related issues until the mission's full and
final withdrawal.

