The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Belgium.

At the outset, I should like to thank President
King and Prosecutor Rapp of the Special Court for
their clear statements.

Belgium welcomes the launch this week of
Charles Taylor's trial before the Special Court for
Sierra Leone. The holding of the trial is proof that
there is no longer any question of impunity for persons
accused of the most serious crimes, whatever their
rank.

My delegation has stressed on several occasions
that peace and impunity are never compatible. That
was the spirit underlying the creation of the Court.
According to a recent study, 90 per cent of the
population of Sierra Leone considers that the Court has
helped to establish peace. There could be no better
illustration of how clearly the people directly
concerned recognize the Court's contribution.

One of the Special Court's important innovations
is that it may issue the first sentence for the
recruitment of child soldiers. Indeed, by its decision of
31 May 2004, the Appeals Chamber deemed that the
rule prohibiting the recruitment of children under the
age of 15 was part of customary international
humanitarian law. That will certainly send an
unmistakable signal to armed groups throughout the
world that seek the unacceptable involvement of
children in armed conflict. We cannot forget that the
conflict in Sierra Leone featured extreme brutality of
which children and women were the chief victims.

The victims' perception that they have received
justice is crucial. In that regard, we stress the
outstanding work done by the Court in terms of
outreach since its creation, and particularly the
communication efforts developed in the context of the
Taylor trial.

My delegation welcomes the fact that judgments
in the case of the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council
are expected on 20 June and, in the case of the Civil
Defence Forces, in July. That represents an important
step forward in the Court's work, which we welcome.
My delegation notes with satisfaction the fact that
the Court is expected to conclude its work by the end
of 2009. We welcome the two documents recently
finalized - the completion strategy of the Court's
work and the completion budget for the next three
years. Insofar as Belgium's principled support is also
expressed in the form of regular contributions to the
Court's budget, those documents provide an essential
basis for the voluntary contributions that are vital to its
work.

December 2009 is no longer so far away, and we
must reflect beforehand on the Court's residual
functions that will remain to be discharged after it
closes. Those include issues of witness protection, the
enforcement of sentences, archives and so on. It would
be useful in that exercise to seek possible synergies
with other jurisdictions that are equally involved in this
debate, in particular the International Criminal
Tribunals for Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I call on the representative of Sierra Leone.

