Mrs. Patterson (United States of America):
Allow me to thank you, Sir, and your delegation for
your endeavours during your presidency of the Council
this month.

The adoption this month of two resolutions on the
Sudan - peacekeeping and sanctions - demonstrates
the Council's strong commitment to fostering peace
and stability throughout the Sudan. The Council has
succeeded in keeping the momentum moving forward
on international support for peace in the Sudan. The
10,000-strong peacekeeping force authorized by the
Council will assist the parties to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement in implementing that historic peace
accord.

The sanctions resolution recognizes that conflict,
violence and atrocities in Darfur continue and that the
Council must take steps now to pressure the parties to
end the violence in Darfur and to conclude a political
settlement peacefully. We strongly urge the parties to
the conflict in Darfur to cease the violence and
atrocities and to resume political negotiations
immediately in order to reach a political settlement
peacefully.

As we all know, the contributions of the African
Union have been and remain integral to the peaceful
resolution of the conflict in Darfur. We commend the
African Union and its leadership for their continued
mission in Darfur. We continue to encourage the
African mission in the Sudan to quickly ramp up its
authorized force level to enable it to expand its areas of
patrol. We continue to strongly support the African
Union's efforts to resolve the conflict in Darfur and
urge all Member States to contribute to the mission.

We strongly support bringing to justice those
responsible for the crimes and atrocities that have
occurred in Darfur and ending the climate of impunity
there. Violators of international humanitarian law and
human rights law must be held accountable. In
September, we concluded that genocide had occurred
in Darfur and we called for and supported the creation
of the International Commission of Inquiry. United
Nations estimates are that 180,000 people have died
from violence, atrocities and the hunger and disease
caused by the conflict. Justice must be served in
Darfur.

By adopting this resolution, the international
community has established an accountability
mechanism for the perpetrators of crimes and atrocities
in Darfur. The resolution will refer the situation in
Darfur to the International Criminal Court (ICC) for
investigation and prosecution. While the United States
believes that the better mechanism would have been a
hybrid tribunal in Africa, it is important that the
international community speak with one voice in order
to help promote effective accountability.

The United States continues to fundamentally
object to the view that the ICC should be able to
exercise jurisdiction over the nationals, including
government officials, of States not party to the Rome
Statute. That strikes at the essence of the nature of
sovereignty. Because of our concerns, we do not agree
to a Security Council referral of the situation in Darfur
to the ICC and abstained in the voting on today's
resolution. We decided not to oppose the resolution
because of the need for the international community to
work together in order to end the climate of impunity
in the Sudan and because the resolution provides
protection from investigation or prosecution for United
States nationals and members of the armed forces of
non-State parties.

The United States is and will continue to be an
important contributor to the peacekeeping and related
humanitarian efforts in the Sudan. The language
providing protection for the United States and other
contributing States is precedent-setting, as it clearly
acknowledges the concerns of States not party to the
Rome Statute and recognizes that persons from those
States should not be vulnerable to investigation or
prosecution by the ICC, absent consent by those States
or a referral by the Security Council. We believe that,
in the future, absent consent of the State involved, any
investigations or prosecutions of nationals of non-party
States should come only pursuant to a decision by the
Security Council.

Consistent with our long-standing views about
the appropriate role of the Security Council, we expect
that, by having the Security Council refer the situation
in Darfur to the ICC, firm political oversight of the
process will be exercised. The Council's action today
plays an important role in that regard. We expect that
the Council will continue to exercise such oversight as
investigations and prosecutions pursuant to the referral
proceed.

Protection from the jurisdiction of the Court
should not be viewed as unusual. Indeed, under article
124, even parties to the Rome Statute can opt out from
the Court's jurisdiction over war crimes for a period of
seven full years, and important supporters of the Court
have in fact availed themselves of that opportunity to
protect their own personnel. If it is appropriate to
afford such protection from the jurisdiction of the
Court to States that have agreed to the Rome Statute, it
cannot be inappropriate to afford protection to those
that have never agreed. It is our view that non-party
States should be able to opt out of the Court's
jurisdiction, as parties to the Statute can, and the
Council should be prepared to take action to that effect
as appropriate situations arise in the future.

Although we abstained on this Security Council
referral to the ICC, we have not dropped, and indeed
continue to maintain, our long-standing and firm
objections and concerns regarding the ICC. We believe
that the Rome Statute is flawed and does not have
sufficient protections from the possibility of politicized
prosecutions. We reiterate our fundamental objection to
the Rome Statute's assertions that the ICC has
jurisdiction over the nationals, including government
officials, of States that have not become parties to the
Rome Statute. Non-parties have no obligations in
connection with that treaty unless otherwise decided by
the Security Council, upon which Members of this
Organization have conferred primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

We are pleased that the resolution recognizes that
none of the expenses incurred in connection with the
referral will be borne by the United Nations and that,
instead, such costs will be borne by the parties to the
Rome Statute and those that contribute voluntarily.
That principle is extremely important and we want to
be perfectly clear that any effort to retrench on that
principle by this or other organizations to which we
contribute could result in our withholding funding or
taking other action in response. That is a situation that
we must avoid.

As is well known, in connection with our
concerns about the jurisdiction of the Court and the
potential for politicized prosecutions, we have
concluded agreements with 99 countries - over half
the States Members of this Organization - since the
entry into force of the Rome Statute to protect against
the possibility of transfer or surrender of United States
persons to the Court. We appreciate that the resolution
takes note of the existence of those agreements and
will continue to pursue additional such agreements
with other countries as we move forward.

Recognizing that non-parties have no obligation
under the Rome Statute, the resolution recognizes and
accepts that the ability of some States to cooperate with
the ICC investigation will be restricted in connection
with applicable domestic law. For the United States, we
are restricted by United States statutes that reflect deep
concerns about the Court from providing assistance
and support to the ICC.

In the Darfur case, the Council included, at our
request, a provision that exempts persons of non-party
States in the Sudan from ICC prosecution. We respect
the position of those countries that are parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, but
persons from countries not party that are supporting the
United Nations or the African Union's efforts should
not be placed in jeopardy. This resolution provides
clear protections for United States persons. No United
States person supporting the operations in the Sudan
will be subject to investigation or prosecution because
of this resolution.

That does not mean that there will be immunity
for American citizens who act in violation of the law.
We will continue to discipline our own people when
appropriate.

Let me conclude by reminding everyone that the
point of these three resolutions is to help the people of
the Sudan. They have suffered through appalling civil
conflicts that have resulted in untold suffering. We
cannot bring justice to all the victims. What we can do
is help the people of the Sudan turn a historic page and
enjoy a much, much better future. This month's three
Sudan resolutions are designed to help reach that goal.

