Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank
Mr. Ging and his team for his briefing.

As this is New Zealand's last opportunity to address
the humanitarian situation in Syria, we wanted to make
a few remarks in the open Chamber.

Over the past two years, New Zealand has worked
with the Security Council to try to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We were honoured
to work with our co-leads Jordan and Spain last year,
and with Egypt and Spain this year. We secured some
modest achievements, most notably the two annual
renewals of the humanitarian access resolutions first
pioneered by Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg.
In Council terms, those resolutions and resolution
2286 (2016), on attacks on healthcare facilities and
workers, were important achievements, especially
when viewed against a background of near paralysis in
the Council on the political track on Syria. However,
in terms of real-world impacts, what has been achieved
under those resolutions is a tiny fraction ofwhat has been
needed to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.

During our term we witnessed some deeply
disturbing trends: systematic attacks on hospitals and
on medical and humanitarian workers; obstruction of
food and essential supplies to civilian populations as a
tactic of war; use of indiscriminate weapons with zero
regard for civilians; and use of chemicals as weapons.
These tactics of war undermine the basic tenets of
international humanitarian law and should concern
us all.

The need to address Syria's humanitarian crisis
should be something on which all Council members
can agree; and for, the most part, that has been the
case. However, as we saw graphically last month, when
humanitarian objectives do not square with the war-
fighting aims of those with decision-making powers on
the Council, the humanitarian objectives are the ones
that are pushed aside, which is not how international
humanitarian law is supposed to work.

Last month's vetoes of the simple draft resolution
that New Zealand put forward with Egypt and Spain was
but the latest example of an attitude that has troubled
New Zealand deeply during our time on the Council:
that is, the apparent indifference ofa number of Council
members to human suffering, even on a large scale.
While that has been most apparent in the case of Syria,
in connection with which a series of vetoes has been
cast over the past five years, it is equally apparent in
the Council's actions and its inability to take effective
action with respect to the crises in Yemen, South Sudan
and the Sudan.

We welcome the recent adoption of the resolutions
allowing the United Nations to observe evacuations in
Aleppo and the renewal of cross-border and cross-line
humanitarian access. The Council's priority must be to
address persistent efforts by the Syrian Government to
prevent the full and effective implementation of those
resolutions, which we have witnessed with depressing
regularity over the past two years. As Mr. Ging has
reminded us, we must now ensure the protection of the
civilians fleeing eastern Aleppo, Fo'ah and Kefraya. In

the longer term, we must ensure that the protection of
civilians is prioritized throughout Syria and in the many
other towns and communities that remain besieged or
undergoing bombardment.

We welcome the determination others have shown
in recent weeks to act when the Council will not.
We hope that the resolution adopted in the General
Assembly this week can lay the ground work for action
to bring justice for the victims of this conflict. We also
welcome the board of inquiry findings on the attack
on the United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent
convoy in Orem Al-Kubra. The information that the
attack was highly likely perpetrated by the Syrian air
force is deeply disturbing, as was the obstruction and
delay by the Syrian Government in issuing visas to the
investigators. We hope that the Council will be able to
unite in welcoming that report and in condemning all
attacks on humanitarian workers.

We pay tribute to the dedication and commitment of
many, including United Nations Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura, to achieve peace in Syria, to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and to Under-
Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien and Mr. Ging and
their teams for their unwavering dedication and efforts to
provide humanitarian assistance to those in need and to
the courage and sacrifice of humanitarian agencies and
workers in Syria and to the generosity of neighbouring
countries in sheltering the millions of Syrian refugees.
We also thank our fellow humanitarian co-leads over
the past two years - Spain, Egypt and Jordan - for
their generous collaboration and their determination to
help improve the humanitarian situation in Syria.

While the provision of humanitarian assistance is
vital, it is only treating the symptoms of the conflict.
External actors must set aside vested interests and
narrow allegiances and prioritize action to end the
conflict and promote genuine reconciliation. As we
all know, only a political resolution with meaningful
reconciliation and genuine political and security sector
reform can provide a lasting peace to the civilians of
Syria.

