Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us. We are in favour of the
Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) by another three months, in support
of the peace process in Liberia and the unremitting efforts
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to resolve the Liberian conflict.

We appreciate the contributions made at the
ECOWAS Summit of 17 August to restoring the Liberian
peace process. Over the years ECOWAS has made
unremitting efforts to end fighting in Liberia despite its
own economic difficulties. ECOWAS countries have sent
peace-keeping forces to Liberia in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter and, braving hardships and
setbacks, offered good offices and mediation to facilitate
a peaceful settlement of the Liberian conflict.

China has consistently rendered firm support to
regional organizations in their efforts to resolve problems
in their respective regions, pursuant to the provisions of
the United Nations Charter. We have noted that a new
timetable and concrete measures were worked out at the
recent ECOWAS Summit to ensure the implementation of
the Abuja Agreement. This has demonstrated the
determination, perseverance and confidence of ECOWAS.
We are of the view that the international community
should support the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) in various ways for its successful fulfilment
of the peace-keeping mission. We hope that ECOMOG
and UNOMIL will continue to closely cooperate and
coordinate with each other to ensure the effective
implementation of the new timetable of the Abuja
Agreement.

As is pointed out in the draft resolution before us,
the final settlement of the Liberian conflict can depend
only on the Liberian people themselves and on the
readiness of the leaders of all Liberian parties, proceeding
from the interests of their country and people, to
demonstrate good faith in political reconciliation, to give
up the use of force and to seek a political solution
acceptable to all parties through patient and sincere
negotiations and dialogue. At this critical juncture in the
Liberian peace process, we sincerely hope that the parties
in Liberia will seize the favourable opportunity of the
extension of UNOMIL's mandate to complete the
disarmament of their forces in earnest and to make good
preparations for the general elections so as to ultimately

 

achieve national reconciliation and restore peace in the
country through fair elections.

We support the international community, including the
United Nations, in promoting the Liberian peace process
together with ECOWAS, thus making their contributions to
peace in West Africa. We have always believed that a
stable and growing Africa is an important and indispensable
component of a peaceful and prosperous world. We
sincerely hope that Liberia, with the help of the
international community, will achieve peace and stability at
an early date. China will join the international community
in making its own contribution to this end.

