Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Azerbaijan.

We commend the permanent representative of
Argentina, Ambassador Maria Cristina Perceval for
her dedicated efforts as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. We also commend former Chairs of the
Working Group for their valuable contributions. We
acknowledge the role that the Working Group is playing
to advance ways to further enhance the transparency,
accountability and overall efficiency of the Council's
work.

The Security Council's working methods continue
to raise great interest among the broader membership.
Today's open debate is yet another illustration of the
priority attention given by Member States to that topic.
Almost one year has passed since the Council's last
open debate (see S/PV.6870), which raised a number of
important issues that required more effort and resolute
steps towards a solution. Meanwhile, the Council has
continued to further implement the presidential note
contained in document S/2010/507 and has agreed
on several measures to enhance its efficiency and
transparency - in addition to its existing interaction
and dialogue with non-Council members and other
bodies, as reproduced in the two notes by the President
adopted earlier this year. More attention has been paid to
achieving broader participation by Council members in
the decision-making process by providing opportunities
to hear the views of the broader membership on the
working methods of the Council. The Council has also
discussed ways and means to enhance its interactivity

with non-Council Member States and to promote its
responsiveness to their inputs and contributions, as
well as to improve Security Council communication
with the Peacebuilding Commission, troop- and
police-contributing countries and relevant regional and
subregional organizations.

Despite a slight decrease in the number of public
meetings of the Council in comparision with the same
period last year, the trend of holding more public
meetings, including in the form of briefings and
debates, is encouraging. At the same time, the quality of
such public meetings depends mostly on the Council's
readiness to take into consideration the views and
contributions of non-Council Member States, including
through a reflection of their proposals and inputs in the
outcomee of public meetings. The holding of annual
open debates on the topic under consideration is a good
opportunity to further encourage the Council's efforts
towards improving its working methods, reviewing the
implementation of note 507 and subsequent documents
adopted by the Council and identifying positive trends
and practices by proposing new ideas on enhancing
transparency and the efficiency of the Council.

A significant number of proposals were submitted
and discussed in previous years, in the course of both
open debates and deliberations within the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Prodecural Questions. Those discussions illustrate
the remaining obstacles and the need for more efforts
towards addressing existing differences. We hope that
the Council will initiate a process of genuine reforms
of the Security Council to meet the expectations of the
international community. It should be noted that the

reluctance - and sometimes even unwillingness - to
change stereotypes by preserving existing practices
complicates the process of reaching agreement
on matters of importance to the United Nations
membership.

Another important issue that requires additional
efforts is the need for the Council's review of the
implementation of its own decisions. It is unacceptable
when resolutions of the Security Council that
contain imperative demands for concrete action are
deliberately ignored, or interpreted in a way to avoid
their implementation. Needless to say, the silence of the
Security Council concerning the apparent disregard of
its resolutions on issues pertaining to international and
regional peace and security, and attempts to question
their validity, are dangerous and cannot constitute an
accepted practice of the Council's working methods.

In conclusion, I would like to thank all Member
States for their active participation in today's debate
and for their valuable ideas and recommendations. They
constitute essential food for thought and undoubtedly
deserve careful consideration with a view to enhancing
the transparency, effectiveness and interactivity of the
Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5pm.
