President Santos Calderon (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
and convened this high-level meeting, which highlights
the commitment of your Government to the high aims
of international peace and welfare. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his valuable report
(S/2011/552) and for his briefing today, both of which
enlighten us about the actions and accomplishments of
the United Nations in the field of preventive
diplomacy.

Colombia is pleased and grateful for the Security
Council's decision to consider as a main topic of
debate that of conflict prevention through the peaceful
settlement of disputes, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Our task today is to ensure that the
means for the prevention and settlement of disputes
become ever more agile and efficient. We should not
underestimate any of these means; each has virtues of
its own and they all have the same purpose.

I would like to stress, however, that some are
especially useful, in particular the less formal means
for dispute settlement, such as good offices and
mediation. The intrinsic advantages of mediation are
evident if one looks at international practice. The
mediator must enjoy the parties' trust. Without trust,
there is no point in even setting the process in motion.
This is why the existence of conditions conducive to
reaching agreement is essential if mediation is to
proceed smoothly.

A recent experience in our region was the
successful mediation carried out by Colombia and
Venezuela in order to assure the return of Honduras to
the Organization of American States and to contribute
to resolving the crisis that arose in that nation in 2009.

Today more than ever before, the recognized
leadership of institutions, Governments and high-
profile personalities, both in the world arena and in the
regional sphere, has a role to play in contributing to the
attainment of peace through good offices and
mediation. By the same token, international
organizations should encourage and promote these
processes. We are referring, of course, to mediation
processes between States in which the United Nations
carries out its mandate, and not to situations involving
illegal actors who act outside the system and even
against it. We are talking about mediation that works,
that sets goals and time limits, and is useful in ending
conflicts, not in perpetuating them.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment in
his 2009 report (S/2009/189) that is surprising that
although mediation has demonstrated its effectiveness
as a means for the settlement of disputes, it has
attracted little attention and has not drawn many
resources from the United Nations system. That is why
we were pleased with the recent adoption of a General
Assembly resolution (resolution 65/283) that
strengthens the role of mediation in conflict prevention
and resolution. That document is destined to become
the roadmap of mediation.

In international disputes, just as with one's
health, it is always better to prevent than to correct.
The most propitious moment to resolve a dispute is
when it is just emerging, before it starts escalating. For
this reason, the early intervention by the United
Nations or regional organizations and even the good
offices of certain countries in regional settings are
fundamental for the prevention and settlement of
conflicts.
I also want to stress the important role that
regional organizations and arrangements can play in

this context, as recognized in Chapter VIII of the
Charter. This has been acknowledged by the Security
Council on numerous occasions, most recently in
today's meeting.

When the Security Council acts under Chapter
VII, the dispute has already acquired such proportions
that it is more complex and more difficult to solve, so
much so that the Council is empowered to impose
sanctions and even to authorize the use of force. It
would be ideal not to have to resort to Chapter VII, and
therefore we must make every effort to strengthen
preventive diplomacy and make it more efficient and
more agile.

The Charter provides us with all the proper tools
to do that, such as direct negotiations, good offices,
mediation, fact-finding, conciliation, arbitration and
judicial settlement, as well as the possibility to call
upon the parties to settle their disputes by pacific
means and to suggest and recommend procedures for
adjustment. We only have to decide to use these
mechanisms and this power.

I want to conclude my intervention by making a
call to the Council that we assume our responsibilities
with a long-term vision. Let us take off the shelf these
instruments for prevention and settlement of disputes
provided for in Chapter VI of the Charter and put them
into practice.

More prevention and less intervention: this must
be our common goal, and this is the proposal and
invitation that Colombia is making.

