Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
thanks the Italian presidency for convening this open
ministerial debate. We appreciate the insights shared by
the Secretary-General and the other briefers.

Bangladesh welcomes the adoption of resolution
2388 (2017) this morning, and aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

We shared our priorities and recommendations
in that regard during the Council's open debates in
December 2016 (see S/PV.7585) and March 2017 (see S/PV.7898). The importance of enhancing United
Nations inter-agency coordination and strengthening
data collection and analysis cannot be over-emphasized.

Despite our collective commitments and efforts,
trafficking in persons continues to thrive, with horrific
consequences. It is evident that some international
terrorist groups are resorting to trafficking in persons
to bolster their power, recruitment base and finances.
Refugees and other conflict-related displaced persons
remain at the highest risk oftrafficking and exploitation.

As the Council is well aware, since 25 August
Bangladesh has witnessed an unprecedented influx of
620,000 people, mostly Rohingya, from Myanmar's
Rakhine state, in the wake of the widespread atrocity
crimes committed against them. We remain deeply
concerned over the possibility that many women and
children among them falling will fall prey to traffickers
and smugglers operating regionally. With the sea routes
becoming safer during the current season for operating
makeshift boats, it is most likely that these elements
would try to take advantage of the forcibly displaced
people from Rakhine state still entering Bangladesh
almost on a daily basis. Those who claim that the
situation on the ground in Rakhine state has stabilized
are either deliberately ignoring the evident reality or
have a vested agenda.

Our law-enforcement and border-management
authorities have mobilized enhanced resources in order
to remain vigilant against traffickers and other organized
criminal networks. It is, however, a possibility that
they might find themselves overstretched in the face of
changing tactics and potential incentives deployed by
traffickers, violent extremist groups and other organized

criminal networks. It is crucial that the relevant
authorities receive meaningful cooperation through
information sharing, prevention and interception from
their relevant counterparts in countries of the region,
including Myanmar.

The case of the Rohingya rescued at sea off the
shores of other countries of the region during the 2015
Andaman Sea crisis is perhaps an indication of how the
victims are likely to be treated under such circumstances.
In the wake of the discovery of mass graves, harrowing
reports of torture, killing and exploitation of victims,
and loss of hundreds of lives on rickety boats adrift at
sea, our delegation urged the need for addressing the
root causes of the crisis in Myanmar's Rakhine state.
Regrettably, the situation continued to deteriorate
further with the Rohingya being increasingly pushed to
the brink, owing to systematic human rights violations
leading to the commission of atrocity crimes against
them. That has only created a fertile ground for
traffickers and other organized criminal networks to
operate with near impunity.

The Secretary-General is expected to brief the
Council next month on the situation in Rahkhine
state, where we would urge him to make practical
recommendations for addressing the renewed threats of
trafficking in persons. It needs to be borne in mind that
every individual languishing in camps on a protracted
basis or left in the lurch in the name of national
verification by Myanmar would run the risk of falling
victim to traffickers and other criminal operatives.
The situation in Myanmar needs to be taken up by the
Council as the test case for attesting to the efficacy
of the resolution adopted today, and for addressing
trafficking in persons during conflicts as part of its
efforts to sustain peace.

In conclusion, we agree with the briefers that
trafficking in persons in conflict situations perhaps
constitutes the greatest human rights issue of our time.
We reaffirm our commitment to join hands with fellow
Member States in further strengthening the coordinated
response and action of the United Nations against
trafficking in persons, slavery and forced labour.

