Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to welcome Minister Dioup. I reiterate
that Egypt stands ready to cooperate with Council
members to provide assistance and support to the
people of Mali so as to overcome the current challenges
at this critical juncture of Mali's history. We will spare
no effort to strengthen regional and international
cooperation so as to confront the threats that are facing
the people of Mali.

Resolution 2295 (2016), which we have just
adopted and of which Egypt is proud to be a sponsor,
takes into consideration the critical situation on the
ground and the emerging and unique challenges
that are facing the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
Unfortunately, MINUSMA has become one of the most
dangerous operations on the ground. The resolution
contains numerous elements that take into consideration
the situation on the ground without undermining the
necessary requirements of peace operations according
to agreed standards.

The resolution gives MINUSMA a balanced
mandate in line with current challenges. It strengthens
the capacities of Blue Helmets so as to enable them
to better protect the Mission, fully discharge their
mandate, including the protection of civilians, and
provide the necessary assistance and support to
the Malian Government and other parties so as to
implement the provisions of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation.

I commend the French delegation's efforts aimed at
reaching a consensus-based agreement and resolution,
in the light of the shared objectives of our delegations.
Indeed, the French delegation was able to close certain
gaps in terms of fulfilling those objectives.

In conclusion, Egypt would once again like to stress
the need to preserve our relationships with our partners
in Mali in order to provide them with the international,
regional and bilateral support they require. We believe
that stability in Mali is the cornerstone of peace,
well-being and prosperity in the Sahel region, whose
proximity to North and West Africa directly links it to
the stability of the African continent in general.

