Ms. Bavdaz Kuret (Slovenia): I wish to thank the Viet Nam presidency of the Council for organizing this debate, in which the wider membership can present its views on upholding the Charter of the United Nations. I also wish to thank both briefers. Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union (see S/PV.8699), and wishes to add few remarks in its national capacity. The entire legal order that regulates international relations and its security structure is built on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which are broad enough to cover new challenges and are just as relevant as they were at the inception of the Organization. Notwithstanding the discussion around Article 103, we believe that the United Nations Charter is the international treaty that prevails in the case of conflicting obligations under other treaties. It must always be respected and implemented - never undermined. The rights and obligations arising from the Charter are equal for all Members and we all benefit from them. All States are obliged to ensure respect for the Charter, and Articles 1 and 2 must be the basis for our behaviour in the international arena. The Security Council has been entrusted with the primary responsibility of maintaining international peace and security. So far, the Council has succeeded in some cases, but has failed in many others. Members of the Security Council discharge that responsibility on behalf of the entire United Nations membership and should therefore look beyond their national interests. We believe there is plenty of room for the Security Council to make better use of the Charter's potential, beyond Chapter VII. In our opinion, the Council should be more active in preventing conflicts instead of only reacting to them. We encourage it to use Chapter VI more often and to explore ways of analysing crises and risks as early as possible in order to address them head- on and, if necessary, take collective action. The Council should address the root causes of conflicts, keeping in mind that gross human rights violations are an alarming indicator that a larger conflict may be under way. When acting in response to a crisis by establishing a mission, the Security Council should stress the rule of law and justice and closely cooperate with the Peacebuilding Commission. Peace and justice reinforce each other. We also wish to encourage the Secretary-General to make use of Article 99 of the Charter. One of the major intersections between the United Nations Charter, the Security Council and the rule of law is the enforcement of those rules and decisions, especially through the International Court of Justice. We welcome the Security Council's discussions and cooperation withregional and subregional organizations. They are essential and uniquely equipped to address situations of risk and conflict, as well as post-conflict situations in particular regions. Let me recall that the Charter and the Organization were not imposed on us, but were created by generations that endured the worst human experiences. Upholding the Charter is the first step towards ensuring that the Organization and its States Members will act for the purposes and by the principles enshrined in it. Let me conclude by saying that, with the latest developments in the Middle East, the need for the United Nations to be a framework for dialogue is more evident than ever.
