The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make an explanation of vote in my capacity as the
representative of France.

France fully supports resolution 1863 (2009) and
welcomes its unanimous adoption by the Security
Council. I should also like to thank Ambassador
Khalilzad for the decisive role he played in the
negotiation of the text.

Inaction is not an option given the tragedy facing
the Somali people. We are thinking in particular of
those millions of people who are currently dependent
on international aid and of those waves of displaced
persons fleeing the violence who find themselves in the
most precarious of conditions on the Afgoye road.

On the other hand, to decide to establish a
peacekeeping operation when the necessary political
and security conditions are not in place would be to
destine the Blue Helmets to failure and to give false
hope to one of the most traumatized populations of
Africa. It would also have been wrong for us to commit
blindly to deploying a peacekeeping operation at an
arbitrary date.

The approach spelled out in resolution 1863
(2009) allows us both to send a strong political signal
and to begin to take concrete action in Somalia itself.
The resolution sends the new and realistic political
message that the Security Council is ready in principle
to establish a peacekeeping operation once the
necessary conditions have been met. The resolution is
very clear on this point. It is also very clear in setting
out that, once those conditions are met, a subsequent
decision will need to be taken by the Council.
Naturally, that decision will be taken in response to
political and security developments in the situation. In
that respect, we look forward to the Secretary-
General's delivery in April of a detailed report that will

equip the Security Council to take a decision at that
point.

Major events are taking place. The Ethiopian
army has now withdrawn from Mogadishu. Following
the resignation of President Yusuf on 29 December
2008, presidential elections are being planned for
26 January. The risks are great, but it is crucial that the
Somali parties seize the political opportunities before
them to implement fully the Djibouti agreement, make
it completely inclusive, pursue political dialogue and
start the work to improve security in certain areas.

Resolution 1863 (2009) enables the Security
Council to act right now to support the African Union
Mission to Somalia (AMISOM). We wish here to pay
tribute in particular to Uganda and to Burundi for their
efforts. It also makes it possible to support the joint
security force created following the Djibouti agreement.

The resolution calls on the Secretary-General to
establish a trust fund and to organize a donors
conference to find additional resources, as well as to
establish a logistics support package for AMISOM, as
he proposed on 19 December. All of this can and
should be done quickly, in a spirit of transparency and,
of course, in full respect of the budgetary principles of
the United Nations.

The Security Council has chosen to act in and off
the coast of Somalia. On the sea, through resolutions
1846 (2008) and 1851 (2008), the fight against piracy
is now actively under way, with the notable
participation of members of the European Union and of
many other nations. On land, resolution 1863 (2008)
provides for a number of steps that have to be
translated into reality. Whether we are talking about the
financial measures that I have just mentioned or the
assignment to Somalia of a special representative of
the Secretary-General, these are all tools to help the
Somalis to live up to the promise of the Djibouti
agreement to restore peace finally to Somalia.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Somalia.
