Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her
briefing and Ms. Nujeen Mustapha for her statement.

China is greatly attentive to the humanitarian
situation in Syria, sympathizes with the Syrian people
for what they have been going through and commends
the efforts of the United Nations and other actors aimed
at improving the humanitarian situation in the country.
As we speak, there continue to be a large number of
people in Syria who need humanitarian assistance, and
the problems in respect of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and Syrian refugees remain dire. Flooding has
hit large swathes of north-western and north-eastern
parts of the country, damaging or destroying IDP
camps there.

The international community has been following
with concern the humanitarian situation in the Al-Hol
camp, Rukban camp and the Idlib governorate. In
order to comprehensively address the humanitarian
challenges, a tailored solution is needed. In that regard,
I would like to share how China sees the situation.

First, we should actively support the Syrian
Government and people in its economic and social
reconstruction and support the return of Syrian
refugees. Ravaged by many years of conflict, Syria has
yet to recover from widespread devastation. The Syrian
Government's reconstruction efforts require strong
support by the international community to inspire
confidence and hope in the hearts of the Syrian people
about a better life ahead.

Recently, thanks to the efforts ofvarious concerned
parties, some Syrian refugees in Lebanon and Jordan
have returned to Syria and some of the internally
displaced persons in the Rukban camp have also left
the camp of their own accord. China welcomes those
developments and supports efforts to find a long-term
solution to the Rukban issue.

Secondly, we should further increase financial and
in-kind assistance to the Syrian people and adjust and
improve humanitarian relief operations in response to
changes in the humanitarian needs on the ground. The
population of the Al-Hol camp has surged in recent
months and more than 90 per cent of its residents are
women and children.

The humanitarian response should be strengthened
in the light of the camp's demographics and efforts
should be focused on long-term solutions. The United
Nations humanitarian operations and the international
community in Syria should fully respect Syria's
sovereignty, strictly adhere to the Council's resolutions
and step up their communication and coordination with
the Syrian Government.

Thirdly, the fight against terrorist forces should
continue to defend hard-won security gains. The
terrorist groups in Idlib, left unchecked and growing
in strength, are jeopardizing security and stability in
Syria and the region. According to the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/321), in the areas
controlled by terrorist groups there is no assurance for
civilians' right to personal safety or other rights. The
status quo is not sustainable.

China supports the commitment of various
concerned parties to find a proper solution to the Idlib
issue and eliminate the risk of a humanitarian crisis.
The international community should apply uniform
criteria to combating all terrorist groups that have been
designated by the Council, while giving comprehensive
consideration to humanitarian needs and avoiding harm
to the civilian population.

Fourthly, the efforts to advance a political
settlement should continue to create the fundamental
conditions for easing the humanitarian situation on the
ground in Syria. The international community should
stand resolutely behind the United Nations as it plays
its role as mediator, pushes the Syrian parties to seek
a solution and addresses the concerns of all parties
through negotiation, while respecting the principle of
a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned process and adhering to
resolution 2254 (2015). The Syrian parties should put
the future of the country and the well-being of their
people first, continue to overcome their differences
through dialogue and consultations, contribute to the
country's stabilization and minimize conflict.

China looks forward to further progress being made
in the new round of the Astana dialogue and following
the formation of the constitutional committee in order to
continue moving the Syrian political process forward.

