Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by
congratulating the Permanent Representative of China,
the Council member which holds the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June. I wish you, Sir,
all the best for a successful tour of duty.

It is a great honour for me to address the members
of the Security Council as the new President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and to present the Council with the current update
on our completion strategy. I would like to express
the appreciation of the entire Tribunal to all of the
Governments of the Security Council for their continued
support as we draw ever closer to the completion of our
work. I would also like to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Council member Guatemala, who has
taken over as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

I am happy to report to the Council that since the
last report (see S/20ll/731) the Tribunal has undergone
a significant shift with respect to both judicial and
administrative activities. As we near the completion of
all trial work, judicial and legal activities have become
more focused on requests for referral of cases to Rwanda,
and administrative energies are increasingly spent on
downsizing and providing the support necessary for the
opening of the Arusha branch of the Residual Mechanism
next month. However, none of that has taken away from
the core of our work, which is to complete all trial and
appellate proceedings in a fair and expeditious manner.

In December 2011, in line with projections since
2010, the final multi-accused trial judgement was
delivered in the Karemera et al. case, marking the most
expeditious judgement delivery in a multi-accused case
and showing that efforts to improve efficiency in recent
years have been effective in many cases. During that
same month, the Appeals Chamber upheld the decision
to refer the first ICTR case to Rwanda for trial. After
finalizing the arrangements for monitoring, Jean
Uwinkindi was transferred to Rwanda in April 2012. A
further three cases of fugitive accused have already been
referred to Rwanda. The Prosecutor has also requested,
or will request, three more referrals of fugitive cases,
all of which will be disposed of by next month. The
final three fugitives, for whom evidence preservation
will be concluded this month, are slated for trial by the
Residual Mechanism upon arrest. The Prosecutor will
provide further details on fugitive referral applications
and tracking during his presentation.

Five trial judgements were projected for delivery
during this six-month reporting period. Of the five,
all but one will have been delivered by the end of this
month. Owing to unforeseeable fair-trial requirements,
including the necessary continuation of the evidence
phase of the trial, judgement in the trial of Augustin
Ngirabatware - the final remaining ongoing ICTR
trial - is now expected by the end of 2012, and closing
arguments are scheduled for next month. Additionally,
just yesterday the Trial Chambers granted the application
for referral to Rwanda of the case against Bernard
Munyagishari, the final accused in pre-trial custody at
the Tribunal. I must note that the accused may appeal
that decision. If that happens, we hope to have a decision
from the Appeals Chamber in the next several months.

Therefore, based upon the current status of cases,
in stark contrast to the report delivered only six months
ago, I am happy to bring news that the Tribunal now
has a vastly reduced judicial workload. Due in no small
part to the continued hard work of our staff, nearly all
trial work is complete. Only one trial judgement in an
ongoing case will remain to be delivered in the second
half of 2012. All appeal judgements remain on track to
be completed by the end of 2014.

It must be noted, however, that pursuant to the
transitional arrangements the responsibility for two
pending contempt of court/false testimony cases where
indictments have already been confirmed remains with
the ICTR. In the event of arrests in those cases, or if
the Munyagishari referral is not upheld on appeal, the
anticipated completion of trial work may need to be
pushed back.

I would also like to take this opportunity to provide
the members of the Council with an update on the status
of the three cases on which there remains some question
as to whether the appeals, if any, would be filed with
the ICTR or the Residual Mechanism. For the first two
cases, there is a possibility for the appeals to remain with
the ICTR. The third will certainly go to the Residual
Mechanism.

In the Nizeyimana case the judgements will be
delivered later this month; in the Nzabonimana case,
oral judgement was rendered last week and the written
judgement will be filed later this month. Whether the
ICTR or the Residual Mechanism hears the appeal in
those two cases will depend upon the dates that the
notice of appeal in each case is filed.

The parties have 30 days from the filing of the written
judgement to file their notice of appeal, if any. In both
cases notices of appeal could be filed prior to 30 June,
causing them to be heard by the ICTR. However, in both
cases the time limits for filing allow the parties to file
after 1 July, the date from which cases go to the Residual
Mechanism. For the third case, Ngirabatware, it is now
clear that the trial judgement will not be delivered before
30 June, so the appeal will certainly go to the Residual
Mechanism.

Next, I turn to an important recent request that I have
sent to the Security Council and the General Assembly
seeking the extension of the terms of office for the trial
judges on the Ngirabatware case and the President, to
correspond with our remaining work. The terms of the
judges on the Ngirabatware bench are required to be
extended until December 2012, or until judgement is
rendered, if earlier. My term is required to be extended
until December 2014, in line with the projected
completion of all judicial work. Those extensions are
critical to ensuring that we meet our remaining goals for
the completion of our mandate.

Next, I turn to staffing. In continuation of a recurring
theme in recent reports, staff recruitment, retention and
separation persist as ongoing challenges as we progress
in the completion process. Where recruitment is required,
the Tribunal has difficulty attracting suitably qualified
candidates, given the limited contractual security that we
as a closing institution can provide. The ICTR continues
to experience difficulties in retaining experienced staff,
who lack financial incentives to stay with the Tribunal to
complete their work, have few possibilities for upward
mobility and have reduced contractual security. They
have therefore been leaving the Tribunal to accept offers
of employment elsewhere, either within or outside the
United Nations system. Although we continue to work
within the resources available and to make significant
progress, staff retention always has the potential to
adversely impact the successful and timely completion
of our work.

The downsizing process that began in 2008-
2009 continues with the proposed abolition of 212
posts during the 2012-2013 biennium. That will mean
an overall reduction of more than one third of the
authorized 2010-2011 levels. A fair and transparent
decision-making process concerning staff retention
during the downsizing process puts additional strain on
programme managers, who are thus required to perform
retention exercises in addition to their regular workload.
Moreover, their workload has already increased due to
restructuring plans, which require all retained staff to
perform an increasing range of functions.

We must express our gratitude to the Department of
Management, especially the Office of the Controller and
the Office of Human Resources Management, which
continue to provide the Tribunal with support to explore
and adopt additional measures and a common strategy
to address the challenges of downsizing and separation
of staff. That includes the implementation of the
previously planned establishment of the outplacement
office to assist Tribunal staff who have applied for
various positions within the United Nations system.

I now turn to the issue of relocating persons who
have been acquitted by the Tribunal. Both of my
predecessors in Office have brought to the Council's
attention the persistent problem of finding countries
to receive acquitted persons. With the near completion
of all trial activities, I see it as a cornerstone of my
presidency to enhance my role in those efforts. In that
regard, I will be increasingly applying my energies to
persuading Member States to assist with relocation. I
have already begun my work in that regard by lobbying
for our acquitted persons. I continue to do so today by
calling upon all members of the Council to do their part
in helping to ensure that we uphold the fundamental
right of freedom to live one's life after being acquitted
by an international tribunal.

I will now provide the Council with an update on the
role that the ICTR is playing in the preparations for the
Arusha branch of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. The Arusha branch of the
Mechanism will open its doors in less than one month.
From 1 July, many judicial and prosecutorial functions
will begin to be officially handed over to the Mechanism,
along with responsibilities for the Tribunal's archives,
the protection of witnesses and numerous other functions
currently handled by the Tribunal.

I am very pleased with the status of efforts to
ensure a seamless transition. I would like to thank
the President, the Registrar and the Prosecutor of the
Residual Mechanism for their tireless work in that
regard. It has been, and will continue to be, my honour
and privilege to do everything in my power to assist
them in that endeavour.

I would also like to express my deep gratitude to
the ICTR Registrar for all that he and his staff have
done to assist with making practical arrangements for
the coordinated provision of administrative and other
services to the Mechanism, in line with resolution 1966
(2010). Since January, the ICTR has been working on
the provision of a fully functional office space for the
Mechanism within the Tribunal's current premises. The
Tribunal has also supported the Mechanism in staff
recruitment and financial and budgetary matters and
assisted the Mechanism in establishing its relations
with the host country. The ICTR Registry continues
to share information and know-how in the areas of
witness support and protection and the enforcement of
sentences, in order to facilitate the smooth transfer of
those functions to the Mechanism.

Efforts to prepare the Tribunal's archives and
records for transfer to the Mechanism are well under
way, and coordinated efforts will increasingly continue
in the coming months. Wherever possible, we have
harmonized our draft retention schedules with those
of the ICTY and we have finalized guidelines on the
appraisal and disposal of records and the preparation of
records for transfer to the archives.

The Tribunals have finalized their coordinated
efforts and have submitted a draft Secretary-General's
bulletin on information sensitivity, classification,
handling and access of the records of the Tribunals and
the Mechanism. We look forward to the finalization and
release of that important document.

As the remaining days of the ICTR become fewer
and the Residual Mechanism begins to take shape, we
will continue to ensure that knowledge gained and
lessons learned are put to good use, both for creating the
institution charged with continuing the residual functions
of the Tribunal and for sharing best practices for the
closure of international legal institutions. Moreover, our
efforts at capacity-building and education for the region
will remain strong, so that the Tribunal's impact will not
only be one of challenging impunity, but also of helping
to improve the means for dispensing justice for an entire
region.

