Mr. Al-Shara' (Syrian Arab Republic)(spoke in Arabic): At this critical and painful moment, I have
nothing to say to the victims of the imminent war
against Iraq, except for these words from the Preamble
to the United Nations Charter:

"We the peoples of the United Nations,
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime
has brought untold sorrow to mankind, and
to practice tolerance and live together in peace
with one another as good neighbours, and to unite
our strength to maintain international peace and
security. . .".

This is the most important commitment consecrated in
the United Nations Charter 58 years ago. The rest are
details.
I would like to remind our audience - here or
there - that this Charter was signed in the United
States of America, in the city of San Francisco, in
1945, and that this historic monument that hosts our
deliberations was also built half a century ago in the
United States of America, in the city of New York, one
of the most densely populated cities in the world, and
that the American people who live in the American
continent between these two great cities - one
overlooking the Pacific and the other overlooking the
Atlantic - is in its plurality and diversity a microcosm
of the international community, more so than any other
country in the world.

This leads us to substantial issues, whether we are
about to deal with the pressing issue of Iraq and its
implications for the Middle East and the world, or
whether we are about to discuss the forgotten
Palestinian cause and its accumulated tragic
consequences for the entire world.

The first question is: can the United States
absolve itself and its ally, the United Kingdom, of the
responsibility that has befallen the two causes and their
catastrophic consequences to date? History is the best
witness - particularly the history of the United
Nations.

The second question is: can the United States use
the difficulty of arriving at constructive solutions to the
two questions within the United Nations itself as a
pretext and then blame failure on the Security Council?
Whoever said that the Security Council's mission is to
wage war, not to establish peace? Since when has
making peace been an easy feat in any international
crisis?

Within hours, a war of aggression will be
unleashed in Iraq, as was declared yesterday in
Washington. Emotions are running high - perhaps as
high as the temperature over there. By now, anyone
with vision and insight knows that this is an unfair and
unjustified war. It will come back to haunt those who
have advocated and promoted it, instead of enhancing
their status in history.

This war is not being waged for a reasonable, let
alone just, cause. While if war will be waged against
Iraq to disarm it of its weapons of mass destruction,
which do constitute a threat to its neighbours, Israel
has a stockpile of such weapons, particularly nuclear
weapons, unmatched even by some major Powers. No
one ignores the threat that such weapons pose to its
close, and not so close, neighbours. If the international
monitoring and inspection processes are ineffective and
unproductive in Iraq, then why is Israel the only
country in the Middle East that rejects any international
inspection or supervision of its weapons of mass
destruction, if it does not possess such weapons,
thereby laying to rest all allegations against it in this
regard?

Syria voted in favour of Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002). We were prompted to do so by
our belief in supporting the international will to find a
peaceful solution to the Iraqi crisis and to eliminate
Iraqi weapons of mass destruction through peaceful
means. Since the adoption of resolution 1441 (2002),
the inspection process has yielded tangible results, due
to positive and proactive Iraqi cooperation with the
inspectors on procedure and substance. Indeed, on
more than one occasion the inspectors said that they
needed a few months, not a few years, to complete the
tasks entrusted to them. However, we are now told that
war is days, or hours, away. It is as if war were an
inescapable fate, as if it were a popular demand in
every part of the world rather than otherwise.

Syria wishes to express its extreme regret and
concern at attempts by some to call into question the
role of the Security Council in particular, and the
United Nations in general, simply because they did not
succeed in imposing their will and positions on the
Council and the United Nations.

Our attention, and the attention of the majority of
the countries of the world, has been drawn to the
attempts by some to blame the Security Council -
perhaps a particular member of the Council - for the
failure to adopt a draft resolution authorizing military
force against Iraq. Such attempts deliberately ignore
the fact that the majority of the members of the Council
rejected the idea of adopting a draft resolution
authorizing the use of force, thus rendering the use of
the veto unnecessary by any country.

With the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 1441 (2002), basic international
terms of reference were set out to settle the Iraqi
question. The verbatim record of meetings of the
Security Council include comments by those members
that are hastening to wage war against Iraq, confirming
their belief that that resolution does not allow for
international law to be circumvented or to permit a
strike against Iraq without first reverting to the
Security Council. We categorically oppose the views of
those who have reneged on that resolution, particularly
given that they are sure that Iraq has no weapons of
mass destruction, as well as those who worked to
deliberately discredit the contents of the resolution, in
accordance with the infamous claim that the end
justifies the means. That is particularly significant
given that paragraph 12 of the resolution demands that
the Security Council be convened in order to discuss
any issue relevant to the implementation of the
provisions of the resolution. Syria believes that
ignoring that paragraph, demanding that inspectors be
suddenly withdrawn from Iraq or that their work be
suspended also makes it clear, beyond any shadow of a
doubt, that the objective is not to disarm Iraq of
weapons of mass destruction, but to occupy it and
usurp its natural resources, in contravention of all
norms and laws.

Syria categorically rejects today the feverish calls
for war against Iraq, just as in 1990 it rejected the
occupation of Kuwait. Syria can find no legal or moral
justification for that destructive option, particularly
outside the context of the Security Council. What logic
could be used by the countries of the world to justify to
their people the waging of a war, in contravention of
international law and in grave and flagrant violation of
the Charter, in order to pursue hidden objectives that
give precedence to the law of the jungle over
international legitimacy? Have not the United Nations
inspectors confirmed, to the Council that Iraq has
cooperated actively with them ever since the adoption
of resolution 1441 (2002)? Have we not clearly seen
the Iraqis destroy Al Samoud 2 missiles, in response to
demands by the international inspectors? How can
some deny that Iraq has provided plenty of evidence
and document after document to prove that it is free
from weapons of mass destruction? How many people
throughout the world believe that Iraq represents a
danger to the security of the United States and the
American people? If such a claim were true or based on
fact, we would have to consider that not just Iraq but
more than 150 countries throughout the world also pose
a threat to the security and integrity of the United
States. There are active or sleeper Al Qaeda cells in
those countries - a fact known to the United States
Administration. Such countries also have a declared or
undeclared class of weapons of mass destruction,
according to the records of the specialized international
agencies. Those records also indicate that the United
States has the largest arsenal of those lethal weapons in
the world.

If we consider both the letter and the spirit of the
United States ultimatum, issued on Monday, we can
only conclude that the objective of the war is the
removal or the bringing to justice of an individual or a
group of individuals. Is ensuring justice an objective
corollary of the killing of tens of thousands of innocent
Iraqis? Have we gone back to the Middle Ages, or are
we truly in the twenty-first century?

Anyone in the world has the right to denounce
such actions and to consider their negative results. The
United States might choose to forget the assassinations
and the carnage directed against the defenceless
Palestinian people, but how can it choose to forget the
fact that Rachel Corrie, an American peace activist,
was recently crushed to death by Israeli bulldozers?

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to those
States members of the Security Council that supported
a peaceful resolution of the issue in the Council for
their great sense of responsibility in very sincerely
expressing the position of the majority of the members
of the international community, regardless of race or
creed. They also reflected the feelings of the millions
who demonstrated, in thousands of cities all over the
world, against war and in favour of peace. We are very
appreciative of the principled position taken by those
members of the Security Council, who chose to stand
firmly in support of right and justice, regardless of the
difficulties and challenges that might result, instead of
succumbing to pressure or to short-term gains, to say
nothing of threats of coercion.

We also express the hope that, in these last hours
and minutes, the option of peace is still available, that
wisdom and historic vision can prevail and right and
justice be done to the benefit of the prosperity of the
people of the Middle East and the world in general.

At this critical moment, Syria urges those
concerned to shut down the machinery of war and to
spare the lives of millions of innocent Iraqis as well as
the lives of their new oppressors who are marching
thousands of miles in their advanced armour, holding
up the banner of liberation like a myth. Many
people- including many Americans - have stood
against the foreign occupier in defence of liberty and
independence. That is the logic of history. That is the
march of history - a march that will continue, no
matter how many challenges and obstacles stand in the
way.

