Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
our briefers. I want to express our strong support for
Special Representative Shearer and the men and women
serving in South Sudan on behalf of all of us here, and
to thank them for all that they are doing on the ground.

On many occasions the United Kingdom has
welcomed the genuine hope for a peaceful South
Sudan that came with the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan in September. It was inspiring
to hear from Mr. Shearer about the enthusiasm and the
desire of people all over South Sudan for that peace
agreement to turn into substantive and lasting peace.
Today I want to express once again the strong and
unwavering support that the United Kingdom has for
the people of South Sudan as they seek peace. Today's
briefers reminded us, of course - and in that respect
I pay particular tribute to Ms. Minagano - that the
people of South Sudan cannot be expected to wait any
longer for the implementation oflasting peace, not least
given the still large numbers of people who are facing
acute food insecurity - almost 7 million, according to
a report last week from the Integrated Food Security
Phase Classification. I am struck by the fact that 89 per
cent of those surveyed believe that lasting peace is
possible by the end of the year, despite the fact that
79 per cent of them knew of someone in their family
who had been killed or forced to flee. There is therefore
still a real opportunity in South Sudan.

Despite a promising start, however, crucial tasks
remain unsolved, particularly with regard to security-
sector reform, agreement on State boundaries and the
unification of forces. Today I want to urge all the parties
to make the compromises needed to unlock progress in
those areas. We supported the agreement in May this
year to extend the pre-transition period, as a sign of
the parties' desire to continue to work for peace. I now
want to echo the calls of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and other Council members
for Salva Kiir and Riek Machar to meet and redouble
their efforts to ensure that a transitional Government is
formed in November. There should be no more delay,
indeed there need be no more delays.

I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for his and his team's efforts
to support the hundreds of thousands of South Sudanese
still living in protection-of-civilian sites. We share the
desire that those sites should be reduced in size as the
peace agreement delivers genuine improvements on the
ground. We also want to point out that the Government
of South Sudan has a primary responsibility for creating
an environment conducive to returns and urge it to play
its part in creating the stability necessary for the safe,
durable and dignified return of internally displaced
persons and refugees.

The United Kingdom also shares the concerns that
Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour expressed today
about restrictions on the political and civic space.
Despite the extension of the pre-transition period,
progress on justice and accountability continues to stall,
and defence and security forces, including the National
Security Service, continue to threaten and intimidate
people perceived as critics. We are deeply troubled by
the findings of the Panel of Experts on South Sudan
with regard to responsibility at the highest level within
the National Security Service for the abduction and
killing of the human rights activist Dong Samuel Luak
and the writer and opposition member Aggrey Idri,
and by the failure of the Government to investigate
or punish those involved. We urge the Government of
South Sudan to meet its commitment to taking steps to
end the culture of impunity, and in particular to sign
the necessary agreements with the African Union to
establish the hybrid court.

Ms. Minagano's presence here today is an important
reminder for us all of the vital role of civil society in the
peace process. She outlined a number of areas where
we need to see action on delivering the agreement.
As I said before, her account and that of the Special
Representative show that after decades of violence,
people across the country are starting to work for
rapprochement and build peace. The dire situation in
South Sudan has been of serious concern to the Council
for some time, but the peace agreement that was signed
represented a new start and a new dawn. Around the
table, we all desperately want to see progress, and there
is still time for it. But it must not be wasted. There
should be no more delays. The two main actors, Salva
Kiir and Rick Machar, have a responsibility to their
people to come together and resolve the outstanding
issues. The region and all of us around the table must
support them. We must not let down the people of South
Sudan, who still have such hope in their hearts.

