Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish at
the outset to welcome the Foreign Minister of Georgia, who
is participating in today's meeting.

The conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia, has been going on
for more than seven years. In all this time, the international
community has never ceased its mediation efforts, and the
Security Council has been closely monitoring the peace
process in Abkhazia, Georgia.

We greatly appreciate the mediation efforts undertaken
by the Secretary-General, his Special Representative and the
Group of Friends of the Secretary-General on Georgia.

I have noted that recently there has been positive
progress in the situation in the region. However, some
crucial problems remain unresolved, and the political
settlement process has reached an impasse. The unilateral
decision to hold presidential elections this autumn has cast
a new shadow over the peace process.

The Chinese delegation would like to reiterate that
China has always maintained that in the process of settling
the Abkhaz conflict, the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia should be respected by the
international community. At the same time, the basic rights
of the multi-ethnic population of the Abkhaz region should
be duly protected. The Chinese delegation opposes any acts
aimed at dividing the territory of Georgia. We believe that
the unilateral decision to hold presidential elections in
Abkhazia is illegitimate and should not, therefore, receive
international recognition.

At the most fundamental level, the ultimate resolution
of the problem of Georgia will depend on the peoples of
Georgia themselves. International efforts can be effective
only when both sides share a political will. We hope,
therefore, that the two sides will put the fundamental
interests of the multi-ethnic population of Georgia above all
other considerations, settle their differences through
negotiations and conclude the necessary agreements on such
issues as the return of refugees and economic
reconstruction, so as to create favourable conditions for the
resolution of the essential question of the political status of
Abkhazia.

Since its inception, the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) has maintained very good,
cooperative relations with the two sides to the conflict and
with the Commonwealth of Independent States
peacekeeping force. It has played an important role in
stabilizing the situation on the ground and in seeking a
political settlement of the conflict. We believe that the
continuing presence of UNOMIG will help to promote the
peace process in Georgia. We therefore endorse the
Secretary-General's proposal to extend the mandate of
UNOMIG and will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us. We hope that UNOMIG will continue faithfully
to implement the mandate of the Security Council. We
also hope that the security and safety of the personnel of
UNOMIG will be ensured.

In conclusion, I should like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bota, for his
efforts and his contribution to a political settlement of the
Abkhaz conflict in Georgia.

