Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the situation in Darfur. The
Council has before it the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and related issues (8/2009/352). I should
like to highlight a few key points in the report and to
share with members some more general observations
about our efforts to put an end to this crisis.

First, I wish to confirm that we are entering a
new phase in UNAMID's deployment. Over the next
few months, we will see the arrival of five more
battalions and five more infantry companies. We are
also trying to have the final two remaining battalions
deployed by the end of the year. As far as the police are
concerned, the deployment of nine of the 11 formed
police units by December is on track, and we continue
to work to ensure that the two remaining units are also
deployed by the end of the year.

This final phase of deployment is occurring at a
time when a new official will be joining the mission.
As members are aware, the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union proposed the
appointment of Lieutenant General Patrick Nyamvuba
of Rwanda as new UNAMID Force Commander. He
will assume his duties by the end of August, taking
over from General Martin Luther Agwai.

Permit me to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the efforts of General Agwai on behalf of the
African Union, the United Nations and, of course, the
people of Darfur. He headed the force of one of the
largest and most complex peacekeeping operations in
09-42178
history during its particularly difficult initial phase. We
are very grateful to him for that.

His successor will join the mission at a time when
priorities will be in the process of changing. Thus far,
by definition, the emphasis has been on deployment
and on developing methods of working with the
Government, the parties to the conflict and other
actors. While we have made much progress in each of
those areas, much certainly remains to be done. In
particular, we must not overlook the issue of visas,
which we stress at every Tripartite Committee meeting,
including the most recent. We will continue to insist
that all visas for all nationalities be issued within a
reasonable time frame.

As 2009 is moving forward with steady increases
each month in the percentage of forces deployed, the
mission will soon be able to devote less energy to
establishing itself and more to carrying out ground
operations, including the implementation of its
protection mandate.

That brings me to the second topic I should like
to stress. The Secretary-General's report reiterates that
UNAMID is basically a protection operation. The
arrival of promised military and police assets and the
shift from deployment to operations must, above all, be
translated into more effective protection work. That
will include carrying out even more forward patrols
than those already being increasingly undertaken by
the mission, and ensuring an even more sustained
presence in and around key locations, such as camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs), where the most
vulnerable populations live. But it will also mean
closer collaboration with the rest of the protection
community: non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
United Nations agencies and governmental forces,
which are also responsible for and engaged in civilian
protection.

I discussed this at length with my colleagues
during my stay at El Fasher two weeks ago. We agreed
that expectations are very high regarding the mission's
performance for the rest of the year and that we must
do our utmost to meet the challenge.

The third element in the report to which I would
like to draw attention concerns the changes in the
security situation in Darfur. UNAMID is now carrying
out its mission in an environment different from that in
which it was initially mandated to function. The report
reflects those changes and the context. Very large-scale
09-42178
violence associated with civilian deaths and
displacement is no longer a major characteristic of the
crisis. Today, attacks are more localized and generally
carried out by rebels against the Government or by the
Government against rebels, or are even inter-ethnic
conflicts.

The deterioration in Chad-Sudan relations is a
significant factor in this changing environment.
Council members will recall that the 2004
humanitarian ceasefire between the Government and
rebels, which gave all of us hope for an imminent end
to the violence, was negotiated and signed at
N'Djamena. It is difficult to imagine something like
that happening today, given the tense relations between
Chad and the Sudan. The bombings of Sudanese
territory by Chadian military aircraft on 16 July did
nothing to improve the situation.

(spoke in English)

The evolution of the crisis does not in any way
diminish the tragedy of Darfur or lessen the suffering
of the 2.7 million displaced, but it does require that our
analysis and actions correspond to realities on the
ground. The United Nations will have to adapt to be
effective. This also affects mediation efforts. The
Secretary-General's report also discusses how Joint
Chief Mediator Bassole has worked to recalibrate his
approach to reflect the fluidity of the situation on the
ground.

Since the report was issued, one positive
development has emerged with the release by the
Justice and Equality Movement of over 60 prisoners
through the mediation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross.

A fourth area I would like to highlight relates to
the direct link between the Darfur crisis and
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). In my 17 July briefing to the
Council, I shared our serious concern regarding the
status of CPA implementation. Delays,
misunderstandings and disagreements between the
partners on key issues - including border demarcation
and the census results - continue to put the CPA at
risk. Failure of the CPA would result in a deep crisis
throughout the Sudan and the region and cause further
suffering to already vulnerable populations.

In this context, it is of course very important to
commend the parties for their conduct in their reaction
3
to the decision on Abyei taken by the Permanent Court
of Arbitration on 22 July. They should be commended
for the composure they have shown in accepting the
decision. The parties must build on their approach to
the Court's decision to tackle other key issues and to
improve the level and quality of their collaboration.

Despite the good news surrounding Abyei, there
is still a sense of drift surrounding CPA
implementation, with direct implications for resolving
the crisis in Darfur. The uncertainty surrounding
elections provide a good example. The contested
census, large-scale displacement and volatility -
particularly in the area bordering Chad - create
enormous risks that the people of Darfur will not be in
a position to participate in the electoral process. This
would further disenfranchise millions already
disempowered by conflict.

The results of any elections would also have
enormous impact on the political dispensation in
Darfur. Elected officials would constitute a newly
minted set of stakeholders and would have to be
engaged in discussions of peacemaking in Darfur.
There is also a real risk that rebel movements may
elect to reduce their engagement in the mediation,
preferring to monitor and perhaps seek advantage from
the difficulties that the Government of National Unity
is facing on CPA implementation.

These, clearly, are only scenarios, but they
illustrate the clear linkages between the CPA and the
conflict in Darfur. It is now more important than ever
that we see both issues as parts of a whole and that we
understand both issues to be linked to the
marginalization of large portions of the population. I
can assure the Council that the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission are working together on
this basis to support the Sudanese in their efforts to
resolve the many serious challenges they face.

In this context, we very much look forward to the
recommendations to be made by the High-Level Panel
being led by President Mbeki. I met with President
Mbeki and his colleagues when I was in Addis Ababa
10 days ago. It is clear that the work they are
undertaking will make a significant contribution to our
efforts to bring lasting peace to all of the Sudan.

I have focused my remarks on highlighting
certain aspects of the Secretary-General's most recent
report on UNAMID and Darfur. I would like to
conclude by offering some additional observations.

It has been more than five years since the Council
first addressed this crisis. While the situation on the
ground has changed, we are in many ways no closer to
a solution now than we were when the issue was first
taken up by this body. This is deeply distressing
because of the human suffering that has occurred in the
intervening years. It is also deeply frustrating, because
the elements of a solution have in many ways always
been clear.

The Government must make serious concessions
and illustrate its commitment to Darfur through active
investment in its people and infrastructure. The rebels
must make the interests of their people their sole
priority, compromise among themselves and agree a
serious platform for discussions. Abstaining from
dialogue is not a policy - it is only a posture. The
supporters and patrons of both the Government and the
rebel movements must once and for all refuse to
support war. Dialogue must become the only serious
option. The arms and financial support must stop
flowing. The safe havens must disappear.

Until there is sustained progress in each of these
areas, we will not see a resolution to the crisis. Instead,
we will continue to meet in this Chamber to discuss an
apparently intractable situation. The alternative is to
muster the political will and unity of purpose required
to address this crisis in all its heart-wrenching
complexity.

Ultimate responsibility for bringing peace and
stability to Darfur lies with the Sudanese. This is their
right and their obligation. The will to peace and the
sacrifices required to achieve it will come from them.
We need to continue to hold them to the highest
standard in this regard.

At the same time, the international community,
and countries in the region in particular, have a central
role to play in creating the conditions which will help
the Sudanese to address these challenges. These
conditions include the provision of concrete incentives
to the parties to reach agreement and guarantees that
new agreements will be implemented. This Council,
along with the African Union Peace and Security
Council, which pronounced itself on UNAMID earlier
this week, will continue to be called on to mobilize the
will and capacity of the parties to transcend this
conflict in the only possible way - through a
negotiated political agreement that puts an effective
end to the marginalization of Darfur.
