Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
We are grateful to the delegation of Viet Nam for
having organized this debate on the Secretary-
General's report (S/2009/504) on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). We also
wish to thank Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his presentation. We also
appreciate the contribution made by Mr. Jose' Luis
Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste.

It is comforting to note that the Government and
people of Timor-Leste, with the support of UNMIT and
the United Nations system, continue tenaciously to
build a stable, democratic and prosperous nation. The
climate of calm that prevailed during the celebration of
the tenth anniversary of the popular consultation amply
demonstrated that. It must be noted that the progress
made in strengthening democratic mechanisms and the
legislative and institutional framework of democratic
governance have contributed greatly to that.

Indeed, the spirit of dialogue and the patriotic
momentum resulting from the initiatives of President
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Gusmao in managing
issues of national interest - initiatives endorsed by the
political opposition during the consideration of draft
laws in Parliament - are praiseworthy and
demonstrates the resolve of political actors to put
national interest above narrow partisan considerations.
We hope that the momentum thus created will continue
in favour of the further consolidation of national
reconciliation. It behooves the people to become
involved in this process, for it is ultimately they who
will bear the responsibility for building the nation of
their choice.

We welcome the strict policy that resulted in the
screening and certification of national police officers,
which is a guarantee for the credibility of the
institution and will, of course, improve the climate of
trust between the Government and its people. We also
welcome the fact that responsibility for the
maintenance of law and order has now been taken on
by the National Police; in that regard, we agree with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
regarding the need to abide by the four criteria
identified in paragraph 9 of the report and to clearly
define the authority devolving to each of the forces
operating in the security sector.

From that point of view, we welcome the
strengthening of the legislative and regulatory
framework governing the police, including the
enactment of the new organic law. However, the
definition of modalities for the implementation of the
new legislation by the National Police and the United
Nations police is essential if the desired results are to
be achieved. Concurrently, all initiatives to strengthen
the security sector must be implemented. However,
those objectives will be achieved only if the various
initiatives are approached in a realistic and consistent
way and enjoy adequate financial backing.

Despite the many activities of UNMIT in many
sectors, the promotion and protection of human rights
deserve greater support, including in the fight against
impunity, the enforcement of sentences, and the
compensation of victims and their families. Regarding
pending investigations, it is important that every effort
be made to remove the obstacles that continue to
hamper them. At the judicial level, the adoption of
relevant legal texts, including the new penal code and
domestic violence legislation, have led to significant
progress. They now need to be fully implemented. We
hope that the consultations undertaken by the United
Nations Development Programme and UNMIT on the
needs assessment of the judicial system will lead to the
elaboration of a strategic plan and the development of a
draft law on mechanisms for traditional justice.
The quest for peace and stability also involves
sustainable socio-economic development benefiting the
people, especially the most vulnerable. That is why it is
essential to ensure that, aside from the relevant policies
it has launched, the Government incorporate the
Millennium Development Goals into its development
programs in order to reduce poverty and improve
standards of living. The momentum towards including
gender- and age-specific needs among the basic needs
of the population is praiseworthy and should be
continued. Socio-economic development also requires
job creation for young people, including those living in
rural areas. We urge the partners and the private sector
to continue to help the Government achieve its
infrastructure and rural and human resources
development programmes. The improvement of
agricultural production, especially through
modernization of agriculture, could in the long run
serve as one of the most solid foundations of the
economy and provide genuine investment
opportunities.

Among the issues that remain to be addressed is
the situation of internally displaced persons and
families living in transitional shelters, who need to be
reintegrated and rehabilitated. Finally, we are
concerned by the recurrence of natural disasters, which
are genuine obstacles to sustainable development. That
is why we urge Timor-Leste's partners and the
international community as a whole to maintain their
involvement alongside the Timorese Government.

There is no doubt that considerable progress has
been made in Timor-Leste. However, further efforts are
needed in order to consolidate those achievements and
to support the ongoing process in the country.

In conclusion, we must pay tribute to
Mr. Atul Khare. As he prepares to leave his
responsibilities as Head of UNMIT, my delegation
would like to pay him tribute and wish him every
success in the future. We would also like to pay tribute
to all the personnel of UNMIT and, more generally, to
the United Nations agencies for their determination to
help the Timorese people in their search for peace,
stability and development. We also welcome the
valuable contributions made by neighbouring countries
in the framework of regional cooperation.

