Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this ninth wrap-up session ofthe year, which
represents an increase of 50 per cent compared to the
six wrap-up sessions organized by Council members
last year. I thank Pakistan for introducing these stock-
taking meetings in January 2013, and we hope that
the current format of public briefings introduced
by Rwanda in its presidency of July this year will
encourage more United Nations Member States to
participate in these important meetings, dedicated to
assessing the activities of the Council, including its
progress, challenges and effectiveness.

Rwanda congratulates you, Sir, on your
demonstrated talent in presiding over the Council this
month. We extend our congratulations to Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
African Integration of Chad, who chaired meetings
on the two main topics you proposed to mark your
presidency - namely, the United Nations-African
Union partnership in peace operations, and terrorism
and cross-border crime, both sanctioned by a
presidential statement and a resolution, respectively.

Our appreciation also goes to Bante Mangaral,
Deputy Permanent Representative; Gombo Tchouli,
Political Coordinator; Madeleine Alingue, Alternate
Political Coordinator; and the whole Security Council
team of Chad, which has done a tremendous job during
Chad's first-ever presidency of the Security Council.

I take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador
Cristian Barros Melet of Chile on his assumption in
a few days of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January 2015. Rwanda pledges its full
support to Chile, and will contribute as much as we can
to the activities of the Council in January and in the
months and years to come.

As this wrap-up session is our last as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council in the
current term, allow me to make a general assessment
of Rwanda's contribution to the work of the Council
for the term 2013-2014. During the campaign for this
prestigious seat in 2012, we issued a booklet entitled
Rwanda Values Peace, which we sent to all United
Nations Member States and in which we made seven
specific commitments.

The first commitment, on page 7, was to contribute
meaningfully to the prevention of conflict and the
consolidation of peace and stability in Africa and
globally. In that regard, it will be recalled that in 2013
Rwanda was Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, and in
that capacity organized several thematic debates on
achieving that goal.

Furthermore, in April 2013, during our first
presidency, we convened a high-level briefing on the
prevention of conflict in Africa by addressing its root
causes (see S/PV.6946), at which presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/4 was adopted. Nonetheless, much more
work by the Council is necessary in the area of conflict
prevention. We believe that the Security Council must
move beyond discussing the issue as the topic of a
thematic debate and consider it as an actual threat to
international peace and security.

The second commitment was to enhancing
partnership between the African Union (AU), other
regional and subregional organizations and the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. As Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, that was
our priority. Rwanda played a leading role in preparing
the seventh annual consultative meeting between the
United Nations Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council held in October
2013 in Addis Ababa, and in the drafting of its joint
communique.

Moreover, resolution 2167 (2014) on regional
partnerships in peacekeeping, introduced by Rwanda
during its second presidency in July, was another
instrument to enhance United Nations-AU cooperation.
It is our hope that the Security Council will pursue
efforts and strengthen cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, including by providing the
necessary support, including predictable funding, to
AU-led peace operations.

The third commitment was to improving the
working methods of the Security Council to ensure
a more inclusive, transparent and effective Council.
That is what we have tried to achieve during our term,
pending the necessary expansion of the Council in both
categories. We introduced an open format of the wrap-
up session in July, advocated for co-penholdership in
favour of African members of the Security Council,
contributed to more focused, interactive and results-
oriented consultations within the Council, and
supported the French proposal on a code of conduct for
the permanent members to refrain from using the veto
in cases of mass atrocities.

The fourth commitment was to working towards a
more responsive Security Council, including through
implementation of the responsibility to protect (R2P)
doctrine. As co-Chair of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect since its creation 10
years ago, Rwanda has consistently advocated for
R2P in the Council. In April, we introduced a draft
resolution, sponsored by all 15 members, which was
adopted as resolution 2150 (2014) on the prevention
of genocide, adopted on the occasion of the twentieth
commemoration of the genocide against the Tutsis in
Rwanda. The resolution reaffirmed paragraphs 138 and
139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), on the responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleaning and crimes
against humanity, and underscored the importance
of taking into account lessons learned from the 1994
genocide against the Tutsis in Rwanda, during which
Hutus and others who opposed genocide were also
killed.

The fifth commitment was to ending sexual
violence and impunity. Although that commitment was
a little bit ambitious, Rwanda was consistent in pleading
for a global commitment to ending sexual violence in
conflict, especially that perpetrated on a daily basis by
the genocidal movement named Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda, in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In an open debate chaired by
Ms. Mushikiwabo, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Regional Cooperation of Rwanda, on 17 April 2013, as
President of the Security Council, she called upon all
Council members,

"to move beyond expressions of outrage and,
instead, to make concrete and measurable progress
towards a world where the bodies of women are no
longer considered a battlefield" (S/PV6948, p. 29).

In addition, Rwanda has demonstrated its
attachment to the fight against impunity in all its
statements and contributions to the Council's decisions,
including the vote on 22 May (see S/PV.7180) on draft
resolution S/2014/348 related to Syria, and the letter of
5 September, which we co-signed, requesting that the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
be placed on the Council's agenda.

The sixth commitment was to advancing the role of
women in conflict resolution and peacebuilding. In that
respect Rwanda, which has made tremendous progress
since the 1994 genocide against the Tutsis, shared its
20 years of experience in various open debates on
women and peace and security and in the briefing on
post-conflict peacebuilding organized by the Council
presidency in March under Ambassador Sylvie Lucas
of Luxembourg (see S/PV.7143). I take this opportunity
to commend the most assiduous Minister for Foreign
Affairs represented in the Council, Mr. Jean Asselborn of
Luxembourg, who has attended almost every high-level
meeting of the Council, and pay tribute to Ambassador
Lucas and her team for the efficient, persistent and
persevering manner with which Luxembourg pleaded
for the well-being of children in armed conflict.

Lastly, Rwanda's seventh commitment was to
ensuring sustainable transitions from peacekeeping to
nation-building in countries emerging from conflict.
We believe that this is the ultimate objective of
peacekeeping missions and the raison d'etre of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). During both of our
presidencies, in April 2013 and July 2014, we organized
briefings on post-conflict peacebuilding, followed by
interactive dialogues with the countries on the PBC's
agenda and PBC country-configuration chairs. It is
worth noting that since June 2013, Rwanda has also been
coordinating an expert-level group gathering together
members of the Council, and a PBC organizational
committee aimed at enhancing the advisory function of
the PBC to the Security Council and ensuring a smooth
transition from peacekeeping to nation-building.

Let me conclude by wishing all the best to the five
incoming members of the Council: Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela. I congratulate the
outgoing members Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg
and the Republic of Korea. I also thank all of those
that have supported Rwanda during its two-year term
in the Security Council. We thank the African Union
for endorsing Rwanda's candidacy in January 2012, the
United Nations States Members for electing Rwanda
in October of the same year, the 19 Council members
who have served on the Council with Rwanda in 2013
and 2014 for their invaluable support, and the Security
Council Affairs Division, headed by Director Movses
Abelian, for its assistance to our delegation from day
one.

Particular thanks go to the Permanent Mission of
the United Kingdom to the United Nations, to the United
Kingdom Centre for Political and Diplomatic Studies,
and to Sir Emyr Jones Parry for the comprehensive two-
day training provided in February 2013 in the Security
Council to our newly appointed staff.

