Mr. Ould Hadrami (Mauritania) (spoke in Arabic): As Chair of the Arab Group for October 2010,
I have the pleasure to address the Security Council at
this meeting on the item entitled "The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question".

I would first like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Uganda's accession to the Council
presidency for this month. I also congratulate Turkey
on its outstanding presidency of the Council last
month. I also thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing.

The Council's debate today is taking place at a
time when Israel is continuing its disregard for the
international community by its intransigent position of
choosing the policy of regular assassinations,
displacement, settlement construction and house
demolition on a daily basis. That behaviour is brutal,
criminal and illegal, and at the same time it constitutes
a blatant breach of international law, including the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Israel's
disregard for international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, constitutes a
grave danger, which makes it necessary for the Council
to shoulder its responsibility with regard to Israel's
intransigence.

The Arab Group affirms that we cannot and
should not divorce reality on the ground from the
efforts being made to achieve peace through the two-
State solution based on the borders of 4 June 1967, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), so as to enable the Palestinian people to
exercise their full and legitimate rights, establish a
sovereign independent Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and ensure the return of
Palestinian refugees to their lands. We welcome the
statement by American President Barack Obama to the
General Assembly on 23 September 2010 (see A/65/PV.11), in which he talked about the
establishment of a Palestinian State in the course of
one year.

The peace efforts in the Middle East - including
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Road Map adopted by
Security Council resolution 1515 (2003) and the efforts
of the Quartet, which command the full and complete
support of the international community - must be
bolstered by accelerating their implementation, for the
sake of terminating the Arab-Israeli conflict and
achieving genuine peace based on the principle of land
for peace. Peace will be achieved only with the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living in peace side by
side with Israel.

In that connection the Arab Group calls on the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibility for the
withdrawal by Israel, the occupying Power, from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967, in
line with Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative adopted at the Arab League Summit
held in Beirut on 28 March 2002.

The Arab Group calls on the Security Council to
force Israel, the occupying Power, to apply the Fourth
Geneva Convention, on the protection of civilians in
time of war, to its Syrian prisoners, some of whom
have been in prison for more than 25 years. The Arab
Group would like to draw the Council's attention to
Israel's continued intransigence in refusing to comply
with resolution 497 (1981), on the Syrian Golan, in its
settlement policies, confiscation of land, diversion of
water resources and imposition of Israeli nationality on
Syrian citizens.

We call on the Council to force Israel, the
occupying Power, to withdraw immediately and
unconditionally from the Sheba'a farms and the
northern part of Al-Ghajar village, as well as from the
Kfar Shouba Hills.

With regard to occupied East Jerusalem and the
Gaza Strip, we would like to put an end to clear Israeli
violations of international law that aim at creating a
Jewish majority in East Jerusalem by evicting
Palestinian citizens, forcibly displacing them, revoking
their residency permits and replacing them with illegal
Israeli settlers.

The Arab Group emphasizes the dangers to which
occupied Jerusalem is subjected, particularly al-Haram
al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, given the persistent
Israeli violations. The continued attempts to demolish
the Al-Aqsa Mosque as well as the violations in the
city of Jerusalem are part of an Israeli plan to Judaize
occupied East Jerusalem, attempts that will undermine
peace efforts internationally and regionally.

International reports frequently emerge on the
situation in Gaza, all of which emphasize the gravity of
the situation inside the Gaza Strip, given the unjust,
inhuman, strangulating and illegal blockade that has
lasted more than three years, paralyzing Gaza's
economy and destroying the health and living and
social conditions of more than 1.7 million Palestinians.

The Arab Group demands the unconditional and
immediate cessation of all settlement activities,
without exception, including those in Jerusalem, as a
sine qua non for the achievement of peace. We call
upon Israel to immediately, without delay, lift the
inhuman blockade of Gaza. Negotiations can never
resume as long as settlement activity by Israel, the
occupying Power, continues. The international
community, particularly the Security Council, must
grapple with the unjust stance of Israel and should

decisively reject Israel's provocative and destructive
position. Israel should abide by international law,
because the alternative threatens not only the peace
process but also international peace and security.

Last but not least, the Arab Group is of the view
that the international community, particularly the
Security Council, must strongly call upon Israel, the
occupying Power, to halt all its blatant violations of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law. Israel should cease
settlement activities and return to sincere negotiations
to establish an independent, sovereign Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by
side with Israel. It should completely and
unconditionally withdraw from all occupied Arab
territories. The Security Council should redouble its
efforts and take further concrete and effective measures
at this critical juncture in the Middle East.

