Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
deliver this statement on behalf of the States members
of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) in the open
debate on the impact of climate change on the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
would like to begin by expressing the Movement's
appreciation to the Secretary-General and Mr. Steiner
for their statements to the Council today.

The Movement's position regarding the Security
Council's repeated attempts to deal with climate
change issues is reflected in a letter dated 12 April
2007 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Cuba on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2007/203); in the statement
delivered by the representative of Cuba on behalf of
the Movement at the 2007 meeting (S/PV.5663 (Resumption l)); and in a letter dated 14 July
addressed to the President from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt in his capacity as current
Chair of the Coordinating Board of the NAM
(S/2011/427), as well as my statement today on behalf
of the Movement.

The Movement also takes note of the concerns
expressed in the letter dated 1 July from the Permanent
Representative of Nauru in her capacity as Chair of the
group of Pacific Small Island Developing States
(SIDS), addressed to the Member States of the United
Nations, and expresses its appreciation for the presence
of His Excellency President Stephen of the Republic of
Nauru, and for his statement on this issue on behalf of
the Pacific SIDS.

General Assembly resolution 63/281 on climate
change and its possible security implications
recognizes the respective responsibilities of the
principal organs of the United Nations, including the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security conferred on the Security Council,
and the responsibility for sustainable development
issues, including climate change, conferred on the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. The final document of the Sixteenth
Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement,
held in Bali from 23 to 27 May, and General Assembly
resolution 63/281 both stress that the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
is the key instrument and central multilateral
framework for addressing all aspects of climate
change, and the primary forum for considering the
risks associated with and the actions needed to address
climate change, in accordance with the principles
enshrined in the Convention.

In this context, the Security Council's continued
encroachment on the functions and powers of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the relevant subsidiary organs, by addressing
issues that traditionally fall within the competence of
those organs, remains a source of deep concern for the
Movement. The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that
the Security Council must fully observe all provisions
of the Charter establishing the delicate balance among
the competencies of all principal organs. The
Movement also stresses that close cooperation and
coordination among the principal organs is
indispensable to enabling the United Nations to remain
effective and capable of meeting existing, new and
emerging threats and challenges.

The Movement also stresses that climate change
and its adverse impacts must be addressed from the

perspective of sustainable development, promoting a
comprehensive approach to addressing the root causes
of the problem. This can happen only in the relevant
frameworks, which are the UNFCCC, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Commission on Sustainable Development. Those
bodies are the most competent to address climate
change and its related issues in a substantive way
through due and harmonious cooperation in dealing
with situations arising from the consequences of
climate change.

The Movement is fully aware of the severity and
urgency of the issue of climate change and its adverse
impacts, and acknowledges the challenges faced by
developing countries - including but not limited to
least developed countries, SIDS and Africa - and the
enormous pressure those impacts put on developing
countries' national capacities and institutions.

The Movement stresses the importance of
fulfilling the international commitments undertaken
according to the UNFCCC and its Kyoto Protocol.
Action must be taken by all, in accordance with the
principles of common but differentiated responsibilities
and respective capacities. Developed countries have a
historical and particular responsibility to reduce
emissions and support developing countries' actions to
adapt to and mitigate climate change by providing new,
additional and predictable financing, as well as
technology transfer and capacity-building.

The Non-Aligned Movement therefore
emphasizes that the Council's decision to hold this
debate should not be considered a precedent, and that
this debate should not result in any form of outcome
that undermines the authority or mandate of the
relevant bodies, processes and instruments of wider
membership that already address climate change.

