Mr. Corr (Ireland): I too, on behalf of my
delegation, would like to express appreciation to the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Gambari, for his briefing
this morning on his visit to Angola. We are very
pleased that he has reported in positive terms on
important elements of the visit, especially in relation to
the peace process. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and Mr. Gambari for their work in
advancing peace and reconciliation in Angola.

Ireland is especially pleased that the visit appears
to have further strengthened the relationship between
Angola and the United Nations. We believe that the
best prospect for peace in Angola rests on close
collaboration between the international community and
the Angolan authorities on a wide range of issues. We
are greatly encouraged by Mr. Gambari's comment that
the Government in Luanda is amenable to the United
Nations exploring with UNITA the question of whether
UNITA is willing to engage seriously in a process for
peace in Angola.

We believe that Mr. Gambari's remarks on the
existence of a window of opportunity in some of the
areas which were the subject of the inter-agency team's
visit to Angola were especially interesting and hopeful.
We would strongly emphasize the importance of
examining how best now to operationalize the role of
the United Nations in those areas, if these are deemed
to be serious opportunities. Ireland continues to
strongly believe that the Lusaka Protocol must be the
basis for peace in Angola. The Protocol should chart a
political path for all shades of Angolan political
opinion. Each of those voices deserves a chance to be
heard, although it must be clear that that can be so only
if all the parties are committed to a democratic national
discussion. That discussion can and should include all
views from across the spectrum: Government,
opposition, and civil society and other organizations.
UNITA, if it took the steps expected of it, could rightly
expect to look forward to a place in that dialogue. We
reiterate our view that a military solution to the
Angolan conflict is not possible or achievable.

It is regrettable that the humanitarian situation in
Angola remains so bleak - this at the end of a year
when good progress had been expected in relation to
access to the enormous numbers of people at risk, and
also in relation to the resettlement of displaced persons.
It is clear that the positive developments we had hoped
for have failed so far to materialize, although we
welcome Mr. Gambari's news of the Government's
efforts. We strongly encourage the United Nations to
continue to work with the authorities on establishing
ways in which the horrific circumstances of the civilian
population can be addressed. It is also our belief that
the Council's continuing commitment to the
implementation of the sanctions against UNITA is
having its own desired impact.

Those measures are contributing in their own way
to the new possibilities to which Mr. Gambari referred.
We observe also that they appear to be playing their
part in improving relations between Angola and those
States which might in the past have supported UNITA
in different ways. We welcome those developments,
some of which are recent, and we commend those who
are taking those steps.

We hold the view that the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2001/36) adopted by the Council after its
meeting on 15 November 2001 provided Mr. Gambari
with a clear and balanced message to convey to
Angolans of all views, many of whom he met and some
of whom he could not meet. The responsibility of
UNITA to cease violence was plainly spelled out. The
Council's expectation that the authorities should work
for economic reform and for transparent and
accountable governance was another important
element. In addition, the role of the Government, the
political parties and civil society in advancing the
peace process was also underlined. It is Ireland's hope
that those aspects of the Council's views have been
widely received in Angola.

This is the third occasion since September on
which we have discussed Angola in this Chamber. We
believe that that fact alone is a recognition of the
Council's desire to see the situation in Angola move
forward. Mr. Gambari's report on his visit gives some
cause for optimism that a glimmer of light exists
against the background of political and military
stalemate. We would not wish to exaggerate that sense
of hope. However, we believe it is incumbent upon the
Angolan Government, other actors and us here in the
Security Council and in the United Nations to do
everything we can to ensure that no opportunity is lost.

