Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I would like to express
our appreciation for the organization of this open
debate, as well as to thank you personally, Madame
President, for the opportunity to share our views on
this important subject.

The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses post-conflict peacebuilding signals, first, the
importance that the international community attaches
to the issue as a preventive tool against the recurrence
of conflict through the establishment of sustained
security and stability, which are prerequisites for the
maintenance of peace and development; and, secondly,
an acknowledgement of the Council's responsibility to
fulfil the commitments undertaken to support countries
that have emerged from conflict.

We share the views expressed by many speakers
calling for more systematic attention to post-conflict
peacebuilding. We believe that this should continue to
be frequently reflected in the deliberations of the
Security Council.

Time and again we have seen how conflicts
re-emerge in the absence of functioning institutions
that reflect a common understanding within a society.
Although lessons have been learned and various
approaches have been refined as the international
community has tackled such conflicts, the tendency
continues to be for a top-down approach that at times
ignores the specific context, roots and causes of a
given conflict.

Institution-building, especially in post-conflict
countries, must be done at all levels of society, with
particular attention paid to the uniqueness of each case,
in order to reach consensus and create a governing
framework. It is important that the programmes
adopted be country-specific, needs-based and target-
oriented to ensure continued adherence by the affected
population. This would safeguard success and assist the
population in building upon existing national capacities
in a more consolidated and effective manner.

In that context, effective institution-building
during the different phases of the process requires
coordination among the Peacebuilding Commission
and all relevant actors, including international financial
institutions, United Nations entities, regional
organizations and civil society, including women, local
experts and other stakeholders.

With respect to the relationship between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council,
we believe that, given limited resources, they should
work closely together and use each other's knowledge
and expertise of a specific country's conflict to clearly
identify priorities in order to most effectively use such
resources towards peacebuilding efforts. For that
cooperation to be workable, both bodies must try to be
as flexible as possible to address conflicts in a timely
and efficient manner, as each conflict will pose unique
problems and require specific solutions.

Armenia remains committed to post-conflict
peace initiatives and believes that the Council should
further advance development initiatives by supporting
peacebuilding mechanisms that help countries
emerging from conflicts in their recovery, reintegration
and reconstruction efforts, which are aimed at creating
foundations for sustainable peace and development.
The successful implementation of this agenda
requires a basic level of political will and
determination on the part of all players as
preconditions for peacebuilding. With those political
conditions in place, the ability of the United Nations or
any other intergovernmental or regional actor will be
enhanced and supported.

Armenia therefore welcomes the Bosnian
initiative to hold this open debate. This is an
opportunity to recap and reflect on our past
experiences in dealing with the issue of post-conflict
peacebuilding and to highlight priorities for united,
practical actions.

