The President: In accordance with the decision taken
at the 4115th meeting, I invite the representative of
Tajikistan to take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan
of 14 March 2000 (S/2000/214), submitted pursuant to
paragraph 12 of its resolution 1274 (1999) of 12
November 1999.

"The Security Council welcomes decisive
progress in the implementation of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord in Tajikistan (S/1997/510) achieved
due to sequential and persistent efforts of the President
of the Republic of Tajikistan and the leadership of the
Commission on National Reconciliation.

"The Security Council welcomes, in particular,
the holding on 27 February 2000 of the first multi-
party and pluralistic parliamentary election in
Tajikistan, in spite of serious problems and
shortcomings, as noted by the Joint Electoral
Observation Mission for Tajikistan. It notes that the
holding of this election the transition period
envisaged in the General Agreement is coming to a
close. The Council acknowledges a significant
achievement of the Tajik parties, which have
managed to overcome many obstacles and to put
their country on the path to peace, national
reconciliation and democracy. It urges the
Government and the Parliament of Tajikistan to
work towards elections in the future that meet fully
acceptable standards as a means to consolidate
peace.

"The Security Council notes with satisfaction
that the United Nations has played an important role
in this success. It welcomes the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT),
supported by the Contact Group of Guarantor States
and International Organizations, the Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, being
instrumental in assisting the parties in the
implementation of the General Agreement.

"The Security Council supports the intention of
the Secretary-General to withdraw UNMOT when its
mandate expires on 15 May 2000. It expects that the
Secretary-General will inform the Council about the
outcome of his current consultations with the
Government of Tajikistan on a role for the United
Nations in the period of post-conflict peace-building
and consolidation."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

