Ms. Tachco (United States of America): The
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) is a peacekeeping mission that
should have finished its job a long time ago. It is a
mission that began 27 years ago, almost to the day. It is
a mission that was designed to help achieve a specific
purpose ~ one that it has not yet completed. That is
not the fault of MINURSO. The fact is that we, as a
Security Council, have allowed Western Sahara to
lapse into a textbook example ofa frozen conflict. And
MINURSO is a textbook example of a peacekeeping
mission that no longer serves a political purpose.

So this year, the United States has taken a different
approach with this renewal. Our goal is to send two
messages. The first is that there can be no more business
as usual with MINURSO and Western Sahara. The
second is that the time is now to lend our support ~ our
full support - to the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara, Mr. Horst Kohler, in his
efforts to facilitate negotiations with the parties.

The United States wants to see progress at last
in the political process meant to resolve this conflict.
That is why we have renewed the MINURSO mandate
for six months, instead of one year. Over the next six
months, we expect that the parties will return to the
table and engage Personal Envoy Kohler. We also hope
that neighbouring States will recognize the special and
important role that they can play in supporting this
negotiating process.

The United States emphasizes the need to
move forward towards a just, lasting, and mutually
acceptable political solution that will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara. We
continue to view Morocco's autonomy plan as serious,
credible and realistic, and it represents one potential
approach to satisfying the aspirations of the people
of Western Sahara to run their own affairs with peace
and dignity. We call on the parties to demonstrate their
commitment to a realistic, practicable and enduring
political solution based on compromise by resuming
negotiations without preconditions and in good faith.
Entrenched positions must not stand in the way
of progress.

In the meantime, we expect that all parties will
respect their obligations under the ceasefire and refrain
from any actions that could destabilize the situation or
threaten the United Nations process. Unilateral changes
to the status quo on the ground will not help us get to a
lasting and peaceful solution. It would be unfortunate for
anyone to seek to pick apart the language in the renewal
for the sake of political point-scoring. The expectation
is clear. It is time to see progress towards a political
solution and, after 27 years, to stop perpetuating the
status quo.

Reflecting on his time as United States Ambassador
to the United Nations, John Bolton once wrote:

"MINURSO seemed well on the way to acquiring
a near-perpetual existence because no one could
figure out what to do with it."

He concluded: "This could well go on forever". More
than a decade later, as we gather once again here in this
Chamber, Ambassador Bolton's warning has proven
accurate. With today's renewal, the Security Council
has taken a step towards ending this cycle. The next
step will be for us to support Personal Envoy Kohler
and to see real and substantive talks resume at last.
Should that fail, we will then need to take a hard look
at our work and our responsibilities when the Mission
again comes up for renewal in six months.

