Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Qatar
commends the Danish delegation for convening the
debate on this important issue. We welcome Judge
Rosalyn Higgins, President of the International Court
of Justice, and Under-Secretary-General Michel for
their participation in today's important debate.

International law and norms play an important
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Strengthening international law and norms is
a prerequisite for living in peace and security.
However, the effectiveness of the international legal
system depends on the degree of commitment shown,
in particular, by the powerful States that play a primary
role in the system. Thus, one question must be
answered: Do those Powers want an effective
international legal system that leaves its mark on
international relations - whose main features are

decided by the politics of particular international legal
contexts?

Accordingly, if we are to evaluate the
performance of States, acting either individually or
through their participation in international
organizations such as the United Nations and its main
organs, including the Security Council - or indeed if
we are to evaluate the performance of those
organizations and organs - we must consider their
commitment to the provisions of international law and
norms. We have all come to realize that the more
effective and robust international law is, the more it
irritates such Powers.

Legal norms and the rule of law form a system
that cannot be brought to full, sustainable fruition
overnight, either locally or internationally. The benefits
we derive from that system are long-term, but only
people with vision realize that. The international
community thrives when the rule of law and political
power act seamlessly in tandem, not when they collide.
With power comes responsibility; even the shortsighted
realize that the absence of the rule of law leads to
anarchy, fragmentation and loss.

The rule and norms of international law translate
into a source of stability, security and safety for all the
peoples of the world and thus, for the international
community. No Power, no matter how strong, and no
international organization or organ such as the Security
Council - whatever its mandate - can achieve
international peace and security without scrupulously
observing the provisions of international law and
strengthening the rule of law. Commitments by world
leaders to uphold the principles and purposes of the
Charter and the norms of international law, as a
precondition for prosperity and peace for the world's
peoples, will not be enough unless they are translated
into action.

The peoples of the world have been vocal in
calling on the United Nations and, in particular, the
Security Council to strengthen international law and
promote the rule of law. That honourable course must
be pursued if international peace and security are to be
maintained. Regrettably, however, armed conflicts
continue to rage mercilessly, killing constituent
members of the international community in full view of
the relevant international organizations.
In post-conflict situations, neglect, political
mayhem and discriminatory practices undermine
international human rights standards. Impunity is
rampant for reasons well known to us all. Foremost
among them is the absence of genuine political will on
the part of some influential Member States which
manipulate the international decision-making process.
Another reason is the failure to bring the perpetrators
of such crimes to justice, in either international or
national courts.

Current policies which target individuals for
sanctions do not take into account due process when
listing and delisting individuals on sanctions lists.
Moreover, failure to provide an effective mechanism to
review those decisions could undermine the credibility
of the Security Council and its effectiveness in
maintaining international peace and security.

Similarly, the Security Council's policies for
combating terrorism may face a credibility gap. Indeed,
these policies have reached a turning point of sorts.
Individuals listed on sanctions lists by committees
established pursuant to Security Council resolutions
have challenged such resolutions and sanctions
regimes, particularly those regarding Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, by taking their cases to regional and national
courts and arguing that their basic rights, including
property rights, the principle of proportionality and due
process, have been violated. One of the most prominent
regional courts has ruled that courts can review
Security Council resolutions to verify that they are
consistent with internationally recognized standards of
human rights, and that no State Member of the United
Nations - nor the United Nations itself, nor the
Security Council - can ignore, violate or bypass those
standards.

This legal and judicial impasse can be overcome,
because we now live in a time when it has become
taboo to sacrifice human rights for any reason. Judges
and other honourable men and women spend long
hours trying to protect the rule of law regardless of the
circumstances. Those individuals will uphold the truth
because they are committed to the implementation of
the law.

Here in the United Nations, and in the Security
Council and its committees, we have made, and will
continue to make, contributions to address and improve
the situation and to strengthen international law and the
rule of law, together with all other peace-loving

countries that respect and defend the rule of law. We
cannot delay working together to restore security,
human rights and the rule of law. We all must stand
united in order to achieve our noble objective, namely,
that international peace and security be a reality for all
peoples of the world.

