Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): As we have all heard,
the Security Council has adopted a presidential
statement on the topic under deliberation today
(S/PRST/2011/15). The statement was read out before
today's debate had ended and before the statements of
11 delegations on the list delivered to us by the
Secretariat, including the Venezuelan delegation,
having been heard. That procedure, to say the least, is
inconsiderate and another example of the exclusive
nature of the Security Council's decision-making.
While voicing such concern about the procedure, I
would like to state the view of the Venezuelan
delegation on the topic under consideration.

First, the delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela endorses the statements made by the
representatives of Argentina on behalf of the Group of
77 (G-77) and China, and of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

My delegation is concerned over the
hypersensitivity shown by members of this body on
issues beyond their competence, even as they omit or
avoid consideration of initiatives that contribute to
making the legitimate activity of this organ more
transparent. It has been repeatedly stated here that the
primary responsibility of the Security Council is the
maintenance of international peace and security, as

 

established in the Charter of the United Nations, as we
all know. That instrument entrusts, among other
matters, the handling of issues of economic and social
development to the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly.

The increasing infringement by the Security
Council of the functions and responsibilities of other
main organs of the United Nations is a distortion of the
purposes and principles of the Charter and is an abuse
of authority that affects the rights of most Members of
the United Nations.

We therefore allow ourselves to reiterate that the
responsibility for addressing matters of sustainable
development falls to the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and its pertinent
auxiliary bodies, such as, for example, the Commission
on Sustainable Development and the United Nations
Environment Programme. Moreover, climate change
and its implications are the object of a binding
multilateral agreement, the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, and an additional
protocol, the Kyoto Protocol. Given its nature, that
issue is outside the competences of the Security
Council.

The position of Venezuela on this issue is
consistent with that voiced by developing countries
since 2007. What is proposed today is to strengthen,
and not to weaken the institutional framework of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council as the principal organs concerned with
economic, social and environmental matters.

Our delegation therefore rejects any initiative on
climate change that is presented outside the scope of
the Framework Convention, as it would deeply affect
the institutionality of the multilateral system on that
issue. Furthermore, the Security Council has no
mandate to address issues related to the vulnerability of
States to the effects of climate change.

We take this opportunity to reiterate the readiness
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to cooperate
on the cause of the sustainable development of small
island States, which is central to the policies of
solidarity and cooperation of the Bolivarian people
with brother island States.

Within the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, we support the
position of the G-77 and China on strengthening the

 

institutions and mechanisms that will help to build the
capacities of those States facing the effects of climate
change. We must assess and manage risks before
disasters occur. It is therefore necessary to unite the
efforts of the development, humanitarian assistance
and environmental protection bodies.

It is essential that all States Members of the
United Nations promote sustainable development by
adhering to the Rio principles, in particular that of
common but differentiated responsibilities, and by
fully implementing Agenda 21 and other documents
agreed at the Rio Conference, the Johannesburg
Summit and the relevant United Nations conferences
on economic, social and environmental matters.

