The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.

I, too, wish to thank Mr. Kalomoh for introducing
the progress report of the Secretary-General on the
recommendations of the Security Council mission to
Central Africa. We are pleased to note that, since the
Council mission's visit to Central Africa last June, the
overall situation in that region has witnessed
encouraging changes. The transitional Government and
the legislative bodies of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are functioning well. The security
environment in the East has been enhanced. Relations
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours have improved to varying degrees.

The peace process in Burundi continues to make
progress. The Conseil national pour la defense de la
democratic-Forces nationales pour la defense de la
democratic have entered the peace process. The leaders
of Palipehutu-Forces nationales de liberation met with
the President of Burundi last month. The disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme in
Burundi has been fully launched.

Events have demonstrated that the Council
mission's visit and recommendations are useful in
advancing the situation in Central Africa, including in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi.
Naturally, the peace processes in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi still face many
uncertainties. Both countries have much to do in the
areas of security sector reform, the rule of law and
preparations for general elections. National
reconciliation awaits further consolidation. The
economies of both countries are extremely precarious
due to the effects of the long war. The proper handling
of the issues in those areas is of vital importance to
achieving sustainable peace in both countries.

The international community should continue to
follow the situation in both countries and encourage all
parties to keep the peace, while adopting a
comprehensive and integrated strategy to facilitate
national reconciliation there and to help them achieve
economic reconstruction.

We appreciate the outstanding role played by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in the
peace process in that country, and we shall continue
actively to support its work. We also support the
United Nations in providing effective assistance to
facilitate the settlement of the Burundi issue, and we
urge the Parti pour la liberation du peuple hutu-Forces
nationales de liberation (Palipehutu-FNL) to enter the
Burundi peace process expeditiously.

We think that, under the current circumstances,
the convening of an international conference on the
Great Lakes region is of great significance for further
enhancement of the peace processes in both countries,
for friendly relations among all countries of the region
and for lasting peace, stability and development in
Central Africa. We look forward to the holding of the
conference as scheduled and to its positive outcome.
We endorse the Secretariat's recommendations on
increased resources for the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Burundi. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

