Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation thanks you, Madam President,
for allowing us to participate on behalf of the Chair
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We welcome the holding of this meeting
of the Security Council devoted to the situation in
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau. We also take this
opportunity to commend your deft handling of the high
office of the presidency of the Council for the month
of August. Allow me also to commend the detailed and
informative briefings by Mr. Trovoada, Mr. De Aguiar
Patriota and the Permanent Representative of Guinea-
Bissau.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau, which has
deteriorated significantly since a decree was issued
calling for Prime Minister, Mr. Domingos Simoes
Pereira, to step down, remains troubling, at a time
when the country needs more than ever before to forge a
robust consensus to overcome the numerous challenges
it continues to face. Aware of the need to establish and
preserve such consensus in order to contribute to the
stabilization of the country, His Excellency President
Macky Sall, ECOWAS Chair, has offered his good
offices in an attempt to renew dialogue among the
principal parties. Moreover, in order to prevent further
deterioration of the political climate in Guinea-Bissau,
he dispatched, on 23 June, his Minister for Foreign
Affairs who held talks with the country's authorities,
with a View to bolstering confidence among them in
order to re-establish properly functioning institutions.
In addition, during his stay, the President's envoy
took the opportunity to make courtesy calls of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Trovoada,
representative of the European Union Victor Dos
Santos, African Union representative Pequeno and
ECOWAS representative Ansumana Ceesay.

Subsequently, President Jose Mario Vaz was
received in Dakar on 7 August, in the presence of His
Excellency President Alpha Conde of the Republic of
Guinea, who was also on an official Visit to Dakar, with
a View to finding a solution to the political crisis in the
country.

Subsequently, on 20 August, President Macky Sall
received Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, former President of
Nigeria, who carried a message from current President
Muhammadu Buhari and had come to gather opinions
and advice with a View to a mission that he was due
to undertake to Guinea-Bissau, which he ultimately
cancelled, following an appointment on that same day
of a new Prime Minister, namely, Mr. Baciro Dja. It
is therefore regrettable that the various aforementioned
efforts were insufficient to put an end to the crisis.

On 24 august, the National Assembly adopted a
resolution calling for the new Prime Minister to step
down. As we see it, the situation remains particularly
delicate. We believe it is important to call on the various
parties to show restraint, so as to ensure a better chance
for the diplomatic efforts with a View to establishing
trust and peace.

For his part, the ECOWAS Chair regretted the
stepping down of Prime Minister Pereira. He also
reiterated the commitment undertaken by the political
actors in Guinea-Bissau in March during the donor
conference in Brussels, including those undertaken by
President Jose Mario Vaz and Prime Minister Pereira
working together towards political stability, economic
development and security on behalf of the citizens of
Guinea-Bissau.

We highlight and welcome the responsible attitude
adopted by the army of Guinea-Bissau, which has kept
its distance from the events under way, thereby allowing
a greater chance of achieving a political solution to this
fragile situation.

Confident that a peaceful, lasting solution can be
found to the crisis under way, with the valuable assistance
ofits partners, the ECOWAS Chair is convinced that the
building of peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau can
be achieved only through a consensual process, which
must be inclusive and nationally owned. Where there
is respect for the constitutional order, the interest and
well-being of the people of Guinea-Bissau will be at the
heart ofthe discussion to bolster national reconciliation,
democracy, good governance and development.

The political tensions should in no way
obscure the progress achieved thus far by Guinea-
Bissau, particularly in terms of the constitutional
revision process, combating corruption through
strengthening the judicial system and improving the
administration, pursuing defence and security reform
and the establishment by the National Assembly of a
commission on peace and stability, in order to accelerate
the reconciliation process.

The situation I have described calls for pursuing
structural defence, security and justice reforms,
promoting the rule of law and socioeconomic
development, in line with the promotion and protection
of human rights and combating impunity.

ECOWAS therefore welcomes the success of the
donor round table on Guinea-Bissau held on 25 March
in Brussels, with the assistance of the United Nations
Development Programme and the European Union. At
the conference, international partners supported the
Government's National Strategic and Operational Plan
for 2015-2020, with pledges standing at $1.2 billion.
In that respect, the Economic Community of West
African States calls on international partners to remain
strongly mobilized and committed in their support to
the stabilization process in Guinea-Bissau, particularly
by delivering on their commitments undertaken at that
occasion. Such support remains crucial for conducting
the aforementioned reforms.

For its part, ECOWAS is continuing its efforts to
help Guinea-Bissau maintain peace and security and
to support the reconciliation process. Aware of the
importance of security and defence sector reform in
the stabilization process, the forty-seventh ordinary
session of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government,
held in Accra on 19 May, extended the mandate of the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau until 31 December.
In any case, it goes without saying that security sector
reform also requires increased efforts to curb drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime in all its
forms and manifestations.

The challenges ahead to achieve stabilization in
Guinea-Bissau remain enormous. The normalization of
the situation in the country will undoubtedly require
bolstering democratic gains and coordinating the
actions of the various partners in support of efforts
made by the Government of Guinea-Bissau. To that end,
ECOWAS remains more than ever willing to pursue
the work launched with all its partners in order to help
Guinea-Bissau to emerge from the current situation.

Allow me to commend the special emphasis placed
by the Security Council on the situation in Guinea-
Bissau, as well as to commend the efforts of the
Secretary-General and of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, in addition to
the important support of all the bodies of the United
Nations system, the European Union, the African
Union, Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
the World Bank and the African Development Bank.

The hope kindled of a return to constitutional
order following presidential and legislative elections
in Guinea-Bissau must not be extinguished. That is the
very essence of the commitment of ECOWAS, including
Senegal, towards lasting peace and the harmonious
socioeconomic development in Guinea-Bissau.

