Mr. Naranjo Trujillo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Twenty months after signing the Agreement
that put an end to the conflict with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) and 12 days from
the end of the term of the President of the Republic, Juan
Manuel Santos, I bring to the Security Council, to the
United Nations and to the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia an expression of gratitude from
my Government and 50 million Colombians. We are
grateful for what has been indisputable support for
peacebuilding in my country.

On this opportunity, as it is our final intervention,
having received the third consecutive report of the
Mission, I wish to issue a call in the Council to the
entire world and to our compatriots for the protection
and safeguarding of peace - the supreme, superlative
good of a society.

Safeguarding peace in Colombia means, in
principle, recognizing that the leadership efforts of
President Juan Manual Santos to reach it were not based
on any political calculation, but rather on the ethical
conviction that it was urgent to put an end to 53 years of
violence that, regrettably, cut short the lives of 220,000
Colombians. Putting an end to the conflict with that
conviction meant acknowledging that five decades
of internal clashes resulted in more than 8,400,000
victims in our country.

Safeguarding peace means honouring our
commitments under the Agreement, with the
understanding that the promise is not that of one
Administration, but rather that of the State in its
entirety and of society in general.

Safeguarding and protecting peace means not
ignoring the great achivements - which representatives
have mentioned here - that have been made in record
time. After 53 years of armed conflict, there was a
surrender of arms in nine months - in record time, before
the year and a half timeline. FARC, an organization that
had taken up arms and defied the Colombian State and
society, transformed into a political party, in record
time. That political party now has a seat in Colombia's
Congress, as we saw on 20 July.

Safeguarding peace means that the reintegration of
13,000 ex-combatants ofFARC represents opportunities
for rights, services and personal safety. As has been
mentioned here, it provides political security, but also
the security of being linked socioeconomically to a
legal system.

Mr. Jean Arnault, Head of the Mission, has said
clearly that reintegration is critical. On that issue, I
wish to assure the Council that today, more than 12,000
ex-combatants are receiving a basic monthly stipend
equivalent to 90 per cent of minimum wage in my
country. I want to assure the Council that 9,000 are
linked to our security and pension systems. I assure
the Council that we are making progress, certainly not
as quickly as we would like, so as to make productive
projects a reality, but I do want to share a piece of good
news that has also been mentioned during the meeting.
The Government of President Santos is bequeathing
the next Government a mid-to-long-term public policy
document. That means that there is a clear road map
that will make reintegration sustainable.

Safeguarding and protecting peace means increasing
efforts in order to continue to reduce violence.

We will never tire of saying that in 2017, as a result
of the Agreement, Colombia saw the lowest murder
rate in the last 42 years. Sadly, we are facing a major
contradiction in this regard. Although the murder rate
is decreasing, the number of threats and attacks against
social leaders and human rights defenders has risen.

I would like to underscore, as the members of the
Council have done, the remarkable fact that under the
leadership of President Santos, the whole nation has
been brought together under a comprehensive political
pact, with no distinctions from the local to the central
level. We hope that this political pact against violence
will be a very powerful tool, conveying the imperative
need to renounce the old culture of conflict in which
death seemed to be part of the solution. Now we are
trying to ensure that life is protected as a supreme,
exceptional and sacred social good. The logic of death
for life is the real challenge that we are facing in the
wake of 50 years of war.

Safeguarding peace means recognizing and
strengthening the legitimacy of our Comprehensive
System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Non-Repetition. We wish to say today, without any
excessive optimism, that we feel great satisfaction
at the fact that the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
through its hearings, has prioritized dealing with three
tragedies of war: the tragedy of the abductions that
took place during the 53 years of conflict; the tragedy
of the recruitment of minors - children, girls, boys
and teenagers - in that war; and what is known in my
country as false-positive cases: the deaths of innocent
citizens within the context of the conflict.

These hearings are part and parcel of a functioning
transitional justice system whose goal is to bring to
justice and punish those who were in any way involved
in that internal armed conflict and who broke laws
and violated human rights. It gives us assurance that
we are moving forward, as we have said so often in
the past, in a manner that strikes a balance between
peace and justice, as is necessary in order to move
towards reconciliation.

Safeguarding peace means continuing to ensure
that our institutions, whose approach is based on more
than just counter-insurgency, are effective throughout
our territory - a territory that is now perceived not
as a theatre for military operations but as a land where
conditions are being created for the transformation of
communities. We are well aware of the fact that we
must continue to progress in our understanding in order
to change that logic and reach all of those territories,
no longer as police or the military, but as a unified
State that protects its communities. Safeguarding and
protecting peace means recognizing the invaluable
support of the international community, for which we
should like once again to express our gratitude.

If there is one unifying factor around peace in
Colombia, it is the unfailing support of the Council. We
say to our compatriots and to the entire world that we
have no words to express our gratitude for the unanimous
way in which the Council has supported peacebuilding
efforts in our country. Thanks to the work of the
Council and to observations and recommendations of
the Mission, we understand that challenges remain.

We know that as we travel the road ahead, we will
have to give priority to, first, safeguarding life in those
areas where leaders have begun to speak out in favour
of democratic participation in the country. Secondly,
we must also need to move forward in overcoming
Colombia's historical tragedy: drug trafficking. In that
regard, we would stress that given the end of armed
conflict with FARC, for the first time in the 35 years of
that tragedy we have now a unique opportunity. Instead
of a strategy to combat illegal crop cultivation and the
production of drugs, we can set up, as we are doing,
a crop-substitution programme so that the 124,000
families that have expressed their desire to abandon
this illicit activity can earn their living legally.

We must also strengthen our efforts to combat
organized crime, because we are not naive. Colombia
is now facing pressure from international cross-border
drug-trafficking organizations that wish to continue
with their illegal trade. The Council can be sure that the
Government ofPresident Santos will, until the very last
minute of its mandate, be strengthening the country's
capacity to contain this threat.

Safeguarding peace must also mean - and we say
this without any pretension - that the lessons learnt
from the Colombian process of seeking an end to the
conflict can serve as a lesson to other nations so that
they, too, can overcome violence and differences and
so that conflicts become a thing of the past. Perhaps we
are a little sentimental in a world that is suffering from
so many conflicts, but we feel that perhaps the case of
Colombia is a paradigmatic one.

We are aware that genuine, innovative efforts
were made here that were based on ethical standards,
political pragmatism and international support, and we
therefore, at the end of our term, express our gratitude in
that respect. The Council can rest assured: the incoming
Government of President-elect Ivan Duque has said
that it will continue to give priority to the agreements
reached and ensure that Colombia continues down a
path towards sustainable peacebuilding.

