I would like to begin my speech by thanking the French Government for having organized this meeting of the Security Council. I also thank the Council for giving me the opportunity to represent civil society organizations, especially children. I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the Executive Director of UNICEF for their engagement and advocacy for children. My name is Mariam, I am 15 years old. lam amember of the National Children's Parliament of Mali. lam committed to the protection and well-being of children. I am particularly sensitive to the situation of children who have been internally displaced by conflicts. It is for this reason that we have started a fundraising campaign to distribute clothes, toys and food to these children. In 2019, it was verified that 7,747 children around the world, some as young as 6 years old, had been recruited and used by armed groups, according to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525). Exactly four years ago, Mohamed, a native of Bankass, located in the Mopti region in central Mali, was enjoying his childhood. He lived surrounded by his parents, his friends, happiness and joy. One day, an armed group attacked his village, killing people, burning houses and taking all the property. As a result, Mohamed became an orphan, not knowing where the other members of his family were. As if that were not enough, he was recruited by force by an armed group when he was only 10 years old. He accompanied the armed group and participated in the atrocities. One day he was forced to witness the massacre of an entire family. This was a huge shock for him, and in the evening he decided to run away and take refuge in a family. Fortunately for him, this family helped him come to Bamako to one of the centres for internally displaced persons. Having no more consideration for his person, and no longer having confidence in others, he does not know what the future holds for him - his future in a world where leaders seem deaf to the most poignant evils. No child should experience this kind of experience, because it takes away not only his innocence but also all his dreams. I ask leaders to make decisions and take actions to prevent other children from finding themselves in the same situation as Mohamed. The consequences of wars and conflicts for children are enormous. Many children have become gangsters or thieves, and some have fallen into alcohol and drugs. In conflict and war zones, children feel frustrated and in danger because they tell themselves that their lives can change at any time. They can be killed, abducted or forcibly recruited by armed groups. Thousands of children are out of school because of war. In Mali, 1,251 schools were closed in March of this year, depriving thousands of children of one of their fundamental rights, which is education. Aminata, a 12-year-old child who lives in an internally displaced persons camp, told me this: "Before, I was happy to go to school because I had friends with whom I had fun and I was learning a lot of things. I loved my teacher so much that I wanted to be like her in the future. One day, people came to my school and burned the benches because they do not want to see formal schools open. I am wondering how I am going to be a teacher now, because I am not in school anymore." Conflicts separate family members. Bakary, aged 14, went on vacation to Mopti in 2017 to stay with one of my uncles. One day when they went out on an errand with one of his friends, they were kidnapped by armed groups. His parents remained without news of him for several months. Afterwards, the armed groups contacted them by phone to give them news of Bakary, and they talked to him. No one has heard from him for over two years. Because of this, his mother has gone mad and can no longer take care of Bakary's little brothers and sisters. What are Member States doing to ensure that Bakary and other abducted children are found and rejoin their families? Girls and boys are victims of rape. Fatou, aged 12, lived in the Gao region with her parents. One day the armed men went to her house. They murdered her father in her presence and raped her. It happened in the presence of her mother, who did not survive. After being raped and losing both her parents, Fatou suffered psychological trauma. She was afraid of people, especially those of the opposite sex. She no longer wanted to continue living. She was supported by a neighbouring family who welcomed her and helped her to go to one of the youth reception centres, where she received psychological care. I tell myself that it could have been me. What would have become of me if I had experienced this situation? I have no answer to that question. I speak with a tearful heart because I know that children suffer and that they simply never should, especially in times of conflict and war. In my country, thousands of children lose their enthusiasm for life and, at the same time, their dreams. There is an urgent need for justice so that victims do not grow up by wanting to take justice into their own hands. I ask States Members of the United Nations to take actions to protect children, including in times of conflict and war. As fathers, mothers, uncles and aunts, I know that no one would want their children or loved ones to be victims of conflict. I am convinced that all children, regardless of race, colour, ethnicity or religion, have the right to enjoy their childhoods and their rights. I urge Member States to take the necessary measures to protect and guarantee the future of children, including in times of conflict or war, because, as we say in Bambara, Djamana ka Sini nye sigi be a dewn bolo - the future of a country is in the hands of its children. Allow me to say that we children want to participate in decision-making that concerns us, because we also have a voice and ideas to propose in order to reduce the impact of armed conflict on children. I ask decision-makers, States members of the Council, to help us improve our living conditions and not to be victims of conflict.
