Mr. Sajjan (Canada): I am pleased to speak on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women. Peace and
Security - an informal network of 53 interested
Member States, representing all five regional groups
of the United Nations and chaired by Canada. In the
context of today's open debate, the Group wishes to
emphasize the importance of women's participation and
gender perspectives in United Nations peacekeeping.

As recognized by resolution 2378 (2017), women
play an indispensable role in peacekeeping. Their
participation and decision-making at all levels is key to
the operational effectiveness of missions. Experience
has shown that women bring valuable perspectives
to and increase situational awareness in missions by
accessing a greater diversity of information about
threats and conflict and help to built trust with local
communities. This supports both the safety and security
of peacekeepers and the operational effectiveness
of missions.

We therefore support calls, including the specific
targets set out in resolution 2242 (2015), to increase the
number of women in uniform and civilian women in
peacekeeping. We must redouble our efforts and engage
in new and creative thinking to resolve persistent gaps
in and structural barriers to female participation and
leadership. We recognize the importance of political
will, attitudinal change and resources for increasing the
meaningful participation ofwomen in peacekeeping. We
encourage the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support to finalize work
on a gender strategy for Headquarters and to ensure the
implementation of targets in field missions.

Beyond increasing the number of women deployed,
greater efforts are required to mainstream gender
considerations in peacekeeping. In that regard,
peacekeeping operations need to be equipped with
appropriate gender-responsive conflict analysis and
expertise at all levels and all stages, including in the
development of mandates. Leadership in peacekeeping
operations must ensure that such experts, including
gender advisers and women protection advisers, are
provided with the access and resources needed to fulfil
their critical tasks.

Lastly, we condemn in the strongest terms cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping
operations and in international assistance. Recent
allegations across the United Nations have reinforced
the need for a system-wide approach. We welcome the
recent initiatives of the Secretary-General, including
the appointment of a sexual exploitation and abuse
Victims" Rights Advocate and field-based victims"
rights advocates, and we welcome efforts to combat
sexual harassment.

Yet, much more still needs to be done to ensure
accountability and fundamentally reconfigure our
collective approach to make responses victim-centred.
We encourage the Secretary-General to ensure that
common standards are developed and implemented
across all United Nations entities and shared with
implementing partners to better prevent and respond to
sexual exploitation and abuse. Both the United Nations
and Member States must play their part. Allow me to
now make a few remarks about women in peacekeeping
and security in my national capacity.

Canada views the participation of women in all
aspects ofpeacekeeping as essential to mission success.
Yet, despite that reality, the United Nations and its
Member States have repeatedly failed to reach targets
set for the deployment of women. The time for change
is now and we must be bold. Recently, Canada launched
the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace Operations, an
innovative and multilateral pilot initiative to design,
implement and evaluate a combination of measures
to overcome barriers to women's deployment to
United Nations peace operations and to support their
effectiveness once on missions. Last month, Canada
hosted representatives from Member States, the United
Nations, civil society and academia for a design
workshop on the Elsie Initiative. Canada has also
formed a contact group to conduct advocacy in the
United Nations system with regard to the representation
of women in United Nations peace operations to help
us develop and implement the five-year pilot initiative.

Peacekeeping operations play a life-saving role
in the protection of the most vulnerable, including
children. Canada believes that there is much more
we can do to enhance child protection. As many of
those present know, Canada developed the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of
the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. Canada
launched this initiative last November, in partnership
with retired General Romeo Dallaire. It seeks to identify
early warning signs, take action to end recruitment and
promote the reporting of abuses and grave violations
against children. Since their launch five months ago,
the Vancouver Principles have already been endorsed
by 62 Member States. In the coming year, Canada will
convene the endorsing States, the United Nations and
members of the child protection community to develop
practical implementation guidance for those principles.

Each of the initiatives I have mentioned reflects
Canada's understanding that we must do peacekeeping
differently and in a way that reflects the present day
realities of conflict. For decades, peacekeeping has
helped to prevent violence, preserve peace and provide
protection to millions of vulnerable people affected by
conflicts. Moreover, as my Prime Minister has said,
peacekeeping operations are important for us not only
because they allow us to assist millions of vulnerable
people in conflict zones, but also because a peaceful
world is a more secure world for Canada.

What we have seen over the past 25 years, however,
are mandates that are more complex and that demand
more and more from both our personnel and systems
of responding. Though the peacekeeping community
has been adapting and incorporating lessons learned,
it is imperative that we continuously adapt, innovate
and respond to new challenges. We must identify the
root causes of conflict and the grievances that fuel it.
In short, we must do peacekeeping differently, better
and together.

There is so much analysis and reporting and so
many initiatives under way that encourage us to look
at peacekeeping in a comprehensive manner. Canada
commends the leadership of the Secretary-General and
his reform efforts across all pillars, which recognize
that sustaining peace remains at the heart of what
we do. We also welcome the important work that
the United Nations is undertaking on enhancing the
safety and security of our peacekeepers. Lieutenant
General Santos Cruz and his team have delivered frank
assessments and honest advice. The mantle now lies
with us.

As Members of the United Nations, whether as
host nations or as troop, police, financial or equipment
contributors, we all have an essential role to play. That
is why Canada is proud to chair the Working Group
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
This year, the Committee completed one of its most
compelling negotiations, during which it brought
together the voices of troop and police contributors
to discuss various major efforts to improve the way
we deliver peacekeeping. That is also why, during
the Vancouver Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Conference in November, Canada convened 80 Member
States and five international organizations to do just
that. In the lead up to and during the Conference, we
examined how we could collectively ensure greater
safety for at-risk populations. We explored early
warning and rapid deployment, smart pledges, training
and capacity-building. Forty-eight new peacekeeping
pledges were made, significantly enhancing the
United Nations peacekeeping capabilities. Following
the Vancouver Ministerial Conference, Canada
remains steadfast in its continued commitment to and
engagement in United Nations peacekeeping.

To that end, Canada has begun deploying key
enablers and military capabilities that leverage
Canadian expertise. Those are aimed at giving the
United Nations the smart and flexible tools it needs to
enhance performance and operational effectiveness.
Last November, we committed a C-l30 Hercules
aircraft to provide tactical airlift support for the United
Nations Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, and
preparations for deployment are currently under way.
That contribution speaks to our support in helping to
enable the United Nations rapid deployment capacities
and effective delivery in the field.

Last week, Canada committed an air task force
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). That
contribution will include Chinook helicopters to
provide urgently needed transport and logistics
capacity and Griffon helicopters to provide armed
escort and protection. We look forward to joining the
57 MINUSMA partner countries in our collective
efforts to bring sustainable peace and stability to Mali
and the Sahel.

In conclusion, Canada is convinced that, when
properly mandated, resourced and supported,
peacekeeping remains one of the most flexible and
effective tools available to the international community
in responding to crises. We welcome this open debate
as an opportunity to further develop our collective
thinking on how to respond to key challenges in the
years ahead. All of us share that responsibility.

