Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
important debate today, and let me also warmly thank
the Secretary-General for his opening remarks. My
thank also go to the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Valerie Amos; the Assistant Secretary-General of the
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ivan Simonovie; and the Director of
the International Law Division of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Philip Spoerri.

I welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guatemala in the Security Council this
morning, which highlights his country's strong support
for this agenda, as, indeed, does Guatemala's recent
adherence to the Rome Statute.

The ninth report (S/2012/376) of the
Secretary-General expresses deep regret that civilians
account for the vast majority of casualties in armed
conflict and highlights the plight of the large number of
displaced civilians. It is important that the Council hear
and act on that sobering message.

As the report makes clear, ensuring the necessary
degree of compliance and thereby strengthening the
protection of civilians is essentially a matter of political
will. The international community must play its part
in helping States to fulfil their primary responsibilities
under international law.

It is therefore of great concern that we continue to
see humanitarian access to areas of need blocked or
constrained. Humanitarian access is fundamental to the
protection of civilians. We must be clear that impeding
this in any way is unacceptable and a violation of
Government responsibilities under international
humanitarian and human rights law.
Since the last protection of civilians debate in
November (see S/PV.6650), we have seen a further
sharp deterioration of the situation for civilians in
Syria. The Syrian regime has shamefully failed in its
responsibility to protect its civilian population. Far
worse, it has deliberately targeted its civilian population
through the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of
force. The regime has now killed around 15,000 Syrian
civilians.

That is why the six-point plan of the Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States on Syria and two resolutions of this Council have
demanded the withdrawal of Syrian troops and heavy
weapons in order to facilitate a sustained reduction in
violence. Without that first step, the violence on all
sides will continue, the United Nations Supervision
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic will not be able
to resume its operations and the Annan plan will fail.
We have now embarked on a final effort to breathe life
back into Mr. Annan's plan, but it will succeed only if
the Council takes robust action to apply pressure on the
regime to meet its basic commitments under the Annan
plan and resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012).

As Mr. Simonovic' has just said, combating
impunity is critical. We therefore commend the work
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and welcome
the recent convictions for war crimes. In March, the
ICC convicted the Congolese militia leader Thomas
Lubanga. In April, the Special Court for Sierra
Leone convicted Charles Taylor. Those verdicts are
examples of how the international community will
continue to challenge impunity and to shine the light
of accountability in all areas. It was right that on both
occasions Council members publicly welcomed those
decisions.

We remain extremely concerned about the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where
civilians continue to suffer the effects of the ongoing
conflict and insecurity. A security vacuum in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo has also
allowed armed groups to regain territory and commit
abuses against the population, including rape. The
responsibility for providing security to the population
rests with the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and we encourage all neighbouring States
to support those efforts. We are working to ensure that
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo supports the
Government's efforts and responds to the changing
situation on the ground, ensuring that the protection of
civilians remains its first priority while increasing its
emphasis on stabilization activity.

In Yemen, we welcome progress made by President
Mansour and his Government to move forward
with political transition. The Government's clear
commitment to removing the threat posed by violent
extremism, notably in the south, must come with equal
determination to protect civilians.

The United Kingdom continues to champion work
on the protection of civilians. The informal Expert
Group on the Protection of Civilians, chaired by the
United Kingdom, has met regularly this year, instituting
thematic and ad hoc briefings. The United Kingdom
has supported the work of the African Union Mission
in Somalia on the civilian casualty-tracking analysis
and response cell, and we have recently launched an
initiative on preventing sexual violence in conflict. Our
ambition is to bring new energy and focus to efforts
to combat sexual violence in situations of conflict and
repression by establishing the capability to rapidly
deploy a United Kingdom team of experts to investigate
and catalogue sexual Violence. We shall use the United
Kingdom's presidency of the Group of Eight in 2013 to
highlight the need to tackle this issue.

We look forward to working with Member States
and existing United Nations mechanisms, such as the
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law, to take this forward.
In addition, we strongly support what Ms. Amos and
Mr. Spoerri said this morning about the importance of
rapidly moving to a conclusion ofthe negotiations on an
arms trade treaty.

In conclusion, resolution 1894 (2009) reaffirms the
Council's commitment to the protection of civilians.
We must continue to act with clarity ofpurpose and the
utmost vigour on this important issue in all theatres of
war and armed conflict.

