Mr.Jeffrey(UnitedStatesofAmerica):Ms.AlHallak's
presentation was a very commendable and moving
depiction of the problems that this terrible conflict
has wrought on Syrian civilians, particularly women.
We thank her very much once again. We thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his remarks and even more so
for the pivotal role he played in last month's launching
of the Constitutional Committee. We congratulate him
personally, as well as the Secretary-General and the
United Nations generally, on that signal achievement.

But while we must not mistake one individual step,
however important, for the peace that we are pursuing,
we must still consider the significance of what has
happened in Geneva. Pursuant to a decision by the
Security Council, we now have two platforms that are
officially recognized by the international community
for dealing with Syria and the problems related to
the Syrian conflict - the regime in Damascus and a
congress of members of all political Views in Geneva.
We have no doubt that that balance, particularly the
part of it based on the work that can be done in Geneva,
can open the door to a much better future ifthe Council
supports it fully. That is therefore our first prescription
for finding a solution to this terrible crisis. The second,
also pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015), is a ceasefire.

We should think about what we have seen since the
Council last met to talk about Syria (see S/PV.8645).
We have seen major new outbreaks of fighting with
the Turkish incursion into the north-east. Four of the
five outside armies concerned, as well as the Syrian
army and several major non-State actors, are all
manoeuvring, sometimes shooting at each other in
a very confined and dangerous area. Meanwhile, in
Idlib in the north-west we have seen a new increase in
violence. As Ms. Al Hallak reminded us, yesterday we
saw a terrible incident of a long-range strategic missile
fired - deliberately, in our view - into an area for
internally displaced persons next to a maternity
hospital, killing and wounding scores of people.

Finally, there was an increase in violence last week
involving three of the other major State military forces
in the air over Syria. Blame should be placed in that
regard on the Iranian Government for continuing to
move long-range weapon systems into Syria in order to
continue its dangerous actions through its proxies. In
the past year three of our partners have been struck by
those weapon systems. In particular we support Israel's
right to defend itself and to act in self-defence when it
needs to.

Our second priority is the achievement of a
nationwide ceasefire. Our third is maintaining
unrelenting diplomatic and economic pressure on
Damascus by the international community to push
forward on our other goals, because we believe that
we will not get them without that pressure. In that
regard, the United States maintains its position that no
reconstruction assistance can be provided to Damascus
in the areas that it controls until a credible and
irreversible political process is in place, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015), and until we are sure that it is
well under way. We believe that position is consistent
with that of many of our European and Middle Eastern
partners, and we will work closely with them to ensure
that this pressure is sustained. Any efforts to provide
reconstruction assistance at this moment is premature,
and here we appreciate the importance of the United
Nations assistance in adhering to its principles and
parameters in support of a political solution. That is our
third area of emphasis.

However, our fourth priority in support of a
viable political solution is based on trying to find
compromises and alternatives to a military solution,
something that the regime, at any rate, still believes to
be possible. My Government in particular has worked
with many of those around this table. I especially want
to emphasize our work with the Russian Federation,
including Secretary of State Pompeo's trip to Sochi
to meet with President Putin in May. We believe that
there is a way forward, as long as we maintain a policy
focused on the political process, putting pressure on
the regime and on those who support it, and ultimately
the achievement of a national ceasefire with a View to
reaching a compromise solution that will finally put an
end to this terrible war, which from the use of chemical
weapons to the millions ofrefugees destabilizing entire
areas, and from the rise of various terrorist groups to
the mass slaughter of civilians, has been such a disgrace
for the world.

