The President (spoke in French): After
consultations among members of the Council, I have
been authorized to make the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council reiterates its
commitment to address the widespread impact of
armed conflict on children and its determination
to ensure respect for and implementation of its
resolution 1612 (2005) and all its previous
32

resolutions on children and armed conflict, which
provide a comprehensive framework for
addressing the protection of children affected by
armed conflict.

"As part of this comprehensive framework,
the Security Council welcomes the progress made
since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), in
particular in the three following areas.

"First, the Security Council welcomes the
appointment of a new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for children and armed
conflict (SRSG), Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy.
The Security Council also welcomes her field
activities in situations of armed conflict and her
intention to carry out new visits in such
situations. The Security Council urges parties to
armed conflict to cooperate with the SRSG, as
well as with UNICEF and other relevant United
Nations entities, with a View to ending
recruitment and use of child soldiers in violation
of applicable international law and all other
violations and abuses committed against children
by parties to armed conflict.

"Secondly, the Security Council welcomes
the ongoing implementation of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on children and armed
conflict, invites the Secretary-General to
accelerate it in accordance with resolution 1612
(2005), and looks forward to receiving the
forthcoming independent review on the
implementation of this mechanism. The Security
Council acknowledges that the application of the
mechanism has already produced results in the
field and welcomes the efforts by national
Governments, relevant United Nations actors and
civil society partners to make the mechanism
operational. The Security Council therefore
invites relevant States affected by armed conflict
that are not yet involved in the implementation of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism to join it
on a voluntary basis, in cooperation with the
SRSG and UNICEF.

"Thirdly, the Security Council welcomes the
activities of its Working Group on children and
armed conflict, as outlined in the report by its
Chair (S/2006/497). The Security Council
welcomes the fact that the Working Group has
achieved commendable progress in its
implementation phase and is now discussing
specific reports of the Secretary-General on
parties in situations of armed conflict. The
Security Council invites the Working Group to
propose effective recommendations for
consideration by the Council.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of a sustained investment in
development, especially in health, education and
skills training, to secure the successful
reintegration of children in their communities and
prevent re-recruitment. The specific situation of
girls exploited by armed forces and groups must
be recognized and adequately addressed.

"The Security Council calls for a
reinvigorated effort by the international
community to enhance the protection of children
affected by armed conflict.

In this regard, it invites all parties concerned, including
Member States, regional organizations, relevant United
Nations entities acting within their mandates including
UNICEF, UNDP, UNHCR, OHCHR, ILO and
UNESCO, international financial institutions,
including the World Bank, as well as civil society, to
build partnerships to that effect. In particular, the
Security Council invites donors to provide additional
resources to fund the development of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism and the reintegration of
children. The Security Council also looks forward to
the contribution of the newly established Peacebuilding
Commission and Human Rights Council to this effort.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
next report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1612 (2005) and its
previous resolutions on children affected by
armed conflict, to be submitted by November
2006, and expresses its determination to address
this important issue."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/2006/PRST/33.

There are a number of speakers remaining on my
list who have not yet made their statements. I propose,
with the consent of the members of the Council, to
suspend this meeting until 2.30 p.m.

The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.
