Mr. Kim Young-mok (Republic of Korea):
Before beginning my statement, I would like to join the
previous speakers in extending our deepest
condolences to the people of India and Pakistan at the
tragic earthquake and the human and physical losses
resulting from it.

I would like to begin by extending my
delegation's appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the
timely preparation of this debate and your personal
interest in East Timor, to which many Member States,
including the Republic of Korea, attach great
importance.

I should also like to take this opportunity to
commend and thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Transitional Administrator for
East Timor, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and all the
members of international agencies for their laborious
efforts in helping East Timor to secure peace and build
a new, self-sustaining nation.

I would like to express my delegation's particular
pleasure in having with us today Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, Cabinet member for foreign affairs of East
Timor, who represents the aspiration of the East
Timorese people to peace and independence. My
delegation also welcomes the contribution of Mr. Harri
Holkeri, President of the General Assembly, to this
debate, which is particularly valuable to us. We hope
that his exceptional presence today in this Chamber
will enhance the interaction between the Council and
the General Assembly.

As many speakers have already pointed out, the
continued interest and assistance of the international
community is essential for the future of East Timor and
for the success of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), which, along
with the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), has become an
important test case of United Nations engagement
beyond its traditional peacekeeping mandates. In this
regard, my delegation supports the extension of
UNTAET's mandate until 31 December 2001, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2001/42).

The Republic of Korea has committed itself to
continuously supporting the United Nations
engagement in East Timor and is prepared to do so in
future. In this spirit, we have joined efforts with the
international community since the very beginning of its
engagement in East Timor through the contribution of
troops as well as other human and financial resources.
My delegation is pleased to note that the contingent of
the Republic of Korea has been successfully operating
as a part ofthe military component of UNTAET.
With regard to nation-building in East Timor,
tremendous work and resources are required, as the
informative and insightful statements made by Mr.
Vieira de Mello, Mr. Ramos-Horta and other senior
officials of various organizations have confirmed
today. My delegation believes that, among other things,
keeping the political process of integration active and
effective is a most important task at this juncture in
achieving a stable and strong nation. In this regard, no
mistakes should be made in securing stability in East
Timor at this particular time, when the country is
confronted with a major and crucial political calendar
for independence. In our View, the process should be
democratic and inclusive and form a solid basis for a
new Timorese government. The opportunity lying
ahead of the people of East Timor is rare and precious.
We understand that this process requires wisdom,
patience and perseverance on the part of all East
Timorese.

In this daunting process, the international
community must spare no effort in helping the East
Timorese in achieving, as speedily as possible,
complete Timorization in every field.

My delegation believes that the cooperation of
the Indonesian Government is crucial in addressing the
challenging issues facing East Timor, such as removing
the threat of militias, the return of refugees, the
prosecution of war criminals and the securing of
borders. My delegation believes that the cooperation of
the Indonesian Government is crucial. My delegation
takes note of the fact that the Government of Indonesia
has done a great deal of work in this regard. However,
we believe that there is room for strengthened
cooperation between the Indonesian Government and
UNTAET. My delegation also hopes that the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), which was withdrawn last September, will
be able to return to West Timor as soon as possible to
allow for continuing assistance to, and the return of,
refugees.

We also agree that East Timor will continue to
need the development cooperation of the international
community, in parallel with security assistance. My
delegation supports the request of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for a certain
level of flexibility in using the allocated resources,
which would contribute to the capacity-building of the
East Timorese, expediting Timorization in all matters.

Concerning the engagement of the international
community in a post-independent East Timor, my
delegation believes that, although the future of East
Timor will depend on the East Timorese people
themselves, a continued United Nations presence,
including a peacekeeping mission, will be necessary
until East Timor achieves an integrated democratic
system with the strong set of institutions that are
necessary to that end. We hope that discussions among
Member States on the future engagement ofthe United
Nations with East Timor will continue. The Republic of
Korea, as an important troop contributor, welcomes an
early opportunity to consider an appropriate mandate
for and level of a peacekeeping operation, in parallel
with the changing environment in East Timor.

In closing, let me reiterate our hope that the
people of East Timor will maintain their courage and
vision in their efforts to achieve all these goals, for the
international community, as manifested today, will
remain committed to working with them. I would like
once again to commend Mr. Vieira de Mello and the
staff of UNTAET for their achievements and
dedication. The Republic of Korea, for its part, will
continue to be a friend to East Timor and to render its
support for this noble cause.

