Mr. Sidorov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): First, I congratulate you, Sir, on your accession
to the presidency of the Security Council and wish you
every success in the performance of your responsible
functions.

We are grateful to the Ambassador of Honduras for
his very skilful direction of the Council's work during the
month of July.

We should also like to welcome the new Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, Sir John Weston. I
wish to assure him that the Russian delegation is ready to
continue to cooperate with the delegation of the United
Kingdom.

The Russian delegation wishes to express its profound
gratification at the progress in the peace-settlement process
in Angola, which has now entered a qualitatively new and
encouraging stage. We are delighted that the Government
of Angola and UNIT A are demonstrating a commitment to
the spirit of the Lusaka Protocol and an increased degree of
cooperation in its implementation.

At the same time, we think it is important to remind
the parties in Angola of the need to observe fully the
timetable for the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol,
first and foremost making up for the delay in the
disengagement of troops and their quartering and in the
formation of a single army and in demining.

We are gratified to note that the steady deployment
of military and police observers and United Nations
troops, including a Russian military contingent, has
helped to consolidate the cease-fire. In this connection,
we emphasize that the operation in Angola acquires
particular importance in the light of the difficulties that
have recently been encountered by the United Nations in
a number of other hot spots. We believe that the positive
progress in the process of an Angolan settlement needs to
be maintained as an encouraging example of United
Nations peacemaking.

We support the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) to 8 February 1996, as envisaged in the draft
resolution. We also wholeheartedly support the appeal to
the international community contained in the draft
resolution to provide aid and assistance to Angola's
efforts in the economic and social fields, with the aim of
restoring and maintaining sound and stable conditions for
development.

Russia, acting in coordination with the other
members of the troika and in close contact with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, will
continue to do everything possible to promote the success
of the peace process in Angola, on the basis of the
Lusaka Protocol. It is our belief that the draft resolution
we are considering today in the Security Council is fully
responsive to the tasks of strengthening the peace process
in Angola, and the Russian delegation will support it.
