Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the delegation of
Malaysia for its initiative to organize today's meeting,
a well as for its able and dynamic leadership of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We are grateful to the Secretary-
General and to today's briefers for their substantive
contributions to today's meeting.

We carefully studied the report (S/2016/360) of the
Secretary-General on the issue of children and armed
conflict. We would like to note the role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, including in
the now-concluding Children, Not Soldiers campaign.

We share the concern of the authors of the report
about the consequences for children as a result of the
numerous conflicts around the world. Modern-day
savagery is what we would call instances where children
become targets of deliberate attacks. We are seriously
concerned about the destruction of schools, hospitals
and other civilian infrastructure. The situation is dire
in a number of countries in the Middle East and North
Africa. In recent days, as a result of the United States-
led air strikes, dozens of civilians have been killed in
Syria, including women and children. The erosion of
State institutions as a result of external intervention in
the region has created a breeding ground for terrorism
and violent extremism. It is no surprise that children
are used as terrorists, suicide bombers or martyrs to
be beheaded. Such grisly crimes point to the urgent
need for coordinated and sustained efforts by the
international community to combat terrorism.

Unfortunately, some international actors and
groups perpetrating such atrocities are referrred to as
"moderates". That brings to mind the recent attack
againstthePalestinianchildbeheadedbyarmedelements
of the Noureddin Al-Zanki group. We are convinced
that allowing such "opposition" is unconscionable. It is
high time that the Security Council expand the list of
terrorist groups operating in Syria.

We support the appeal of the Secretary-General
to scale up programmes to prevent the recruitment of
children via social networks and to combat the spread
of violent extremism through social media.

The report notes an increase in the number of
children displaced as a result of numerous conflicts.
We agree with the conclusion that lasting peace is
the best way to reduce the flow of displaced persons,
including children.

We note the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the use of country visits
aimed at ensuring that parties to a conflict, including
non-State armed groups, take the necessary measures
to protect children.

Given that these issues are the responsibility of
national Governments, it is particularly important to
establish cooperation with Governments. We think
that measuring progress in the protection of children
must be based primarily on an objective asssessment
of the situation on the ground, rather than being guided
by statistics included in action plans. An impartial
approach and using only verified information are of
crucial importance, including in the drafting of reports
on this issue. There is a need to draw upon data from
reliable sources, following thorough checking. There
should be no attempts to bring outside political pressure
to bear with respect to the activities of the Special
Representative as she carries out her mandate.

In order to ensure effective United Nations action
to protect children in situations of armed conflict,
adequate capacity should be provided in peacekeeping
operations. Missions should be equipped with devoted,
highly qualified professionals who stay far removed
from politics. We have questions with regard to the idea
of so-called consolidation of specialized protection
functions under the human rights component. Such
an initiative could have a negative impact on the
effectiveness of United Nations missions in protecting
children, shifting the emphasis to human rights issues.
We believe that this type of decision should not be taken
without prior consultation with States, especially as the
work on the subject of children and armed conflict is
carried out on the basis of Security Council mandates.
However much the Ukrainian delegation would
like to place the blame on the Russian Federation for
the situation in Donbas, including that of children, the
situation is in fact the result of a military operation by
Kyiv against the east of Ukraine. Unfortunately, in spite
of statements of commitment to the Minsk package,
Ukrainian military activities continue. According to
the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, between 12 and
20 July alone, rebel-controlled residential areas were
shelled from positions held by the Ukrainian armed
forces. Houses, schools and electrical facilities and gas
plants came under fire. Civilians were wounded and
killed.

The Mission's report indicates that approximately
70 per cent of all shelling targeted residential areas of
Dombas and was carried out by the Ukrainian military.
Military activity by the Ukrainian armed forces is
continuing along with stubborn determination not to
implement the Minsk agreements and the obligations
entered into by Kyiv. There is a focus on ensuring
lasting security, but Kyiv is actually provoking clashes
along the line of contact.

The economic blockade of Donbas is on Kyiv's
conscience, as is hurting children, including hampering
basic services and goods such as medication, education,
health care and so on. Numerous accounts from
non-governmental organizations point to the use of
schools and other educational institutions by Ukrainian
military forces, including the destruction and seizure
of property.

We have noted many times that there is no military
solution to the crisis in Ukraine. We must prevent the
increasing tensions in the east from leading to full
military action. We once again appeal to the Ukrainian
representatives not to escalate tensions and instead
to concentrate on full and strict compliance with the
package of measures through direct dialogue between
Kyiv and Donbas.

The Graca Machel report on children and armed
conflict (see A/51/306) was published 20 years ago.
The report focused on the disproportionate effect of
war on children. Over the years, the Security Council
has developed a toolkit to systematically address
this challenge. In today's complex environment, it
is important that all links in the chain hold up, that
they be impartial and that they be guided by the need
to cooperate.

