Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I am happy to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for September. I am convinced that you will guide the
Council's work with wisdom and brilliance. I also wish
to convey to the Permanent Representative of Namibia
our thanks for the work he did last month.

The Security Council is seized today of an extremely
important question, the situation in East Timor, with
which my country, Guinea-Bissau, enjoys historic and
cultural bonds that date back centuries.

After the success of the process of inscribing voters
on the electoral lists, followed by the holding, through
direct secret ballot and with universal suffrage, of the
popular consultation on the status of the territory on 30

 

August 1999, Guinea-Bissau and the entire international
community had hoped that true dialogue and reconciliation
might be established, putting a definitive end to the
Violence which, for 24 years, has caused enormous
suffering to the people of East Timor and enabling a
peaceful and orderly transition to the deeply desired
independence that was so courageously voted for by a large
majority of 78.5 per cent of East Timorese.

Instead, we have witnessed a growing wave of
violence and terror caused by militias that persist in
hindering the march of history, at the cost of many human
lives.

Indonesia has not lived up to its commitments to
guarantee security in East Timor, where anti-independence
factions unfortunately continue with impunity to commit
atrocities against partisans of independence. They have
gone so far as to attack churches, the headquarters of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the United
Nations Mission in East Timor, whose efforts,
determination and courage we wish to salute here.

Accordingly, Guinea-Bissau voices its vigorous
indignation at the situation in East Timor and stresses the
need for Indonesia fully to assume its responsibilities under
the 5 May Agreements signed in New York. It must
guarantee peace, security and public order in East Timor
and call on the international community for assistance in
this task, which it is finding difficult if not impossible to
accomplish.

The international community must not remain passive
in the face of atrocities committed against hundreds of
innocent civilians, particularly women and children. That is
why Guinea-Bissau appeals to the international community,
in particular to the Security Council, to do everything
possible to restore peace and security, inter alia, by
dispatching an international peacekeeping force to the
territory. It is also important that the international
community mobilize to provide economic assistance and
immediately to send a humanitarian mission to alleviate the
suffering of the people of East Timor. We urge Indonesia
to accept the dispatch of such a mission.

At this difficult time for the Timorese people, my
delegation would like to reiterate its strong solidarity with
all the Timorese and to guarantee that we will support them
as they travel the path towards independence.

It is indispensable that the international community do
more to create in Timor conditions that guarantee a
peaceful, democratic transition, taking scrupulous account
of the results of the 30 August consultation and of the
interests of all the Timorese.

