Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Our thanks go to Poland for having
convened this important open debate. I also wish to
thank Ms. Virginia Gamba and Ms. Henrietta Fore
for their valuable briefings, as well as the civil society
representatives for their moving testimony.

Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

The figures contained in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/509) are alarming and overwhelming. In
2018, there were more than 24,000 verified cases ofgrave
violations perpetrated against children. Cases ofmurder
and maiming reached unprecedented levels. Attacks on
hospitals and schools multiplied overwhelmingly in
certain regions, including in Syria, Afghanistan and
Yemen. Sexual violence continues to be perpetrated
against children, often under the protection of ominous
silence. Another illustrative fact is that while the
number of violations committed by non-State groups
remained steady, there was an alarming increase in
those attributed to State actors and international forces.
That bears testament to the fact that, sadly, it is States
themselves that have been responsible for the increase
in attacks on the most innocent and vulnerable victims,
which is truly reprehensible.

We must put an end to the suffering that is growing
incessantly year after year and alleviate the critical
situation of children mired in the tragedy of war. To that
end, it is essential to properly harness all instruments
and mechanisms at the international community's
disposal to protect children and defend their rights, as
well as to monitor, investigate and punish the grave
violations committed against them. Uruguay urges all
States that have not yet done so to become party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols - especially that on the involvement of
children in armed conflict - to implement resolution
2286 (2016) and to endorse the Paris and Vancouver
Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration.

The increase in the number of child fatalities and
injuries is, to a large extent, a result of the growing
use of explosive weapons, in particular mines and
improvised explosive devices, as well as indiscriminate
air strikes in densely populated areas. It is therefore
necessary that we continue to work tirelessly on the
disarmament agenda and carry out a review on the
production and responsible trading of weapons. States
must shoulder their obligations in that connection.

The economic interests that fuel the manufacture
and sale of weapons should not be allowed to prevail at
the cost of the bloodshed and suffering of defenceless
beings. Uruguay also values the role played by the
instruments available to the children and armed conflict
agenda. The monitoring and reporting mechanism is a
powerful tool, as is the list annexed to the Secretary-
General's annual report. In order to be effective, that list
must be independent, impartial and rigorous and should
include non-State and State actors alike when there is
evidence that they have committed grave violations
against children. There is no place on that list for half
measures, waivers or exemptions of any kind. In that
sense, the ability of the instrument to respond to and
prevent such violations will not be impaired.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General also has a decisive role to play. We recognize
her continued efforts and those of her team, as well
as her valuable initiatives, including the recently
established Global Coalition for the Reintegration of
Former Child Soldiers, and we reiterate our support for
her work. We also commend the tireless work carried
out every day by UNICEF in defence of the rights of
children in conflict zones.

Accountability is also essential to preventing and
combating impunity. The International Criminal Court
must be supported, and the Security Council must
shoulder its responsibility to refer cases to the Court,
when appropriate.

To conclude, I should like to mention a central issue
to the recovery of children affected by conflict, namely
education. Nelson Mandela, a fervent champion ofpeace
and dignity for all human beings, said, "Education is
the most powerful weapon which you can use to change
the world". The testimonies delivered by Ms. Mariatu
Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter Awan, who put a face to
the statistics and gave a voice to hundreds of thousands
of victims, are proof of that. Together with health care
and psychosocial care, we must invest time, effort and

resources to ensure that education is available to all,
and the international community must collaborate
to that end. Education offers valid alternatives for
victims facing a future that often appears hopeless
and uncertain. Through the transformative power of
education, children and young people will acquire the
skills and economic security necessary to break the
circle of violence, while learning the values of humanity
and coexistence that will allow them to build healthy,
peaceful and sustainable societies.

