Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I had
intended to focus my remarks on the issue before us,
and will do so. But that does not mean we agree with
either the interpretation of the process that led to this
resolution or the representation of the arguments
presented by Council members on the specific issues
raised by both Ambassador Urbina and Ambassador
Kumalo reflecting the substance of the issue. But let
me focus on the issue as we see it before us.

The Western Sahara conflict has gone on too
long, provoking tensions, causing human suffering and
preventing progress towards regional integration in
North Africa. I am sure that all of us around this table
yearn for a mutually agreed political solution to this
conflict. Four rounds of discussions in the framework
of the latest settlement initiative have, however,
confirmed the difficulty of arriving at such a solution,
despite the seriousness, dedication and sincerity of the
Secretary-General's Personal Envoy, Peter van
Walsum.

In the absence of a settlement, my Government
judges the mission of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara to be vital and is
pleased that the Council has renewed its mandate for a
full year; we appreciate the fact that it was done
consensually.
08-32472

It is our hope that this will permit the parties to
engage in the search for a solution in a sustained,
intensive and creative manner. To encourage them to
do so, we intend to broaden our own engagement with
them over the coming weeks and months. For our part,
we agree with Mr. van Walsum's assessment that an
independent Sahrawi State is not a realistic option for
resolving the conflict and that genuine autonomy under
Moroccan sovereignty is the only feasible solution. In
our View, the focus of future negotiation rounds should
therefore be on designing a mutually acceptable
autonomy regime that is consistent with the aspirations
of the people of the Western Sahara.

In that regard, Morocco has already produced a
proposal that the Security Council has qualified as
serious and credible, and we urge the POLISARIO to
engage Morocco in negotiation of its details - or to
submit a comprehensive autonomy proposal of its own.

