Mr. Mercado (Philippines): I join other
delegations in thanking the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
thorough but concise reports (S/2005/343, annexes I and II and S/2005/336, enclosure), which have given
the Council a better perspective on the workings of
both Tribunals and the challenges they face. We also
congratulate the two courts for their accomplishments
since their last reports.

With respect to the work of the ICTY, the
Philippines notes with approval the measures
undertaken to implement the completion strategy,
specifically the amendment in the Rules of Procedure
and Evidence requiring the parties' submissions and
the Trial Chamber's judgements of acquittal to be
delivered orally. Written submissions and decisions
take up an enormous amount of the Tribunal's time,
and justice delayed is justice denied. Although the
amendment will entail more preparation for the
Prosecutor to ensure that proper evidence is presented,
we believe that the amendment to rule 98 bis greatly
enhances the Tribunal's capability to dispense justice
while maintaining the standards of due process.

We also laud the establishment of the two
working groups and stress that all discussion and all
recommendations for court procedures and working
methods should be done in line with the noble
principles under which the Tribunal was established. It
may also be prudent to review existing best practices in
pre-trial and trial procedures from various national
systems, although research on these may entail a
considerable amount of time.

We note that the work of the Prosecutor is
invariably affected by such changes. The Prosecutor
has a key role to play in determining the admissibility
of evidence and in referring cases to competent
national jurisdictions. We support the remarkable
efforts of Ms. Carla Del Ponte in that regard,
particularly the latest round of indictments and the
motion for referral of the Stankovic case to the
Sarajevo War Crimes Chamber. As stated in the report
of President Meron (S/2005/343, annex I), the ability
of the Tribunal to refer cases to competent national
jurisdictions for trial is important not only for the
achievement of the completion strategy but also for
national healing and the re-establishment of stability
and the rule of law in the former Yugoslavia. We
congratulate the Tribunal for the significant role it
played in the creation of the War Crimes Chamber of
the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

With respect to the report of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, we commend the court
for achieving the targets and projections set out in its
completion strategy of April 2004 (S/2004/921, annex).
My delegation welcomes the Court's adoption of
measures designed to regulate the pre-trial process and
to restrict the number of interlocutory appeals. Pre-trial
and pre-defence status conferences greatly facilitate
and streamline the conduct of trials.

We are pleased to note that the number of
indictees at large has gone down from 14 to 10 since
the last report. However, we are bothered by the
observation that those indictees still at large may never
be found. We nevertheless hope that the Prosecutor's
more aggressive programme for the tracking and
apprehension of fugitives will produce positive results.

My delegation also notes the issues facing the
proposed transfer of ICTR cases to Rwanda. It
encourages States to cooperate fully with the
Prosecutor in discussions regarding the transfer of
cases and the transmission of files to other national
jurisdictions that comply with the jurisdictional
requirement and international standards for fair trials.

The latest reporting period has been a productive
one for the ICTY and the ICTR. My delegation
congratulates both Tribunals on carrying out their work
at full capacity and integrating time-saving measures
that do not jeopardize international standards of justice
and due process.

My delegation is fully cognizant of the challenges
and difficulties in achieving the completion strategy,
specifically the requirement for the completion of all
trials by 2008. We View the work of both Tribunals as
an important contribution in addressing the challenges
of justice and ending impunity in Rwanda and in the
former Yugoslavia.

As my delegation has stated in the past, we would
like the courts to adhere to the time lines established
under resolution 1503 (2003). We therefore support all
efforts aimed at increasing the efficiency of the ICTY
and the ICTR. We also call on all concerned States to
cooperate fully with the Tribunals, specifically in
bringing the fugitives to justice, as that is crucial in
achieving the completion strategy. We also would like
to remind them of their obligations to extend full
cooperation to the ICTY and the ICTR pursuant to
resolution 1503 (2003).

