Ms. Sabelo (South Africa): We thank you, Madam
President, for calling this meeting at this important
juncture, especially given the recent developments
regarding the Syrian Golan Heights. I would also like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Under-
Secretary-General DiCarlo for their briefings on
this matter.

My delegation supports the work of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
in the region and acknowledges the important role it
plays in stabilizing the region, including through its
continued engagement with all parties concerned.

South Africa is deeply concerned about the recent
decision by a member of the Security Council to
recognize Israel's sovereignty over the Syrian Golan
Heights. That unilateral action does nothing to assist in
finding a long-term peaceful solution to the conflict in
the Middle East.

The Security Council has adopted numerous
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) and 497
(1981), calling for Israel to relinquish its occupation of
the Syrian Golan Heights and other occupied territory.
Yet, in 2019, we are still discussing Israel's Violations of
the Council's decisions in the Chamber of the Security
Council. Resolution 497 (1981) declares that the Israeli
annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights is null and void
and without international legal effect. Israel's continued
occupation of the Syrian Golan Heights is therefore
evidence of its continued violation of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.

The recent decision by a member of the Council
to recognize Israel's sovereignty over the Syrian Golan
Heights is a blatant violation of international law and
the resolutions I mentioned. South Africa, along with
other members of the international community, rejects
that unilateral decision. That decision marks the failure
of the Council to take action against the continued
Violations of its resolutions and the inability of the
international community to resolve that protracted
conflict. Israel has continued to defy international law
in its attempt to alter the facts on the ground by the
construction of settlements, appropriation of water
resources and expulsion of Arab occupants from
their land.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to note
that, if the Council were dealing with another country
on its agenda and such flagrant violations occurred,
there would be no hesitation to act. Yet on this matter
we allow the violations to persist with impunity and
thereby undermine the Council's credibility, which
highlights its double standards. We support the call for
all parties to work towards a just and durable peace.
Only through a comprehensive peace settlement in the
Middle East that addresses the Syrian and Lebanese
tracks as well would thatjust and durable peace prevail.

