Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): We are almost at
the end of another busy month - busy, yet skillfully
facilitated by a presidency with a clear sense of
purpose, efficiency and transparency. This month the
Council focused its discussions on a number of issues
that Lithuania finds particularly pertinent.

We held the first-ever briefing with the heads of
police components (see S/PV.7317) and the adoption
of resolution 2185 (2014) on United Nations police.
Like the debate with the heads of military components
during the Argentinian presidency (see S/PV.7275), it
allowed us to hear directly from the commanders of
the most rapidly growing United Nations peacekeeping
component on efforts to stop community violence, ensure
accountability and build national justice institutions.
It was very encouraging to hear police commanders
reaffirming that the protection of civilians, and in
particular women and children, is the key priority for
United Nations peacekeeping. The Council has been
consistent in sending that message through its country-
specific and horizontal resolutions. Member States and
the Secretariat alike have to reinforce their efforts in
ensuring that peacekeepers are prepared and willing to
actively intervene when the most vulnerable are in need
of protection.

Yesterday's debate on United Nations sanctions (see S/PV.7323) offered us an opportunity to reflect on how
sanctions have evolved from being punitive measures
imposed in response to incompliance with international
obligations. We look forward to a prompt adoption of
the draft resolution on this issue. Currently, more often
than not sanctions are a much more comprehensive
tool intended to help countries in their post-conflict
recovery or in preventing relapse The Council must
therefore consider how it should readjust its efforts to
ensure better compliance with and implementation of
sanctions.

While arms embargoes, travel bans and asset freezes
might indeed be instrumental in setting a country on a
path towards peaceful development, it is only through
capacity-building and technical assistance that their
true potential can be achieved. It is also important for
the Council and relevant Committees to remain engaged
with neighbouring countries. Their shared interest
in regional stability and first-hand knowledge of the
situation are a crucial asset in making sanctions timely
and well targeted. Finally, the sanctions committees
must engage in constant dialogue with the wider United
Nations membership through open briefings and press
statements.

Looking ahead into next month, the Council will
have to decide on the extension of the mandates of
the judges of the International Criminal Tribunals for
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. During the past
two decades, both tribunals have made enormous
contributions both to the development of international
criminal law and to assistance to national judicial
systems in conducting their own trials. They are now at a
crucial juncture, in which they are aiming to effectively
conclude cases still under consideration while referring
pending tasks to the Residual Mechanism. Keeping
that in mind, the Council has to ensure that closure
dates depend on the completion of ongoing trials in
compliance with the highest standards of procedural
fairness. That can be assured only by the extension of
the mandates, as requested by the Presidents of both
Tribunals.

In November the Council held an important debate
on international cooperation in combating terrorism
(see S/PV.7316) and adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/23), which reiterated the grave concern
about the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, the Al-Nusra
Front and other Al-Qaida affiliates, as well as the
negative impact of violent extremist ideology on the
stability of Iraq, Syria and beyond. Next month the
Council will continue to address the multifaceted issue
of terrorism with a focus on the African region, which
remains one of the most vulnerable to this increasingly
diffuse threat. As noted in the Secretary-General's
report of9 January 2014 (S/2014/9), the picture is further
complicated by the increasing cooperation among
criminal networks and terrorist groups, especially in
West Africa and the Sahel. It often involves drugs, arms
and human trafficking, as well as other illicit activities,
which call for an immediate and enhanced response at
all levels.

Despite repeated calls from the international
community to find a solution, the situation in the east of
Ukraine continues to escalate. In the public meeting on
12 November (see S/PV.7311) most Council Members
echoed concerns expressed by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and Assistant
Secretary-General Toyberg-Frandzen over increased
tensions as convoys moved into the separatist-held
areas with substantial amounts of heavy weapons
and troops from across the Russian border. Constant
violations of the ceasefire continued to fuel the conflict
and further endangered the Minsk agreements, as did
the illegal and illegitimate so-called elections held
on 2 November by foreign-backed illegal armed rebel
groups despite the overwhelming consensus on the part
of the international community that they would damage
the political solution. As the international efforts to find
a solution that can only be based on respect okaraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity continue, the
Council and the United Nations should support them.

Lastly, as this is the last Council meeting for
November, let me thank Australia for this extraordinary
month, welcome the newly elected Council members
that have now joined us and, finally, wish Chad every
success in December.

