Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): Mr. President,
allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for
having convened this meeting.

The Holy See has repeatedly voiced its urgent
concern for the peace and welfare of all the peoples in
the Middle East, regardless of their ethnicity or religion.
Pope Francis, in his first Easter message, on 31 March
this year, appealed for:
"Peace for the Middle East, and particularly
between Israelis and Palestinians, who struggle to
find the road of agreement, that they may willingly
and courageously resume negotiations to end a
conflict that has lasted all too long. Peace above
all for dear Syria, for its people torn by conflict
and for the many refugees who await help and
comfort. How much blood has been shed! And how
much suffering must there still be before a political
solution to the crisis is found?"

Given the extreme seriousness of what has been
unfolding in Syria, especially during these past few
months, my delegation wishes to focus its remarks
today on the unbearable suffering of its people.

The whole world has been shocked by the ever-
increasing statistics describing the dire humanitarian
situation in Syria. The tragedy of such an intolerable
situation demands from us immediate measures to
assist the some 1.8 million refugees who now seek
peace, security and safety in Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq,
Turkey and Egypt.

Further, there are over 4 million internally
displaced persons, constituting nearly 18 per cent of
the population, and 6.8 million victims of this conflict,
half of whom are children, require urgent humanitarian
assistance. More than 4 million people have lost their
homes. Moreover, the challenges faced by neighbouring
countries in assisting and protecting refugees appear to
contribute to the further political destabilization of the
region.

On the political front, this destructive conflict
is only being exacerbated by outside influences and
extremist groups, which see it as an opportunity
for political or ideological gains rather than as an
appalling disaster that is engulfing Syria. Today, while
recognizing that the conflict has negative repercussions
for everyone, my delegation would like to bring to the
international community's attention the devastating
impact that the conflict is having on Syria's Christian
population, a population which in its various traditions
has been present in the country for 2,000 years.

These days, the Christian community faces
numerous challenges to its very survival in the region.
Christians face, on the one hand, ideological extremist
groups that seek to eradicate them from the region, and,
on the other, continued insecurity for their families
and homes as they are left to fend for themselves. The
murder of the Catholic priest Francois Murad is just one
of the many heinous acts in a long series ofkidnappings
of Christians, including bishops and priests, and of
gruesome killings of innocent civilians. Christians have
also witnessed the destruction of more than 60 of their
churches and affiliated institutions. Here I would like
to thank the representative of Togo for having kindly
remembered the murder of Father Murad.

In many cases, they have had to seek ways and
means, in the midst of dangerous and life-threatening
circumstances, to safeguard their treasured sacred
objects and priceless manuscripts and artifacts
bearing witness to their bi-millennial tradition and
culture, which constitutes a veritable world heritage of
outstanding universal value for the whole of humanity.

These pertinent remarks are not indicative of any
lack of concern on the part of the Holy See for the
suffering that afflicts each and every Syrian citizen,
regardless of religion or ethnicity. Rather, they are
a fitting expression of the solicitude of the Holy See
for the whole Christian family and of what should be
the serious apprehension of the entire world about
the overlooked fate of so many thousands of victims,
including Christians as well as other ethnic and
religious minorities, who find themselves ruthlessly
targeted in that conflict through no fault of their own,
and who now, caught in the crossfire, are struggling
for their very survival. My delegation is convinced
that there can be no social progress and no justice if
religious and ethnic minorities are not accorded their
rightful place as full members of society.

The persistent refusal on the part of both sides to
the conflict to engage in a meaningful political dialogue
aimed at building a reconciled Syria augurs only more
deaths, fear, hatred and destruction. As has been stated
many times in this Chamber and in other international
forums, there can be no military solution to the Syrian
conflict. Regardless of this, the parties to the conflict
manifest the determination, with total impunity, to
shed yet more blood, to supply yet more weapons and
to destroy more lives before they can be brought to the
negotiating table.

War can never more be considered a means of
resolving conflicts. Yet war, when it occurs, can be won
only through peace; yes, peace won through negotiations,
dialogue and reconciliation. It is my delegation's hope,
therefore, that the international community can find
the courage to reconcile its differences and show the
political determination necessary to pave the path to
the much-awaited "Geneva II" conference, so as to help
all parties to the conflict rediscover the indispensable
path of dialogue with a view to reaching a concerted
and negotiated solution.
My delegation commends every effort to that end
and calls upon all responsible parties to desist from
hindering the long-overdue negotiated settlement of this
conflict. Peace in Syria makes us all winners, whereas
enduring conflict surely guarantees only losers.

