Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to extend
my thanks to Mr. Robert Serry for the comprehensive
briefing he gave this morning.

The efforts to achieve peace in the Middle East are
passing through a very sensitive stage due to the lack of
meaningful progress and stagnation in the negotiations
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides, despite
the intensive, continuous and commendable efforts
undertaken by the United States and other influential
international actors. Reaching a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question
on the basis of a two-State solution is at the core of
solving the conflict in the region and is a strategic
regional and international interest. Failure to do so will
expose all countries in the region and its peoples, who
are increasingly frustrated, to new and unprecedented
waves of tension and violence. That failure will have
serious repercussions, not only for the region, but also
on international peace and security.

It is necessary to intensify international efforts
to establish an independent, sovereign and viable
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
in accordance with the borders of 4 June 1967, based
on the two-State solution and the relevant international
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. The
achievement of that goal is a high priority for Jordan,
and we underscore, in particular, that all agreements on
final status issues must uphold Jordan's high priorities.

(spoke in English)

I would like now to focus my attention on why the
recent actions by leading right-wing members of the
Israeli Government, as well as members of the Israeli
Knesset, with respect to the Muslim sites throughout the
Haram al-Sharif/Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, as well
as the Christian sites in the Old City, are a challenge
and threat to Jordan, and to peace and security in the
immediate region and beyond.

Over the past few years, the most extreme parts
of the Israeli right-wing movement have been intent
on overturning the status quo regarding the Al-Aqsa
Mosque compound. Their regular incursions into
the compound, which spike in frequency with the
observance of religious holidays and occasions, have
been nothing short of provocative and menacing.
Moreover, the incursions are gaining in intensity and,
if they continue, will tip the situation throughout the
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound into a colossal crisis.

Last month, a delegation led by the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, which included the Chair of the
Group of Arab States, the Chair of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
together with the Permanent Observer of the State of
Palestine, the Egyptian Permanent Representative and
myself, met with the then President of the Council to
deliver a letter, voice our deep concern and follow up on
a previous letter sent to the Council by the Arab Group
on that subject. While we affirm today everything that
was contained in those letters, I will not go into detail
word for word.

I will limit myself to the essential features of the
broader violations on the part of the Israeli authorities.
They consist of the illegal and intrusive excavations on
both sides of the wall surrounding the Old City; a blatant
disregard for the decisions adopted by UNESCO'S
World Heritage Committee and the Executive Board of
UNESCO; obstructing a UNESCO reactive monitoring
mission to the Old City, and renovating parts of the
wall of the Al-Aqsa Mosque without the approval
of the Jordanian side - and I will get to that point
shortly - regular incursions by Israeli right-wing
politicians, settlers and extremists, as I mentioned
earlier, into the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, as well
as a recent debate organized in the Knesset aimed at
imposing Israeli sovereignty over the Al-Aqsa Mosque
compound.

We join the Arab world and the Islamic Ummah
in condemning those irresponsible and inflammatory
actions. We are also satisfied that virtually every
country in the international community shares a deep
concern about those developments, and we welcome
their supportive actions in that regard. Ambassador
Mansour has spoken eloquently in expressing the
Palestinian position on that and, given that the
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
remains under foreign military occupation, we appeal
to colleagues to listen to his words very carefully.
I would, however, like to explain how the actions of
the extreme Israeli right-wing also threaten Jordanian
interests directly. How so?

The Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, together with the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre, falls under Jordanian
custodianship and protection. And any members of
the Council who have visited either would have seen
Jordanian officials tending to those two sites. Indeed, we
have maintained them since 1924, when the Hashemite
guardianship over the holy sites was formalized.
Presently, it is His Majesty King Abdullah II, who is the
Guardian and Custodian of the Muslim and Christian
holy sites in the Old City of Jerusalem.

As we have noted time and again, East Jerusalem
is occupied territory under international law. The
International Court of Justice has affirmed that. In
paragraph 78 of its 2004 advisory opinion, citing
decisions of this Council, it emphasized the way
that international humanitarian law applies to East
Jerusalem, as well as to the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory.

As an occupying Power, Israel is also under
obligation, by virtue of article 56 of the 1907 Hague
Regulations, which reflects an established rule
of customary international law to treat religious
institutions, even when State-owned, as private
property. As such, the rights that derive from private
ownership under international law apply, including
the right of the holder of such rights - in this case
the Jordanian Awqaf department 4 to administer its
property without interference from the occupying
Power. As such, Israel may not interfere with any
aspect of the administration of worship in the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, except to ensure the safety and security of
the site. That is an obligation more than a right, and
must be carried out without undermining the exercise
of religious administration of the Awqaf department.

Paragraph 2 of article 9 of the Jordan-Israeli peace
treaty reflects the special role ofthe Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, and article 5 of the Hague Convention on the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict, to which Israel is a party, also imposes a clear
obligation on that country to support the "competent
national authorities in safeguarding and preserving
its cultural property". In that respect, I would like to
make two points. First, the Jordanian Awqaf was the
national authority when East Jerusalem was occupied
and has remained so continuously since June 1967.
Secondly, Israel's actions undermine the exercise
by the national authority of its role in preserving the
Al-Aqsa Mosque by allowing Israeli incursions and
violations. Naturally, the draft law discussed last month
in the Knesset on the extension of sovereignty aims to
overturn, unlawfully, the national authority's role as
the custodian of that cultural property.

Moreover, in March 2013 an agreement signed by
His Majesty King Abdullah II and President Mahmoud
Abbas reaffirmed the status of His Majesty as the
Custodian of the holy sites in Jerusalem. Under that
agreement, His Majesty enjoys the full right to exert
all legal efforts to safeguard Jerusalem's holy sites,
including the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, the Dome of
the Rock, all its mosques, buildings, walls, courtyards
over and beneath the ground and the Waqf properties
connected to the Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well as the
churches in the Old City of Jerusalem, including the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre.

Unless the threat to the Al Aqsa Mosque compound
from the extreme right-wing movement is reversed,
it will not only provoke a massive crisis with the
Muslim world and even parts of the Christian world,
but will also obviously, given what I have just said,
pose a direct threat and challenge to one of the two
neighbours with whom Israel has a peace treaty.
Such actions and incitements must therefore end, and
end permanently, for the sake of a region that can ill
afford yet another crisis, especially since this would be
anything but yet another crisis. Rather, it would be the
crisis to overwhelm all others, and one that we must do
everything in our power to prevent.

