Mr. Kouchner (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you for both your words of appreciation and your
criticism. Positive appreciation seems to have won the
day, I think, but of course I am not in the right position
to judge that. I am grateful to the Ambassadors of the
Russian Federation and China for having provided us
by their criticism an opportunity to improve our work. I
have a great deal of respect for these countries and the
personalities of the Ambassadors, and I would like to
respond to them quickly.

Some 15 months ago, you probably would not
have spoken thus. I believe, quite modestly, that I have
done my best. I think that those who have visited this
region, Kosovo, at least on two occasions can testify
that the situation has radically changed, practically
changed, technically changed, materially changed, and
I would even say that on a routine, day-to-day basis it
has changed.

As for change in attitude and conduct, more time
will be necessary. Even the Security Council can do
nothing there. Human conduct has a timeframe which
is not the same as that of either the media or of politics.
That notwithstanding, I share your impatience and
frustration.

Thirteen centuries of confrontation between these
ethnic groups, these peoples, these communities -
thirteen centuries of not living together, thirteen
centuries of not talking with each other, thirteen
centuries of not seeing each other, and you want
violence to stop in 15 months?

I do understand political impatience, but I also
believe that we have to remain reasonable, and reason
may return bit by bit to Kosovo. Do not believe that we
are indifferent to violence. In the marvelous team that I
have the honour to lead we devote all our energies to
trying to staunch that violence, to reduce it. Look at the
level of violence elsewhere in the world; you hardly
need to do that to believe me. Just look at this curve of
violence and you will see. It is not just Kosovo where
there is violence. We spend our time in trying with the
police - and that includes 49 nations - to innovate
and make the international community's intervention
more effective. Fortunately - and I remember next to
me a few months ago General Klaus Reinhardt was
here to affirm this - we have the possibility of
requesting the soldiers of KFOR to intervene with a
view to tempering that violence. But it is not a soldier's
job to extemporize civilian police work, although they
do it very well. At some point we will need to do what
the Brahimi report has urged: we will have to create the
conditions necessary for peace so that peacekeeping
missions and missions to impose a peace - because
one cannot keep a peace that does not exist - can do
their jobs. We must understand how necessary it is to
train international police together so that they can be
effective. And of course, those police officers should
not be penalized in any country for participating.

I have heard the Council's impatience, and I share
that impatience. We experience that impatience every
day. Members have paid tribute to the team that I lead;
by myselfI can do nothing, and I am nothing. The
Secretary-General appointed me to head the Mission,
which was a great honour. But nothing could have been
done without the dedication and tireless work of all the
staff members of the agencies, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) the
European Union and, especially, the United Nations.
They are a brilliant, dedicated, creative team who work
night and day. I think that anyone who has visited the
region can attest to their dedication to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and to peace
in the region. I am proud to be heading that team,
which is a very exceptional one indeed.

Mr. Holbrooke of the United States spoke the
truth about the historic moment we are experiencing. I
do not wish at present to take a position on the events
in Belgrade, but I think that I might venture to say that
this is a unique opportunity for our Serb friends and for
the Serb people to reach out to democracy. They have
shown their will to do that. We must help them not to
miss this opportunity. I am certain that the majority of
Serbs - certainly those with whom I have dealt in
Kosovo and those I know who come from Belgrade and
elsewhere - have awaited this opportunity with high
hopes. Let us not disappoint them. This is indeed an
opportunity for the Serb people to live up to its historic
calling in this region, for peace, justice and democracy.
Our Serb friends expect us to support them. I listened
to Ambassador Holbrooke's flattering remarks about
the Mission, and I thank him very warmly.

The representative of Bangladesh rightly
observed that the elections are essential for the
restoration of peace. I agree - and so do 13 out of 15
countries. That does not mean that the other two are
wrong, but it is still a nice majority. How can we hope
to restore democracy if we do not play out the scenario
of elections to its very end. And that scenario begins
with local elections. It is not an enormous thing that
after a year and a half we are asking that the existing
municipal councils be endorsed or modified. Those
municipal councils do indeed exist and do indeed
engage in administration, with the involvement of
UNMIK. They administer daily life in the
municipalities. We will give them democratic
legitimacy and will place better means at their disposal.
And that is all. Serbs are already working in those
municipalities, and they will continue to do so. I am
sorry that once again Serbs have not registered to vote,
but I am sure that they will participate in this
endeavour.

Is a year and a half enough? Is it too long? How
much longer should we wait? Should we wait for the
violence to stop again? Well, centuries have gone by
and have not been long enough to eliminate that
violence. Should we wait another year, or two, or
three? Is there a criterion? I do not know. We shall see
if history vindicates me; if it does not, it will vindicate
some members of the Council, and I will be the first to
acknowledge the mistake. But I do not think that
history will prove me wrong. I think that the roots of
democracy will be found in these municipal elections
and that they will later spread.

Here again, I am thinking of what the
representative of Bangladesh said: that the security
situation will improve thanks to these elections,
because we will be giving people responsibility. That is
the only way to show respect for them, the only way to
show that they are considered to be full-fledged
citizens. I hope rather that the violence will diminish
during the electoral campaign. I hope I am not wrong,
but it is curious that there has been less violence ever
since the start of the campaign, as though the campaign
had caused this phenomenon psychologically and
sociologically. If an outlet is provided by the
international community for making these arguments,
we will all have reason to rejoice.

Yesterday, for the first time, the Democratic
League of Kosovo (LDK), Mr. Rugova's party, was
rather passive. Of course, we saw the first ofthe public
demonstrations by Mr. Rugova; never had there been
so many people demonstrating in Pristina. Mr. Rugova
made a speech, and there was not one single incident. I
myself systematically witnessed the launching of every
party's campaign so as not to be selective. I think this
marked the beginning of democracy. So yesterday there
was a very important event at Pristina: the beginning of
the LDK campaign. That might not seem so significant,
but in Kosovo it is astonishing if you think about the
background of the two key actors: the former KLA and
the LDK. I hope this trend will continue.

I thank the representative of France for having
given me the opportunity to pay tribute to the team I
lead, in Pristina and throughout the country, who are
activists more than bureaucrats.

Will any momentum be generated by these
elections in these communities? I think so; I hope so.
Will we see a rejection of hatred and a movement
towards positions of peace and reconciliation? I hope
so. Once again, we have to understand that these were
opposing sides, and that indeed they were fighting one
another. I would say to the representative of the
Russian Federation that it is paradoxical that I should
be criticized for organizing elections. I have also been
rightly criticized for accepting certain parties who were
imposed in the municipalities during the war. By what
miracle could I have got rid of them other than through
the miracle of democracy? The majority of those who
were imposed in the municipalities will undoubtedly be
rejected in the future through a vote, or they will hold
other posts. I hope that will be done in the best possible
spirit; it is the only way to possibly remove those who
did not enjoy legitimacy from the posts they occupied
by force. That is how I would respond to some of
Ambassador Lavrov's arguments.

It is not that I am too optimistic; I try to be a
realist. I am trying not to forget my limitations or the
great principles of resolution 1244 (1999), which it is
my job to implement, and which I am implementing
willingly. But let us rely on the facts for our criticisms;
they are enough.

Let me say one word about the article in the
Financial Times. Never did I speak of independence,
never in one and a half years: not once have I done that
in public. I acknowledge that the phrase in the
Financial Times was an ambiguous one; I know it by
heart - as one can imagine, I read it. But this was
simply a case ofincorrect interpretation.

The population of Kosovo admits that it is
contemplating independence. I believe that we must
apply resolution 1244 (1999), which speaks of
"substantial autonomy", and that the Kosovars, or some
among them, took this to refer to a phase. That was not
my personal opinion. You will never, ever find me
remiss in the interpretation of that phrase, but I
apologize if my statement was misunderstood.

I recall the incident that was referred to by the
Russian Ambassador, particularly since I have here the
card of his colleague, Mr. Valery Yegoshkin, who
visited me for an hour and a half. I was very pleased to
meet and speak with him. We got along very well.
During the one and a half hours I spent with him, he
had no complaints. He said nothing about an arrest. If
he had, I would have looked into it. On behalf of the
international community, which I represent in part -
though not on behalf of the Kosovo Force, which I do
not represent - I offer our apologies if Mr. Yegoshkin
was detained too long. Although I do not offer excuses
for anyone, Mr. Yegoshkin was crossing the border at a
time when security was important and when the
announcement of federal elections - particularly the
presidential and the National Assembly elections of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia - made the situation
extremely explosive. I am sorry that Mr. Yegoshkin
was detained too long at the border. I assure the
Russian Ambassador that there was no ulterior motive
for that.

Reference was made to the attitude ofthe Doctors
Without Borders organization. I am grateful for that. I
was involved in the establishment of that organization.
I was somewhat pained by the attitude of some people
who, instead of making constructive criticisms in a
difficult situation, left in protest against violence.
Fortunately, they were replaced by other doctors of that
organization and I believe their protest served no
purpose. One must sometimes protest, but not against
one's friends.

I agree that no one is happy at the level of
excessive violence, but it is in constant decline. Once
again, I offer the statistical charts demonstrating that,
although I do not attach too much importance to
statistics. One single incident makes me indignant, too.
However, we did have a profoundly, historically,
humanly, sociologically and psychopathologically
volatile situation. How can that be expected to
disappear in one and a half years? Look at what is
occurring in other peacekeeping missions. I will not be
callous enough to mention some by name, but the level
of violence is extremely high. That is the way it is.
Obviously, there would be no peacekeeping missions
without violence. So we do what we can and our
people work day and night, but they cannot stand
behind every individual or guarantee personal security
to everyone. Unfortunately, that is impossible.

Let us make no mistake. The pact is in no way a
legal one. It is entirely a moral and emotional one. I
ask them to guarantee democratic elections without
violence so that we will be in a better position to
discuss their future. Of course, I make no one sign a
political or legal statement.

I am pleased that the Russian Ambassador
referred to provisional autonomy, as we did in Tokyo.
It is in that context that I shall try to move ahead,
thanks to the pact, after the municipal elections. Not
only did we propose this to the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure (JIAS), but we have tried and
continue to try - as Mr. Ivansov behind me, who is in
charge of policy at UNMIK, can attest - to see the
official representatives of Belgrade every day or almost
every day.

I am glad that the Russian Ambassador cited the
Kosovar newspaper Koha Diiore for its acute criticism
of the registration process, but I should have liked him
also to cite the paper's correction of that article, since
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) pointed out that it was based on
entirely mistaken premises. In any case, I am very
pleased that he mentioned that newspaper, which is
indeed an example of increasing open-mindedness
among the Kosovar daily press.

I shall naturally try to see to it that the mistakes
that have been referred to are put to rights, but I am not
the one who will do it. That will be up to the JIAS, the
OSCE and UNMIK. In the registration process, which
is being carried out according to very up-to-date
methods using databases, there are certain elements
that were understandably skewed. It would,
unfortunately, take too long to explain, but there are
procedures known as "invitations to tender". These
invitations were won by the Indians. We therefore sent
these Albanian-language databases to the Indians.
There were occasional errors made in the
retranscription of people's names or place names. That
is why it was claimed that 30 per cent ofthe data banks
were in error. But that is not true. We are in the process
of correcting the errors, which we feel will fall within a
margin of l to 5 per cent, which is more or less the
acceptable margin in all monitored elections. There
will be no 30 per cent margin of error. I can guarantee
that. We are working tirelessly on this.
This was not the first time that reference has been
made to that Finnish document. I am entirely ready
myself to request the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, which is in charge of these
investigations, to take that Finnish document into
account.

I have also seen the statement concerning the
liaison office that we have opened with the
representatives of Pristina in Albania. I would like to
know why, although there are 30 similar offices open in
Kosovo, that country would be more stigmatized than
another. I believe that there is nothing in international
politics or law to make a particular case against
Albania. These are commercial offices. There is no
diplomatic representation, let it be clear. No one in any
ofthese offices has diplomatic status.

I think that I have responded to many of the
questions that were posed, although perhaps not in
enough detail to a specific point that the representative
ofthe United Kingdom raised. I agree with him. I know
that he has proposed many - perhaps as many as
40 - judges and prosecutors, who were considered by
those in charge of the legal department. Some of his
candidates have already been accepted. I have just met
with one of the them in Pristina. I thank the British
Ambassador. These judges are extremely useful to us
and I think we need many more of them. I thank him
for having proposed them.

The representative of China said that there were
improvements to be made, for which I thank him. Yes,
of course, certainly not all minorities are still able to
enjoy the full freedom which, as I said in my briefing,
we could wish for them. We have to change habits. We
have to change a society. Have you ever seen a society
that could change in a year and a half? I do not refer to
any of the societies represented here, but it takes
centuries to change them. I therefore cannot see why
we should be reproached, given the efforts we are
making, for not having performed such a miracle in a
year and a half. I assure you that we or our successors
will succeed.

Moreover, the representative of Argentina
responded instantly to the effect that it is complex and
difficult. Yes, it is very complex and very difficult to
confront, with limited resources, these communities'
refusal to communicate with each other. I am asked
about the beginning of reconciliation, but there has
never been conciliation. If reconciliation is to take
place, people need to get to know each other. They
have never known each other. This is, after all, one of
the only places in the world where people have never
spoken to each other, where they have not been taught
in the same language.

In the hospitals, there were Serb and Albanian
doctors and nurses. They worked together but they did
not speak to each other. They ate at separate tables in
the refectory. That is pretty symbolic to anyone who is
familiar with hospitals. That is how it was: they never
spoke to each other. It is the only spot in the world
where you can ask a Serb architect if he knows an
Albanian architect or a Serb doctor if he knows an
Albanian architect, and he does not. No one wants to
answer. And when they do know someone - there is a
sort of 200-metre radius within which the neighbours
know each other, 200 metres but no farther. It is a
special type of society, but it will evolve, just like all
others.

I would like to thank the representative of the
Netherlands, whose concerns I share, for his country's
support to date, and for its continuing support. I am
very grateful for that. We know that we can appeal to
some countries, such as the Netherlands, even in the
most urgent circumstances, when fast decisions have to
be taken. You never fail to respond, and I am grateful.

Let me thank Canada as well, because it is one of
the countries that we also turn to at times, just as we
turn to all the countries represented here. I hope we
will be excused for the abruptness with which we
sometimes do this. With regard to the media code that
the representative of Canada referred to, yes, it is
highly theoretical, and it must also be applied. But
what can one expect? Polemics and personal
denunciations are a part, perhaps too much a part, of
the political campaign that is waged daily, as can be
seen in the newspapers. Should we halt the publication
of a newspaper when somewhat sharp denunciations
appear? This is a very sensitive matter, because at the
same time we want to respect freedom of the press. We
did close a newspaper for eight days; that was our great
demonstration. Now we have a mediator who is trying
to make the journalists understand that the code must
be followed.

I thank the representative of Tunisia for his
encouragement. I shall convey his regards to the Serb
National Council. Reduce violence: well, I shall try
again to respond. Yes, we try to do that every day.
Justice is absolutely essential. In order to reduce
violence, there cannot be any more impunity, and to put
an end to impunity, the police must be able to arrest
suspects and bring them to justice. The judicial system
is still flawed, even if it is getting better, and even if
there have been trials and there are now enough judges
for us to deal with the situation. It is not impossible,
but it is difficult.

Malaysia put forward five points: elections,
minority participation, crime, Mitrovica and of course
missing persons. I appreciate that. We have talked
about these things in the field. I am in favour of
frankness, and I try to be frank myself, but it is not
always easy, as diplomats know. Sometimes, to make
progress one has to use persuasion rather than speak
frankly about one's disappointments. I have learned
that, which proves that one can learn at any age.

Regarding whether we can correct the registration
process, the representative of Ukraine asked three
specific questions, and I appreciate the comments that
preceded those questions. Can the registration process
be corrected by 28 October? No. If we did not do it
before, we cannot do it now. As I said earlier, the
registration process has been carried out by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the technical workers, and - Mr. Lavrov talked
about this - many independent experts came and
contributed. For three months we have been trying to
correct the registration process. Will the result be 100
per cent acceptable? Certainly not 100 per cent, but
within a range of l per cent to 5 per cent, we think. In
any case, this percentage can be corrected on the very
day when the elections are held, when the voters go to
vote; the corrections will be made by hand.
Beforehand, we will publish the lists of voters and
make them available to the voters in all municipalities
two weeks ahead of time, and then one last time the
lists can be corrected by our team, by hand. And then
we will have a day for registration. I hope that most, if
not all, of the defects will be corrected. As for
reopening the process, that is not possible, and that was
not the spirit ofthe question asked.

It is very clear that the Zvecan smelting plant
workers were paid. There were 600 workers, and 3,000
people were paid. Those whose grandparents had
worked there came. The employees of all the factories
connected with the Zvecan smelter were also paid. We
tried to pay them in dinars; I have often been criticized
for paying in deutsche marks. Those people had been
paid by Belgrade for years in dinars. Only 10 per cent
accepted dinars, while 90 per cent wanted deutsche
marks, and we paid in deutsche marks. They are being
paid quite a bit more than before, and they are being
asked to resume work. We do not have any business
plan yet for the complex, but we found money, which
was not easy for us to do in a year, so that the
emloyees' security could be guaranteed. Security was
the first consideration. We have asked 300 of the 600
former workers at Zvecan to work at the plant again.
As of how their response is under negotiation; they
want 3,000 to work or none at all. That is not possible;
there were 600 workers, and there cannot be 3,000. We
are negotiating with them so that 300 can work now
and others can join them soon. We think - though I
could be wrong about this - that in approximately six
to eight months, minimum international norms will be
re-established at the smelter. Afterwards we will see.
During that time the experts will be working.
Fortunately, France, the United States and Sweden
quickly provided money to ensure security and safety,
and we are already at work with that money.

As for the pact, as I have said before, it is not a
legal pact, but an emotional or even a moral pact. "As
soon as you hold clean elections, we will talk about
substantial autonomy", with debates everywhere, as a
number of representatives have recalled.

In response to the representative of Jamaica, we
have found some caches of weapons in the Balkans.
This is not particularly surprising. True, the arms were
not turned in, but in the Balkans in general, and in this
region of the Balkans in particular, there are weapons
everywhere. Of course, the more we find, the better. I
am also pleased that Ambassador Amneus has been
appointed. Again, his mandate must include both the
prisoners of war and missing persons. But we must
move fast. I talked about 68 people who were on a
hunger strike. I do not think that violence can be
eliminated until news of missing persons is available,
even if it is tragic news, because I am sure that many of
them are dead. I am sorry to say this. I have started to
tell this to the families of the missing persons.
Nurturing hope is sometimes very harmful
psychologically, and even for society at large. The
regulations on trafficking are to be published very
soon. Let me emphasize the role of women in Kosovar
associations and the role I hope they will play in
reducing violence, which began with the electoral
campaign. The role of women in the electoral
campaign is to encourage democratic debate and
perhaps to reduce violence.

Let me say to the representative of Namibia that
the allusion to the Turkish population pleases me,
because the minorities - those who were not
represented in the Kosovo Transitional Council finally
came. I appreciate the emphasis given to this. We have
negotiated amply to make sure that all members of the
Turkish community can participate in the electoral
process. Unfortunately, it was requested that Turkish be
the third official language. There is an agreement with
Ankara - the negotiations were difficult, but respected
basic democratic ideals - and we were pleased. In the
end, despite that agreement, some Turkish parties did
not accept the agreement and wanted their community,
which probably numbers about 20,000, to have their
language treated as an official language. That was far
too complicated and impossible to accept. Nonetheless,
almost half of the Turkish community registered to
vote, but because of the date other Turkish people were
unable to do so. I am grateful for this interest in the
representation of minorities.

I thank the President for the comments he made,
in his capacity as representative of Mali, about the
progress achieved. He used the words reconciliation
and tolerance. I share your feeling that reconciliation is
necessary. But I believe that before reconciliation - as
I have said here in the Council since the outset - we
have to talk about coexistence.

The wounds are too fresh, the conflict too
ancient. Thirteen centuries on the one side, one year on
the other. We cannot talk about reconciliation
immediately. Let us talk about conciliation and, first
and foremost, about peaceful coexistence. When they
stop threatening one another, when the communities
agree to at least the status quo, then I hope we can open
the door to the very, very beginnings of reconciliation.
And this will take many years.

