Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): First of all, we would like to
state that we find Iraq's decision to expel United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) personnel of one
nationality totally unacceptable. Iraq must rescind that
decision.

Immense efforts have been made by many to resolve
this crisis, but to no avail. In this regard, my delegation
warmly commends the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
for his tremendous efforts, including his decision to send
three special envoys to Baghdad in an attempt to defuse the
situation. We feel that this was a timely and right decision
that falls squarely within his mandate as Secretary-General.
We, too, in this Council have an obligation to ensure that
the situation gets our full attention and does not deteriorate
further.

The draft resolution before us responding to this new
situation is balanced and in our view sends a clear message
to Iraq. We see it as an improvement on the initial draft,
and it has in the main addressed our concerns. UNSCOM
must be allowed to complete its work on the basis of the
mandate given to it by the Security Council. We hope that
the message will be heard.

We are disappointed that, despite the level of
cooperation UNSCOM. enjoyed and recorded in its latest
comprehensive report [S/ 1997/774], we are confronted with
the current level of tension, which must not be allowed to
escalate any further. Today we are all united in accepting
this draft resolution. What we would like to see, sooner
rather than later, is a level of cooperation from Iraq's
authorities that will allow the Council to review the
sanctions imposed on Iraq. Such a review should provide a
degree of hope to the people of Iraq. At the end of the
day, they should be able to see light at the end of the
tunnel.

In the meantime, Iraq, under a comprehensive
sanctions regime, must comply with its resulting
obligations substantively and in good faith. It is important
that we all reject Iraq's decision of 29 October 1997, and
Kenya will, therefore, support the draft resolution before
us.

