Major General Asarta Cuevas: I thank you very
much, Sir, for your kind words and for giving me the
opportunity to address the Council today.

Last week, the Council met to discuss the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) (8/2011/406). I know that the
Council was briefed by Special Coordinator Williams
and the Department for Peacekeeping Operations.

Today, I would like to take this opportunity to
highlight one of my main concerns in southern
Lebanon: the issue of safety and security and its impact
on the operations of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL). I will then also touch on the
broader issue of the status of the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and the focus for the coming
period to ensure further progress in its overall
implementation.

On the whole, southern Lebanon and northern
Israel have enjoyed the five quietest and calmest years
in many decades. The situation in UNIFIL's area of
operations also remained relatively stable during the
first half of 2011, when the political situation in the
country was at an impasse. Nevertheless, in recent
months, UNIFIL has experienced a series of events that
reflected the range of threats that the Mission is
exposed to and that affect the security situation.

Yesterday, at around 6 p.m. local time, an
explosion targeted a UNIFIL convoy along the coastal
road near the town of Saida, which is outside UNIFIL's
area of operations. According to preliminary
information, the attack injured six UNIFIL
peacekeepers. Three of them were transported with
minor injuries to hospital for treatment, where their
condition is said to be stable. They will be repatriated
today to France. UNIFIL forensic experts are
coordinating closely with the Lebanese Armed Forces
to determine the circumstances surrounding the
incident. This was the fifth attack against UNIF IL since
the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006).

Council members will also be aware of the attack
against a UNIFIL convoy that occurred on 27 May on
the highway to Beirut, when a remote-controlled
roadside bomb exploded, injuring six Italian
peacekeepers. Two were seriously wounded, while four
suffered light to moderate injuries. In addition, two
Lebanese civilians sustained minor injuries. This was
the first attack in more than three years. No one has
claimed responsibility for the attack.

The Lebanese authorities and UNIFIL
immediately launched an investigation, as have the
Italian authorities. These investigations are still
ongoing. The attack was condemned by all senior
political leaders across the political spectrum. The
cooperation with the Lebanese authorities in
conducting the investigation and in instituting
additional risk-mitigation measures, such as Lebanese

Army escorts, has been good. In addition, I, as the
designated official for security in south Lebanon,
undertook to reduce the risk of a similar attack by
adopting additional protection measures, including for
military convoys and other movements inside and
outside the UNIFIL area of operations, and for
enhanced force protection. Nevertheless, it is
impossible to completely prevent such terrorist attacks.

On 15 May - and this is also covered in the
Secretary-General's report - a large demonstration
took place on the occasion of what the Palestinians
commemorate as Nakba Day. I will not repeat in detail
the sequence of the tragic events that, according to the
information provided to UNIFIL by Lebanese
authorities, resulted in 7 persons being killed and more
than 100 injured. We have discussed our preliminary
findings on the events with the parties and, having sent
the UNIFIL investigation report to them, will do so in
more detail at the next tripartite meeting, planned for
August.

UNIFIL has also conveyed to the parties its
recommendations for preventing such incidents in the
future. Specifically, the Lebanese authorities should
carry out a full assessment of all security and other
risks of violations of resolution 1701 (2006) and of
measures required to maintain law and order before
authorizing any demonstration in the vicinity of the
Blue Line. The Lebanese Army did not authorize
demonstrations in the vicinity of the Blue Line during
the Naksa period in early June, thereby preventing a
repetition of such violence. These measures have
indeed proven to be effective, and they demonstrate yet
again the resolve and determination of the Lebanese
Armed Forces and the people of southern Lebanon to
work towards lasting peace and stability in the south.

Finally, throughout the month of June, the
Mission experienced a number of incidents of
unfriendly behaviour by individuals or groups of
individuals towards UNIFIL patrols and restricted
freedom of movement of UNIFIL. These incidents do
give me real cause for concern.

In many instances, the Lebanese side cites a
perceived infringement of the individual's or local
community's privacy by the UNIFIL troops taking
photos or inadvertently entering private property as the
reason for the unfriendly behaviour towards our troops.
However, not all such situations can be explained in
this way, and we cannot exclude that there may also be

instances when the population may be encouraged to
act in this way in an attempt to discourage UNIFIL
from carrying out its activities and thereby fulfilling its
mandate throughout the area of operations.

How has UNIFIL reacted to these events? We
have increased force protection and risk-mitigating
measures, which often means that more personnel are
required to carry out the same activities. We also
conduct more operational activities, together with the
Lebanese Armed Forces to the extent that the capacity
of the Lebanese Army allows but without limiting the
performance of UNIF IL in carrying out activities,
especially those we consider essential. The Council can
rest assured that neither terrorist attacks nor unfriendly
encounters with the population will deter UNIFIL from
carrying out its mandate. We continue to do so with the
same resolve as ever.

At this point, I would also like to convey to the
Council how greatly the Mission has benefited from
the unwavering support it has received over the years
from the Council, as expressed most strongly in
resolution 1773 (2007). On the basis of that resolution,
UNIFIL regularly reminds the parties of their
responsibilities to scrupulously respect the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and the freedom
of movement of UNIFIL and reiterates with Lebanese
interlocutors the Council's call for closer cooperation
between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Army.

Despite the security challenges I spoke about
earlier, the security situation in the south, as I
mentioned before, remains generally relatively stable,
and south Lebanon has enjoyed the five quietest and
calmest years in many decades. This is in many ways
the result of the close cooperation between UNIF IL and
the Lebanese Army, which helped establish a new
strategic environment in southern Lebanon.

Almost five years since the adoption of resolution
1701 (2006), it is an appropriate moment to look again
at the main objectives of the resolution and how we
need to proceed in order to achieve them.

Resolution 1701 (2006) called for a full cessation
of hostilities. It also called for Israel and Lebanon to
support a permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution
of the conflict based, inter alia, on full respect for the
Blue Line by both parties and security arrangements to
prevent the resumption of hostilities, including the
establishment between the Blue Line and the Litani
River of an area free of any armed personnel, assets
and weapons other than those of the Government of
Lebanon and of UNIFIL.

In addition to carrying out its military operational
activities, UNIFIL established the tripartite forum, in
which it discusses with senior representatives of the
Israel Defense Forces and the Lebanese Armed Forces
violations of resolution 1701 (2006), military
operational issues and confidence-building measures
between the two sides. The tripartite forum has
developed into a key mechanism for liaison and
coordination between the parties, and both parties have
committed themselves to it and use it actively. The
forum continues to play a critical role in advancing the
Blue Line marking process, in finding practical
solutions to contentious issues and thereby in defusing
tensions and preventing the escalation of incidents in
areas along the Blue Line.

The Lebanese Armed Forces are a strategic
partner for UNIFIL in maintaining the new strategic
environment in south Lebanon and in implementing
resolution 1701 (2006). The joint Department of
Peacekeeping Operations-UNIFIL technical review,
which was completed at the beginning of 2010,
therefore recommended that a regular strategic
dialogue mechanism between UNIFIL and the
Lebanese Armed Forces be set up. The Lebanese
authorities - Government and Army - welcomed this
recommendation, and the mechanism has been
established and has taken up its work.

The process will assist the Lebanese Armed
Forces in establishing appropriate operational
capabilities for implementing tasks mandated in
resolution 1701 (2006) and will eventually facilitate
the gradual handover of responsibility to the Lebanese
Armed Forces. The strategic dialogue mechanism will
proceed on the basis of analyses of the UNIFIL and
Lebanese Army ground forces and maritime assets and
will set a series of benchmarks reflecting the
correlation between the capacity and responsibilities of
UNIFIL vis-a-vis the capacity and responsibilities of
the Lebanese Armed Forces.

With the tripartite forum and the strategic
dialogue mechanism, UNIFIL is in a good position to
advance the military operational issues mandated to it
in resolution 1701 (2006). The successful
implementation of these processes will, hopefully,
ensure that the situation in south Lebanon and along
the Blue Line will remain calm and that the cessation
of hostilities between the parties will be maintained.

Essentially, that would ensure maintaining the
status quo of relative calm, but in a precariously fragile

environment. However, I believe we - the United
Nations, UNIFIL, the Security Council and the
international community - should not be satisfied

with maintaining this status quo. Rather, the calm and
relative stability that UNIFIL and the Lebanese Army
and the Israel Defense Forces have established and
maintained across the Blue Line provide a window of
opportunity for a political process to address the issues,
which are beyond the remit of a peacekeeping mission
such as UNIFIL can support a political process by
ensuring a conducive security situation, but it cannot
replace a political, diplomatic process.

I therefore believe it is necessary to refocus all
our efforts on achieving the main objectives of
resolution 1701 (2006), namely, a permanent ceasefire
and a long-term solution to the conflict.

UNIFIL enjoys the support of the population in
the south, and the Lebanese national consensus on
resolution 1701 (2006) has been maintained. The
ministerial statement of the new Government reiterates
Lebanon's strong commitment to resolution 1701
(2006) and to UNIFIL's mandate. At the most recent
tripartite meeting, on 13 July, the head of the Lebanese
delegation confirmed that there has been no change in
the orders to the Lebanese Armed Forces with respect
to implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and
cooperation with UNIFIL.

While the new Government's period in office has
been short, UNIFIL has noted that the Government and
the Army are acting in that spirit. This was confirmed
by Prime Minister Mikati in his first visit to south
Lebanon, on 16 July, which included a symbolic visit
to UNIFIL headquarters, constituting a strong
statement of support for our Mission.

The Government of Israel also remains
committed to the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006). Since the adoption of the resolution, UNIFIL
has enjoyed the unanimous support of the Security
Council for its operation in south Lebanon. That
support remains of vital importance in order for
UNIFIL to be in a strong position to continue to carry
out its mandate.
These are key factors for continued success in the
implementation of UNIFIL's mandate. At the same
time, however, UNIFIL's success in eventually handing
over responsibilities to the Lebanese Army and
drawing down its own forces will ultimately depend on
a political process to resolve the issues underlying the
conflict. UNIF IL is providing a window of opportunity
that should be seized in order to make progress towards
achieving the main objectives of resolution 1701
(2006), which I reiterate, namely, the establishment of
a permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution of the

conflict.

Very soon the Council will discuss the extension
of UNIFIL's mandate. As Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, I would highly appreciate the
continued support of the Security Council and in
particular its express support for the safety and
freedom of movement of UNIFIL personnel, as well as
the objectives of the strategic dialogue process.

