Mr. Holmes: Allow me to express sincere
appreciation to you, Sir, and to the Government of
Austria for convening this high-level open debate, as
well as for your efforts leading to the adoption today of
resolution 1894 (2009), which marks a further
important advance in the Council's commitment to
protecting civilians.

When the Council first took up the protection of
civilians as a thematic issue in February 1999, against
the backdrop of widespread atrocities and displacement
in Angola, Kosovo, Sierra Leone and elsewhere, it
rightly viewed the situation in very bleak terms. The
presidential statement of 12 February 1999
(S/PRST/1999/6), the first on this topic, spoke of the
Council's distress that civilians accounted for the vast
majority of casualties in conflicts. It condemned the
targeting of civilians, demanded an end to such
violations and affirmed the need to bring to justice
those who violate international humanitarian and
human rights law. It expressed concern also over the
widening gap between the rules of international
humanitarian law and their application.

Significant progress has since been made in
seeking enhanced protection for civilians and in
developing further the normative framework. But can
we say with conviction, as we meet today, that those
affected by conflict enjoy a significantly greater and
more tangible degree of protection than 10 years ago?
Have we narrowed the gap between the rules of
international humanitarian and human rights law and
their application? Have we narrowed the gap between
rhetoric and reality?

Even an optimistic assessment suggests that we
still have far to go, first, in closing the gap between the
rhetoric of internationally agreed laws for the
protection of civilians and the reality of widespread
non-compliance with those laws. From Afghanistan to
Chad to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
occupied Palestinian territories, Somalia, the Sudan,
Yemen and beyond, the lack of compliance with the
law by parties to conflict, both State and non-State,
results in thousands of civilians killed or injured every
month and thousands more forced from their homes
into situations of dependency, destitution and yet
further violations, including rape and other forms of
sexual Violence.

As the Secretary-General has made clear, access
for humanitarians is vital to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. One issue critical to enhancing
compliance and access is humanitarian engagement
with non-State armed groups. Some Member States
remain concerned that engagement affords those
groups an unwelcome degree of recognition. Yet the
reality is that armed groups account for one or more of
the parties in virtually every conflict in which we
operate today, however much we may condemn their
aims or their often bloody acts, which take many
civilian lives. For the effectiveness and safety of
humanitarian operations - and we have seen some
horrific attacks on humanitarians in recent weeks and
months - and for the sake of access to those in need,
we must have flexibility to engage these groups, to
promote their compliance with international
humanitarian law and to seek their understanding of
our neutrality, independence and impartiality.

We have far to go too in closing the gap between
the mandates of peacekeeping missions which include
the protection of civilians and the reality of the
shortcomings identified in the independent study,
jointly commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs OCHA) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO),
which was released last Friday. I should make clear
that this part of my statement includes input from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy and I agreed on this in order
to limit the number of speakers. The OCHA-DPKO
study sheds valuable light on where we must focus our
efforts in improving the implementation of protection
mandates by United Nations peacekeeping missions.

First, we must address the uncertainty as to what
missions, and individual actors within missions, should
actually do to protect civilians and, critically, how they
should do it. We should be clear that, even when they
have protection of civilians mandates under Chapter VII
of the Charter, United Nations peacekeeping operations
continue to be guided by the basic principles of
peacekeeping. They are not peace-enforcement
operations. DPKO, in consultation with troop and
police contributors and other stakeholders, is
developing an operational concept to clarify what
protection means in the peacekeeping context, which
will provide the basis for further guidance. It will
ensure that Member States, including troop and police
contributors, the Secretariat and peacekeeping missions
themselves have the same understanding of the
expectations and limitations of protection mandates.
Support from Member States in the Council and the
General Assembly in developing the concept and this
guidance will be critical.

Secondly, all missions should develop protection-
of-civilians strategies, in consultation with
humanitarian and human rights actors, and based on a
realistic assessment of the threats and risks to the
population. Guidance from Headquarters on developing
such strategies will be important, and development of
the operational concept is an important step in that
direction. Such protection strategies must be based on
the understanding that protection mandates are not
limited to the protection of civilians under imminent
threat of physical violence, but involve a much broader

range of activities including, for example, facilitating
humanitarian access, the return of refugees and
displaced persons, human rights monitoring, child
protection and addressing sexual violence. Their
implementation is not a task exclusively for the
military or police personnel of a mission, orjust for the
civilian components of missions and humanitarian
actors. Rather, it is an overarching responsibility for
the mission, whose leadership needs to finds ways to
bring together the relevant mandates, capacities and
expertise of those different actors.

Thirdly, leadership is crucial, and Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and the senior
mission leadership must ensure protection is
considered a priority across the whole mission. They
must be accountable for developing and implementing
protection strategies and reporting on their results. But
if they are to do this effectively, they too must receive
the requisite guidance, training and resources before
they assume their responsibilities.

Fourthly, we must ensure, through better analysis
and reporting, that the Council itself is candidly
informed of the challenges missions face and the
opportunities that exist to protect civilians. Only then
can the Council take informed and supportive action.

Fifthly, we must ensure the requisite political
commitment to the mission by the Council and by the
parties on the ground, and also by troop and police
contributors, who must have a firm understanding of
the critical role they play in protecting civilians.

DPKO and the Department of Field Support will
work closely with contributing countries and other
stakeholders to ensure that protection of civilians
becomes integral to predeployment training, as part of
a broader effort to gather lessons learned on the
implementation of protection mandates, as requested
by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
earlier this year.

We must also keep in mind the necessity of
strengthening the host State's capacity to protect its
population. Peacekeeping can assist countries in
rebuilding in the aftermath of a conflict and in
protecting civilians while doing so. But it cannot
substitute for the State, which bears the primary
responsibility for the safety and well-being of its own
citizens.
While we must guard against exaggerated
expectations of protection of all civilians wherever
missions are deployed, as the study itself makes clear,
we can nevertheless reasonably expect greater
consistency and success in this core function of
peacekeeping than has been the case to date. We are
committed to working jointly to take forward the
study's recommendations, in consultation with all
relevant actors. I trust that we can count on the full
cooperation and support of the Council and Member
States in doing so. I am delighted that important
provisions of resolution 1894 (2009) already give us a
head start in this respect.

Finally, I believe that there is a gap between
rhetoric and reality as it relates to the consistency with
which the Council itself pursues its stated commitment
to the protection of civilians. For example, targeted
sanctions are a critical tool for seeking compliance
with the law. They have been imposed against those
responsible for humanitarian and human rights law
violations in Cote d'Ivoire and in the Sudan. But in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, only those
committing violations involving the targeting of
children or women or obstructing the access to or the
distribution of humanitarian assistance are subject to
such measures. In Somalia, only those obstructing
humanitarian assistance are targeted.

The Council needs a consistent and
comprehensive approach to these accountability issues.
The stakes for the civilians concerned are simply too
high, and the allegations of selectivity or double
standards too easily made otherwise. The systematic
application of the aide-memoire (see S/PRST/2009/1, annex), as a checklist against which to identify
protection concerns and appropriate responses in any
given context, can help here, as can the informal
Expert Group.

Others have characterized the gap between the
rhetoric and the reality of the protection of civilians as
that between idealism and realism. But the effective
application of international humanitarian and human
rights law is not some ideal notion. On the contrary, it
is an achievable reality. What it requires, above all
else, is that States and other parties to conflict give top
priority to the protection of civilians, that they
promote, implement and enforce the practical steps
required to apply the law, and that the Security Council
not only encourage them to do so but also call them to
account when they do not, on the basis of the facts, not
political convenience. This tenth anniversary of the
protection of civilians is as good a time as any to make
a fresh start.

