President dos Santos (spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): I would like to thank
the Council for having invited me to take part in this
meeting of the Security Council dedicated to an analysis
of the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At a time when we thought that, with the end of the
so-called cold war, the world would embark upon a new
era of peace and cooperation for development, events
began to unfold in Africa that are frustrating many of our
expectations. Local conflicts increased and the economic
and social situation in many countries began to
deteriorate. We also witnessed the emergence of other
misfortunes, such as transnational crime, drug trafficking
and intolerance of every nature, especially intolerance
based on ethnic and religious grounds.

It is precisely to discuss one of these conflicts - the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo - that
we are gathered here today. The intensification and
escalation of this conflict threaten to involve ever more
neighbouring countries. This country, one of the largest in
Africa, is extremely rich in natural resources. It has a
population of over 50 million inhabitants and shares
common borders with nine other countries. For many
years it was ruled by a dictatorial regime that transformed
the country into a permanent base for aggression and
destabilization against all the countries of the region,
especially Angola.

Poor governance, oppression and the failure of the
economic system led the country into discredit at the
international level and produced a chaotic domestic
situation that forced hundreds of thousands of its citizens
to immigrate to neighbouring countries, thereby
compelling those countries to reinforce the control and
protection of their borders. When the internal political
opposition organized itself to confront the regime, some
of its members decided to carry out an armed struggle of
national liberation from the eastern region. All the
affected countries supported the forces of liberation and
change for the establishment of democracy. Angola, of
course, joined in that regional effort, together with
Rwanda and Uganda.

In this context, Angola ended up a short time later
assuming the role of a strategic ally in conducting the war
and the political process that culminated with the victory
of the Congolese people over the dictatorship. When the

 

new Government was instituted and the then Zaire became
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the hopes of all the
Congolese people were reborn. Taking into account the
chaotic situation that existed and the heavy legacy it
inherited, it was implicitly assumed that the Government
would be given a grace period by its people and by the
international community to re-establish peace, re-organize
the political and economic systems and mobilize society so
as to strengthen national unity and rebuild the country.

But that did not happen. Within less than a year,
Angola was surprised by the outbreak of a new war in the
country and was once again forced to intervene in order to
avoid bloodshed and contain the threat of escalation of this
new war on its borders. Once this threat to its own security
was eliminated, as well as the threat of disintegration to this
sister country, Angola immediately sought to join in the
search for a solution to the internal conflict of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo through dialogue and
regional consultations.

Accordingly, the Angolan Government approved the
results of the Pretoria meeting, as well as the principles
adopted at the Victoria Falls summit held in Zimbabwe.
Unfortunately, these principles were not fully incorporated
into the Lusaka accords of July and August 1999. The
omission of the principle that the legitimacy and authority
of the present Government and President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should be recognized leaves room
for some confusion and uncertainty. A Government that has
not been militarily defeated cannot accept to capitulate at
the negotiating table.

The accords provide for a military and a political
process to bring about a solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, their
principal shortcoming is that they limit to some extent the
sovereignty of the power instituted and place it on an equal
footing with the forces that oppose it through violent and
illegal means. At the same time, external aggression is dealt
with in a very moderate fashion.

It is also important to recognize that significant
changes have occurred in the region since the signing of the
accords. This new situation allows for a better
understanding of the different links existing between the
rebel forces in the region and, at the same time, creates
better conditions for a rapid solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is why the United
Nations, in addition to guaranteeing the actions provided for
in the accords - namely, the disarming and
demilitarization of the rebel forces - also has an
immediate and special responsibility to proceed to
interpositioning and separating the warring forces so as to
uphold the cease-fire and avoid new violations. To this
end, we ask that the United Nations act expeditiously by
sending peacekeeping forces and by increasing logistical
and financial support.

With a view to making the Lusaka accords
operational and speed up their implementation, allow me
to make the following suggestions.

The disarmament of the rebel forces should be
accelerated and a single national army should be formed.
The authority of the present Government should be
recognized as that of a Government of transition that
should lead the country to legislative and presidential
elections, to be held under the supervision of the
international community. Security guarantees must be
established for the installation of the rebel leaders in the
country's capital and their integration into the transitional
political process. National debate, or national dialogue, as
it is being called here, should focus on discussion of a
provisional constitution of the Republic, of electoral law
and mechanisms for voter registration and of laws to
regulate political parties. The new institutions should start
operating as soon as elections are held. The elected
parliament should play the role of a constituent assembly
and be entrusted with approving the final constitution of
the Republic.

The Great Lakes conflict is still ongoing and is
closely linked to the development of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where the ceasefire
has been continuously violated and the rebel forces have
not yet been disarmed, due to the lack of trust between
the parties. Furthermore, the ways and means of
disarming the Interahamwe forces, as provided for in the
Lusaka accords, remain to be determined. These accords
fail to offer any political guarantees for these elements.

It seems to me that there is also a need for an
internal political agreement for Rwanda, Uganda and
Burundi. This way the the Great Lakes issue could be
resolved. Therefore, the United Nations should commit
itself to seeking a peaceful and democratic solution to this
crisis. It should tackle this with the same seriousness as
it has in crises of other parts of the world. Three years
ago, we welcomed the proposals of the Secretary-General
on Africa. These proposals entailed a programme of
concrete actions designed to prevent and resolve regional
conflicts and to accelerate development in African
countries over the following decade, emphasizing the

 
health and education of new generations as high priorities,
among other far-reaching measures destined to achieve
good governance and to strengthen and stabilize the
democratic institutions.

We trust that at the end of these meetings, thanks to
the wisdom and goods sense of members, concrete
measures will be taken to affirm and consolidate peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
across the entire Central African region, including the Great
Lakes region.

Madam President, I wish you every success in your
presidency.

