Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Allow me to thank you,
Madam President, and Secretary Kerry for having
convened this meeting on one of the most pressing
current challenges to international peace and security
and for the invitation to take part. Like the rest of
the world, we are shocked by the terrible actions
committed by terrorist groups in Iraq and, most
notably, by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). For months now, wherever ISIL fanatics have
set foot, terror has been the norm, brutality the method
and the massacre of innocents their footprint. Their
actions have caused heavy human casualties, including
children, the displacement of more than 1 million Iraqi
civilians, including forced deportation under the threat
of execution, and threats against all religious and ethnic
groups. Albania condemns in the strongest terms all
terrorist attacks committed by terrorist groups and
organizations in Iraq, including, and especially, ISIL.

ISIL represents a real, clear and current
danger to Iraq, to the countries of the region and to
broader international peace and security. We, as the
international community, cannot cannot stand by while
ISIL fanatics massacre entire villages, attack Iraq's
religious minorities, destroy their places ofworship and
threaten the integrity and sovereignty of independent
countries. We cannot remain silent while that scourge
marches through borders, imposing its obscurantist
oppressive rule.

It must be said and highlighted that ISIL is in no way
representative or in accordance with the mainstream
teachings of Islam. On the contrary, it is a disgrace to
the faith that it proclaims to defend. Countless Islamic
groups around the globe have vehemently rejected
ISIL and its abhorrent actions. They are right - ISIL
is simply an abomination to Islam. They are mere
terrorists and ruthless assassins, ready to slaughter
whoever stands in their way.

While ISIL is a direct threat to Iraq and Syria, it is
also a threat to peace and security at large and to human
values, human life and our common civilization. The
adoption by the Council of resolution 2170 (2014) was a
first step in the right direction, but there is an urgent need
for bolder action. We welcome presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/20, adopted earlier this afternoon. We
applaud in particular the firm stand taken by the United
Sates, as outlined by President Obama a few days ago
and by Secretary Kerry here this afternoon, as well as
the actions taken by other partners and allies.

For all those reasons, from the beginning of the
crisis, Albania joined the international coalition so as
to fight and to eradicate ISIL. Albania has welcomed
and has taken concrete steps to support the new Iraqi
Government in its fight against terrorism. It remains
committed to continuing to engage and to providing both
military and humanitarian assistance. We have already
contributed to the fight against ISIL, providing a sizeable
quantity of weapons and ammunition to the Iraqi armed
forces. We will continue to help Iraq in the future.

Let me also recall the particular assistance that
Albania has provided to the refugees of the Camp
Hurriya. Few people may know that, since the appeal of
the Secretary-General two years ago (see SG/SM/15415),
Albania has accommodated 240 of the approximately
377 relocated refugees on a humanitarian basis. That is
more than double the total number of those absorbed by
the rest of the world.

In conclusion, terrorism has become a challenge
not only for one country or region but for the entire
community of nations. It will take a resolute and joint
effort to deter and finally defeat it. In our view, that is
the only way to deal with a global phenomenon that is
fed by distorted religion, poverty and ignorance. It is
the best way to restore hope, peace and security in all
affected regions. Albania is and will be a part of that
joint effort.

