I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador Skoog and Ambassador De Buytswerve, in his capacity as Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for their briefings. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the Secretary-General's ninth report (S/2020/531) on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We are dedicated to the full implementation of the resolution and we strongly support the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) - a key pillar of the global nuclear non-proliferation architecture and multilateral diplomacy. Its preservation is crucial to safeguarding peace and stability in the region and the wider world. We deeply regret the withdrawal of the United States from the JCPOA and its subsequent decisions to reimpose sanctions and terminate waivers. Those actions run counter to the requirements and goals of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA, and they do not promote an environment conducive to international cooperation. We encourage the United States to rejoin the agreement and to lift all sanctions. The appeal for lifting sanctions is now even more urgent with the arrival of the pandemic, as they considerably undermine and impede the coronavirus disease response and mitigation efforts. We also regret the Islamic Republic of Iran's decision to break with several of its nuclear-related commitments under the JCPOA. We take note that Iran has indicated that those steps are reversible, having undertaken them subsequent to the withdrawal of the United States from the agreement. We urge Iran to return to full compliance and to meet the totality of its obligations. It is our hope, despite recent declarations, that Iran will remain a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Saint Vincent and the Grenadines supports the mandate of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as it works to ensure the peaceful use of nuclear science and technology. The important role that the [AEA plays in the verification and monitoring of compliance with resolution 2231 (2015) cannot be overstated. We recognize Iran's cooperation with the IAEA thus far and we encourage further cooperation in implementing its Safeguards Agreement and Additional Protocol. We welcome the developments made in relation to the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges. Those advancements are essential to the normalization of trade and economic relations with Iran. We also take note of the activities of the procurement channel, which must remain operational and effective to ensure that a new relationship is indeed cultivated with Iran. The JCPOA remains the only viable path to ensure a peaceful, comprehensive and long-term solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. In that regard, we implore all parties to fully implement their obligations under the agreement. Further, we urge all sides to exercise maximum restraint, to refrain from actions that can inflame tensions and to commit fully to dialogue and negotiation so as to resolve the current issues and preserve the JCPOA. In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its commitment to achieving a nuclear-weapon free world. As a member of the zone of peace of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States and a party to the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, the NPT and the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, we appeal to the international community to remain steadfast in its commitment to disarmament, as it is inextricably linked to non-proliferation. *
