Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Like others,
we would like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-
Secretary-General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, for their briefings on the Secretary-
General's strategic-level report on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh)
(S/20l9/612).

The comprehensive report on the threat posed
by ISIL/Da'esh provided in the Secretary-General's
ninth strategic-level report emphasizes that, while the
group has suffered significant setbacks, it nevertheless
remains a serious threat to international peace and
security as a result, inter alia, of its highly-adaptive
nature and continued access to significant funds
and recruits. As the report indicates, ISIL/Da'esh is
attempting to regroup and re-establish itself in a covert
capacity and further expand its international presence
by means of affiliates. The present lull in attacks by the
group might, regrettably, be only temporary.

South Africa notes with particular concern the
findings in the Secretary-General's report concerning
the African continent, where ISIL/Da'esh has sought to
exploit peace and security challenges, via affiliates, to
further the group's abhorrent agenda. Areas of particular
concern highlighted in the report include parts of
North Africa, where the crisis in Libya in particular
has provided fertile ground for ISIL/Da'esh affiliates in
fragile countries and the surrounding region.

Also of concern is the observation in the Secretary
General's report that West Africa has seen a striking
increase in ISIL and Al-Qaida-linked recruitment
and violence and that the Islamic State West Africa
Province, believed to comprise 4,000 fighters, now
ranks alongside the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant-
Khorasan as the strongest ISIL regional affiliate.

We are of course also particularly concerned about
reports suggesting that ISIL/Da'esh is attempting
to establish itself in Central Africa, and even in the
Southern African region. South Africa will continue
to stand steadfast with our fellow African brothers and
sisters in the fight against terrorism on the continent
so that that terrible scourge is not allowed to erode the
hard-won progress we have collectively made in Africa.

South Africa remains committed to international
cooperation in fighting terrorism. No country can
shoulder the burden alone. The centrality of the United
Nations in coordinating and facilitating international
efforts to fight terrorism and providing support to
those Member States requiring it is crucial if we are
to succeed. In that regard, we value the work of the
counter-terrorism bodies of the United Nations in
assisting Member States in fighting the scourge and
encourage greater cooperation among them and regional
bodies, including the African Union. In that regard,
we commend the Secretary-General's international
regional conferences, including the African Regional
High-level Conference on Counter-Terrorism and
the Prevention of Violent Extremism Conducive to
Terrorism, inaugurated by the Secretary-General and
His Excellency President Kenyatta of Kenya in Nairobi
in July.

In the fight against ISIL/Da'esh, South Africa also
views as important the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD), which undertakes the
task of investigating the crimes committed by ISIL/
Da'esh and works to ensure that those responsible face
accountability for their crimes.

South Africa remains committed to addressing
terrorism holistically as a security threat, and equally
to addressing the conditions and factors that give rise to
terrorism and fuel it. Its causes and manifestations are
varied and should be taken into account in elaborating
counter-measures, in full compliance with international
law, including human rights law and humanitarian law.

It is also critically important that countries refrain
from the use of unilateral coercive measures in their
counter-terrorism efforts. Such measures often result in
unintended casualties and serve to fuel a vicious cycle
of resentment and hatred that ultimately perpetuates
further violent extremism and terrorism.

