Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
extend my warmest congratulations to His Excellency
Mr. Didier Burkhalter, President of the Swiss
Confederation, on the assumption of the position of
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for 2014. We are
very grateful for his personal briefing today on the
priorities of the OSCE under his chairmanship.

The OSCE's approach to security is exemplary
among the efforts to address today's growing security
challenges, which are becoming more complex and
multifaceted. The Republic of Korea appreciates and
supports the OSCE's unique role in that regard. In
particular, we take note of the fact that the OSCE is
taking meaningful steps to deal with transnational and
emerging threats, such as terrorism, drug trafficking
and challenges to cybersecurity.

Having hosted the Seoul Conference on Cyberspace
in October 2013, the Republic of Korea pays special
attention to the OSCE's adoption of the initial set of
confidence-building measures to reduce the risks of
conflict stemming from the use of information and
communication technology. We believe that kind of
initiative will provide timely momentum to regional
cooperation to counter new forms of threats.

The Republic of Korea also welcomes the
"Helsinki+40" process, which aims at rebuilding
confidence measures in terms of responding to
regional challenges, which is very much in line with
the work of the Council. In that vein, we support the
OSCE's commitment to advancing reconciliation in the
Western Balkans, resolving the protracted conflict in
the Southern Caucasus and Transnistria, and dealing
with the emerging crisis in Ukraine, as explained by
the Chairperson-in-Office.

Another area we would like to mention is the OSCE's
continued effort to promote the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), regarding the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. The Republic of Korea,
as the current Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), highly
values the OSCE's efforts to enhance cooperation with
the Security Council in that area.

Central Asia and Afghanistan are another region
of shared concern between the United Nations and the
OSCE. It is commendable that the OSCE has contributed
to the promotion of security in that region, as shown
by the decision to send an elections support team to
Afghanistan for the presidential and provincial council
elections coming up in April. We expect the OSCE
to continue to support Afghanistan and Central Asia
with its vast experience in confidence-building, the
prevention of conflict and rehabilitation after conflict.
Overall, we would like to reaffirm our support for
the enhanced role of the OSCE as a regional arrangement
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
As a strong partner of the United Nations in promoting
international peace and security, we look forward to
closer cooperation between the OSCE and the Council.

