Mr. Jovanovie: Today, the armed forces of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) committed a
unilateral act of the most brutal and unprovoked
aggression against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, a
sovereign and independent State and a founding Member
of the United Nations. The Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has not threatened any country or the peace
and security of the region. It has been attacked because it
sought to solve an internal problem and used its sovereign
right to fight terrorism and prevent the secession of a part
of its territory that has always belonged to Serbia and
Yugoslavia.

The decision to attack an independent country has
been taken outside the Security Council, the sole body
responsible, under the Charter of the United Nations, for
maintaining international peace and security. This blatant
aggression is a flagrant violation of the basic principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and is in direct
contravention of its Article 53, paragraph 1, which states
that,

 

"no enforcement action shall be taken under regional
arrangements or by regional agencies without the
authorization of the Security Council".

Today, NATO was unmasked. It ceased to be a
defensive military alliance and became an aggressive
military alliance, disregarding its own statute, the Charter
of the United Nations, and the Paris Charter of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), as well as the system of international relations
based on respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States. By bombing massively and indiscriminately the
cities and towns of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
NATO has become the air force and mercenary of the
terrorist Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA).

The United States of America and NATO must
assume full responsibility for all consequences of their act
of open aggression, both foreseeable and unforeseeable.

By committing the aggression against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, NATO has trampled upon
international law and the fundamental principles of
international relations by endangering peace and security in
the world in the most irresponsible and criminal way.

That is why my Government requested, on the basis
of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, an urgent
meeting of the Security Council. We expect and request the
Security Council to take immediate action strongly to
condemn and stop the aggression against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and to protect its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Until this happens, my country has no
alternative but to defend its sovereignty and territorial
integrity by all means at its disposal, in accordance with
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations.

The NATO attacks have been made against my
country only because Yugoslavia, as a sovereign and
independent State, refuses to allow foreign troops to occupy
its territory and to reduce its sovereignty. The excuse for
this NATO action was the alleged refusal of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to sign the so-called agreement,
which had neither been endorsed by all members of the
Contact Group nor negotiated with my country. The
meetings in France were not negotiations about the
autonomy of Kosovo and Metohija, but a crude and
unprecedented attempt to impose a solution clearly
endorsing the separatists' objectives, under pressure,
blackmail and the threat of use of force against my country.

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia was and is ready to find a political solution.
We give it absolute priority, but we cannot agree to the
secession of Kosovo and Metohija, either immediately or
after the interim period of three years.
Our delegation had submitted a document on the
substantial autonomy and genuine self-government of
Kosovo and Metohija on the basis of the 10 principles
agreed by the Contact Group. That document is signed by
all the members of our delegation. It is fully in line with
the highest European standards relating to human rights,
democracy and multi-ethnicity. As in the past, we remain
committed to a reasonable political settlement of the
problems in Kosovo and Metohija that respects the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and
Yugoslavia and guarantees the equality of the rights of all
citizens and national communities living there.

If the Security Council does not protect a State
Member of the United Nations against such aggression, it
will undermine the entire system of international peace
and security as we know it. The question is: What has
happened to the credibility of the Security Council and
who is responsible for maintaining international peace and
security? Is it the Security Council or the usurper,
NATO? The NATO air strikes have already resulted in
heavy destruction and great loss of human life. If this
aggression is not stopped immediately and
unconditionally, its consequences for peace in the world
will be catastrophic.

I call on the members of the Security Council to act
swiftly and in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations to condemn this act of aggression and to take
appropriate measures to stop it immediately and
unambiguously so that all problems may be resolved by
political means.

The Government of my country extends an urgent
appeal to all States to categorically oppose the current
aggression of NATO and the United States of America
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. If the
aggression is not stopped, the precedent of such
unpunished aggression will, sooner or later, lead to
aggression against a number of other, smaller and
medium-sized countries. The real question is: Which
country is next?

Sixty-five years ago, the Emperor Haile Selassie,
whose country was subjected to aggression by Fascist
Italy - as the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is today

 

by NATO and the United States of America - entered
history with his prophetic outcry that the League of Nations
and international peace would be fatally wounded if the
aggression did not stop. The United Nations is at the
crossroads today, as the League of Nations was then. I hope
that, this time, the United Nations chooses the right path.
