The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Bangladesh.

My delegation would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his briefing and his
introduction of the interim report of the Secretary-
General.

The holding of parliamentary elections on 27
February was a significant step forward for Tajikistan,
though there were a number of areas in which the
electoral process did not meet with the full satisfaction of
the international community. In considering the outcome,
a number of points must be borne in mind.

First, this was the first multi-party, pluralistic
election in Tajikistan, and it included participation by
former warring parties. Secondly, the voter turnout was
very good - 93 per cent. And thirdly, the fact that the
elections were held without any violent incidents halting
the process was itself a success.

 

The deficiencies in the electoral process were not
entirely unexpected. The Joint Electoral Observation
Mission of the United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) was deployed
despite shortcomings in the electoral laws. It was present
not only to observe the process, but also to offer
constructive engagement. The country has emerged from a
prolonged and difficult conflict situation, and we consider
these elections as a building-block phase in the peace
process and the development of democracy in the country.

The holding of elections, even if flawless, cannot
guarantee the consolidation of democracy. The elections
were only a starting point in a long journey in the quest for
national reconciliation and democratic institution-building.
The process could be disrupted if not properly nurtured.
The Government of Tajikistan and the international
community should focus on carrying this process forward.

With regard to the reintegration of opposition fighters,
let me say that in order to consolidate the peace process,
the reintegration of ex-combatants into society should be
given a high priority. It cannot be viewed as a sequential
event which will follow their disarmament. The two
processes are intertwined. The positive results achieved in
the reintegration of the former fighters into society will
mobilize those still holding on to weapons and encourage
them to surrender those arms.

The Secretary-General's report notes that in Tajikistan
there are still too many men under arms. They should be
offered meaningful and productive economic opportunities.
Otherwise, the ex-combatants, with their illegal arms, will
be a threat to the peace and security of society.

More projects geared to job creation should be
undertaken, and funding should be made available for them.
The only such project, in the Karategin Valley, was
interrupted by the onset of winter. It should receive more
attention and be resumed soon.

Finally, on the way ahead, the international community
has a responsibility to see that the gains achieved in
Tajikistan are not lost and that interest does not wane after
the acute phase of the conflict is over. The world
community should come forward and provide assistance to
help this fledgling democracy take root and to create
opportunities for the people to see hope in their future.

We have noted from the Secretary-General's report
that he will be consulting the Tajik Government about the
possible role of the United Nations in post-conflict peace-
building and will inform the Council about the outcome
of his consultations. It might be worthwhile for the
Council to consider some viable and convincing options
for the future involvement of the United Nations in
Tajikistan.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The representative of Tajikistan has asked for the
floor, and I now call on him.

