Ms. Cardona Moscoso (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to welcome
Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Cooperation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, to the
Security Council, in her role presiding over today's
important debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like
to thank her delegation for its work in ensuring the
adoption today ofresolution 2405 (2018). We also thank
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, Ms. Habiba
Sarabi, Deputy Chairperson of the High Peace Council
and Ms. Mariam Safi, Executive Director of the
Organization for Policy Research and Development
Studies, for their briefings.

It is an honour for me to be able to represent Bolivian
women today. The women in my country are a symbol
of determination and strength, which are qualities that
have long gone unnoticed. Let us remember that today
is not a day of festivities, but one that commemorates
the struggle for women's' rights. Bolivia pays tribute
to those women for all their fortitude, in particular for
moving forward in conflict situations as in the case of
the women of Afghanistan. We should recognize all
their work not only today 4 on International Women's
Day. That recognition should always be conveyed, but
not just in speeches, but also in the form of concrete
actions that empower women. That is the best way to
honour them.

The role of women is a priority component in
the development and unity of Afghan society. The
involvement of women in the current process is
particularly relevant owing to the fact that they are
often the ones primarily responsible for their families
while seeking to ensure their well-being. Now,
however, they are taking on leadership roles in seeking
peace in Afghanistan. Our inclusion in all areas is not
only required to bring about sustainable development,
but also to bring about the peace and security for
which we strive so mightily in the Security Council,
the Organization and throughout the world. As the
Deputy Chairperson of Afghanistan's High Peace
Council put it, "peace without women's meaningful
participation is impossible".

Bolivia wishes once again to underscore the mission
undertaken by the Security Council to Kabul in January,
during which we were able to witness the people work
to rebuild their country. That visit reaffirmed our
commitment to the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, as well as to carrying outjoint activities
aimed at the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy so as to prevent
violent extremism. Nevertheless, we must express our
deep concern about the increase in violent incidents
that began this year owing to the various attacks against
civilians, nearly one third of whom were children. It is
essential that the negotiations move forward to avoid
any further undermining of a peaceful settlement in
the region.

As clearly stated in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/165), the political volatility has been
exacerbated and created a sense of insecurity in the
community, particularly among the residents of Kabul,
who were targeted by a wave of suicide attacks in
January. The potential threat to the security and stability
of Afghanistan will continue so long as the threat of
terrorist organizations, such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant-Khorsan Province - which was
responsible for several other attacks not only in Kabul,
but also in the eastern province ofNangarhar-maintain
their presence in Khorsan province and continue to
resist the efforts by Afghan and international armed
forces. Bolivia expresses its condemnation in the
strongest terms of all terrorist acts, regardless of the
group or entity that seeks to impose its ideology.

We also express our concern about the prolonged
stalemate in the political dialogue between the
National Unity Government of Afghanistan and the
Jamiat-e-Islami political party. We believe that the
time is ripe for the parties concerned to take proactive
steps and move forward in view of the holding of
the 2018 elections. We encourage the efforts by the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
together with its Central Asian neighbours to promote
mechanisms and platforms for regional, interregional
and international cooperation to achieve peace,
stability and long-term sustainable development, as
well as actions to promote connectivity linking trade
policies, finance, infrastructure improvement and trade
among Afghanistan, Central Asian countries and other
regions. We hope that the instability that Afghanistan
is experiencing will shed its fragility so as to provide
the stable environment needed for the holding of
transparent and inclusive elections in the near future.

The fact that over the past several months many
families have been displaced without any immediate
prospect of returning to their homes in a safe and
dignified manner remains an issue that the Security
Council must continue to prioritize. In that regard,
we call on the countries of the region to step up their
commitment to share information and documentation
that will ensure those people's voluntary, informed,
dignified, safe and permanent return to their places
of origin, and, at all costs, safeguard against a
repetition of circumstances leading to their return to
insecurity or areas that are inappropriate for them.
Accordingly, Bolivia believes that the success of
subregional, regional, interregional, and international
projects, platforms and programmes must be framed by
unequivocal respect for increasing the representation
of women at all decision-making levels in national,
regional and international institutions and mechanisms
for the prevention, management and resolution of
conflict pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000).
Lastly, we urge against any military solution to
the situation in Afghanistan, and we join any initiative
that promotes inclusive dialogue that is predicated on
respect for sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of other countries. We therefore state our
full support for the Kabul Process, which, under the
leadership of the Government of Afghanistan, seeks
to achieve peace, security and sustainability in the
country for the benefit all Afghans.

