Mr. Chungong (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
am especially happy to take the floor today on this
solemn meeting of the Council to welcome the new,
independent State of East Timor. First of all, let me
join preceding delegations in wishing you, Sir,
welcome in New York and in telling you how joyful we
are to see you preside over our work on this
exceptional day.

My delegation congratulates the new Timorese
authorities on this historic day, especially the new
President, Mr. Xanana Gusmao. His vision and spirit of
tolerance and openness will be useful to his country to
consolidate peace, security and the national
development of East Timor and the relations of this
young nation with its neighbours, in particular
Indonesia.

On 17 May, we voted for a resolution, which
created the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET). This Mission succeeds the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). It is once again time to pay an enthusiastic
tribute to Mr. Vieira de Mello, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
UNTAET, whose mission is ending today, and to all
civilian and military staff of UNTAET for the work
they have done and their tremendous success.

This positive outcome of the question of East
Timor that we are celebrating today has caught all the
sceptics out, since it clearly shows the ability of the
Security Council to ensure peace and security with
substantive results in a reasonable time frame.

A new day has dawned on East Timor, henceforth
an independent State. My delegation confirms that it
will join with the other Members of the United Nations
to support the speedy admission of this country as a
Member of our Organization. In addition, we are
prepared to forge bonds of multifaceted cooperation
with the Democratic Republic of East Timor.

It is clear that the work accomplished will not be
able to thrive unless the international community
strengthens its technical and financial assistance to this
young State, making sure that there is good
coordination of all actions on the part of the donors,
both bilateral and multilateral. From this standpoint,
we support the decision of the Secretary-General to
make his Resident Coordinator in Dili the Deputy
Special Representative for East Timor as of tomorrow.

The economic and social development of East
Timor requires, first of all, complete pacification inside
the country and on its borders. The new United Nations
Mission will have a delicate and critical role along
these lines. It is fortunate that the new Special
Representative is Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, who
is a person of experience and great competence. His
attributes will be very appropriate in order to complete
his mission. My delegation fully supports the draft
statement that he will make in a little while and which
deals with the concerns that I have just stated.

To conclude, I would like to renew to the new
authorities and people of East Timor all of our good
wishes for peace and success as an independent State.
They have the ability and the will to make of their
country a land of success. I can only wish them a fair
journey.

