Mr. Koriisi (Hungary): Hungary, as a member
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, aligns itself fully with the statement made on the
group's behalf by the representative of Switzerland. Our
statement in full written form will be made available to
all Member States. In order to save time, I would like
to focus here on six concrete proposals, all of which
are related to the interlinkages between the work of
the Council and questions of accountability for major
international crimes.

First, the open debate on the International Criminal
Court (ICC) held under the Guatemalan presidency in
October 2012 (see S/PV.6849) was a crucial initiative in
examining the important link between peace, security
and accountability. We hope that such debates will be
held on a regular basis in the future.

Secondly, the question of accountability in general
is an issue that concerns not only the Security Council
but other bodies within the United Nations. Interaction
between the different bodies should be regular, and
developments in other forums should be taken into
consideration by the Security Council.

Thirdly, in cases where the Security Council has
to act to maintain international peace and security,
we encourage the Council to develop a coherent
accountability strategy with clear criteria to guide its
future decisions and to send an important message to
Member States.

Fourthly, the work of the Council in the field
of accountability deserves better reflection on the
Council's website. In that regard, we note that at
present there is no information on the reasons and basis
for the establishment of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda by the Council, and not a word
is devoted to the role of the Council in ICC-related
proceedings, as set forth in the Rome Statute.

Fifthly, when the Council uses its prerogative to
refer cases to the ICC, it has the responsibility to do
so in a predictable and even-handed manner, and then
to provide support by setting up appropriate follow-up
mechanisms and procedures. So far we have seen only
partial results in this area.

Last but not least, Hungary appreciates and very
much supports the repeated initiatives of France
proposing that the permanent members of the Council
voluntarily refrain from using their veto power in
situations of mass atrocities. Hungary believes that
any and every proposal that brings the Council closer
to its ultimate raison d'etre and the fulfilment of its
responsibilities in a flawless and predictable manner
merits serious consideration.
