Mr. Vieira (Brazil): First of all, I would like to
express the Brazilian Government's sadness over the
death of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin. We extend our
condolences to his family and to the Government and
the people of the Russian Federation, as well as to the
staff members of the Permanent Mission of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations. We will all deeply
miss Ambassador Churkin, who was a distinguished
diplomat and a good friend.

I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
open debate and the Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier
and Ms. Schmid for their briefings.

Recent and protracted conflicts in Europe constitute
a matter of concern for the entire international
community. They threaten regional stability and
international peace and security. Two devastating wars
began in apparently minor clashes on the European
continent, and they soon became systemic disruptions.
This Organization and this Council were created
precisely to avoid another tragedy of such proportions.

As history shows us, stability in the Balkans
remains a challenging and important goal. Brazil is
firmly committed to preserving stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and has supported all efforts to strengthen
the State at the national level, while preserving the
rights and prerogatives of all communal entities. Recent
tensions involving the Republika Srpska must be
tackled in the context of the full implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in the country,
with the full support of the international community,
including with regard to socioeconomic development.

Brazil also reaffirms its belief that resolution 1244
(1999) offers the appropriate framework for a negotiated
settlement that can address tensions in Kosovo. We
are confident that a fair and legitimate solution can
be reached under the auspices of the Security Council
through the support of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
regional organizations, and we encourage a continuing
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, bearing in
mind the most pressing threats mentioned in the last
Secretary-General's report on UNMIK (S/2016/901).

Brazil has stated its utmost concern about the
gravity of the situation in Ukraine since the very early
stages of the crisis. We are particularly troubled by the
intensification of hostilities since January, considering
its humanitarian impact and potential consequences.
Brazil renews its support for the peaceful solution
represented by the Minsk agreements, as endorsed
by resolution 2202 (2015), and urges all parties to
fully implement them, as well as to keep engaged
in constructive talks that take diversity in account
and respect the rights of all Ukrainians, including
minorities. We also call for all stakeholders to exercise
maximum restraint.

Brazil expects that the crisis in Georgia can be
resolved peaceably in the shortest time possible.
We believe that confidence-building measures and
initiatives to foster cooperation should be pursued
by all parties, particularly in the framework of the
Geneva process.

With regard to the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, we
reiterate our support for the relevant Security Council
resolutions and to the peace process conducted by
the OSCE's Minsk Group, and we urge all parties to
strengthen their dialogue to reach a settlement.

On Cyprus, Brazil welcomes the renewed efforts
undertaken by both parties to intensify diplomatic
negotiations in pursuit of a lasting solution. We
welcomed the holding of the Geneva Conference in
January, with the participation of the Secretary-General,
as well as the meeting of Mr. Nicos Anastasiades
and Mr. Mustafa Akinci with Special Adviser Espen
Barth Eide. It is our hope that that constructive spirit
will pave the way to sustained peace after decades of
impasse. At this advanced and promising stage of the
political dialogue, both sides should display flexibility
and refrain from actions that could become hurdles in
the overall process.

The Charter of the United Nations was conceived
precisely to provide the instruments to avoid the
recurrence of war. Brazil has consistently upheld
that the Charter should be respected, including its
principles of the peaceful settlement of disputes and
respect for the territorial integrity of States. We should
honour all those who perished in the appalling conflicts
prior to the creation of the United Nations, in Europe
and elsewhere. This Council has a pivotal role to play
in helping all Member States not to forget the lessons
history taught us not so long ago.

