Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor for her twenty-seventh report on
the situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005), and for her briefing today. I would also like
to commend her and her staff for their hard work and
dedication in the investigations.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) has an
important role to play in global efforts to end impunity
for the most serious crimes of international concern.
The United Kingdom fully supports its efforts to hold
perpetrators to account and to achieve justice for
victims. We understand how difficult the investigations
have proven to be for the Prosecutor and her team and
how disheartening that can be, but we encourage them
to maintain their current level of commitment, as the
victims and the witnesses deserve nothing less.

While the United Kingdom welcomes the decrease
in armed conflict between Government forces and the
armed opposition, we are concerned by the ongoing

clashes between the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid faction and Government forces in the Jebel
Marra region. Reports of villages being burned, aerial
bombardmens and civilian casualties and displacements
are particularly troubling. It is unacceptable that the
Government of the Sudan has prevented the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and humanitarian actors from accessing
areas of recent conflict. We call on the Government of
the Sudan to provide unfettered access immediately.

As the security situation shows signs of
improvement in some parts of Darfur, small numbers
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) are beginning to
return to their areas of origin. However, many of those
returns are short-lived and precarious due to localized
insecurity, the occupation of lands by militias and the
absence of basic services. We note that the Prosecutor's
Office is highly concerned for the fate of some of
those IDPs. We are also concerned that the situation is
particularly perilous for female IDPs, given the ongoing
prevalence of sexual and gender-based violence.
The Government of the Sudan, with the support of
UNAMID and international donors, must focus its
efforts on creating the conditions necessary for the safe
and voluntary return of all IDPs in accordance with
applicable international law, as required by resolution
2363 (2017).

The continued lack of progress in the peace
process is a cause for significant frustration. We urge
all parties to engage meaningfully and to focus their
efforts on implementing the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel road map. Linked to that, the
Government must ensure the protection of fundamental
human rights, including the freedom of expression
and the freedom of association, in order to create
an environment conducive to political dialogue and
democratic reform.

In adopting resolution 1593 (2005), the Council
committed to supporting the Office of the Prosecutor
in its efforts to investigate the situation in Darfur. We
must therefore act upon the Prosecutor's request to the
Council to take effective measures to enable the Court
to carry out its mandate in Darfur, in particular by
asserting the need for all States to cooperate with the
Office's investigations.

In that regard, the United Kingdom looks forward
to the Arria Formula meeting on Security Council-
International Criminal Court relations, on 6 July,
initiated by the Netherlands and sponsored by the United
Kingdom and others. We encourage our fellow Member
States to engage constructively with that meeting and
to consider carefully what more we as a Council can do
to ensure that the Court receives the necessary support.
The United Kingdom joins those States which believe
that the Council should consider steps that it might take
to address non-compliance findings by the Court when
they are referred to the Council by the Court'sjudges. In
that connection, the United Kingdom again calls on the
Government of the Sudan to fulfil its legal obligations
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate fully
with the Court and to arrest and surrender the suspects
to it without further delay.

The United Kingdom continues to be frustrated
that fugitives from the Court, including President
Al-Bashir, Mr. Harun and Mr. Hussein, are still
travelling to certain countries unhindered. For its part,
the United Kingdom will continue to raise its concerns
with the relevant Governments, including through the
European Union. We renew our call on all States parties
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court and
abide by its obligations under the Rome Statute. We
also urge them to consult the Court if they feel they are
unable to cooperate with it for whatever reason.

Finally, we again thank the Office of the Prosecutor
for its continued commitment to pursuing these
investigations and achieving justice for the victims of
Darfur, despite the fragility of the security situation,
access restrictions and the lack of cooperation. We urge
them to continue with this important work.

