Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): We are meeting in the
Council for the fourth time in almost as many weeks to
discuss, yet again, the ever-worsening situation in the
Middle East. It is indeed a matter of concern to the
international community that Israel persists in its
defiance of the successive resolutions adopted by the
Council in its recent meetings. The tragedy in the
Middle East continues to pose a mounting threat to
regional peace. It also represents a serious
humanitarian crisis, which the Secretary-General has
aptly described as an appalling humanitarian situation.

The recent massacre in Jenin was as excessive as
it was inexcusable. According to the United Nations
Special Coordinator, who visited the camp, Jenin looks
like a calamity-stricken area. Jenin is yet another
chapter written in the blood of innocent people, while
the memories of Srebrenica and Rwanda are still fresh
in the minds of humanity and haunting the conscience
of mankind.

Nothing could have justified the wanton killing of
dozens, if not hundreds, of Palestinians. This happened
in spite of, and in defiance of, Security Council
resolutions. There is a need for an immediate,
comprehensive and impartial international inquiry.
While Chairman Arafat has demonstrated
commendable respect for humanitarian law by
denouncing all terrorist attacks which target innocent
civilians, Israel too must be expected to abide by
international and humanitarian law.

For its part, the Security Council cannot be
unmindful of its special responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
must not allow selectivity and double standards in the
implementation of its resolutions. The Council must
now take decisive and effective measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter to ensure the immediate
cessation of all Israeli military action and the total
withdrawal of Israeli forces from the occupied
territories, as well as the urgent resumption of the
political process for the settlement of the Palestinian
issue in accordance with its own resolutions. The
Council's very credibility and moral authority now
depend on this.

Pakistan deplores the killing of innocent civilians
in the region. We welcome the Secretary-General's call
for the deployment of an international force to ensure
safety and to provide an opening for diplomatic moves.
The urgent need for international intervention to save
the situation from further deterioration was adequately
highlighted in the Secretary-General's statement to the
Council. We support his proposal, and we believe that
the immediate deployment of an international force in
the region would not only create a secure environment
through the cessation of violence, but also pave the
way for putting the peace process back on track. The
deployment of such a multinational force must be
immediately authorized by the Council.

