Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to recognize the presence here today of
the Secretary-General and of our guests from the
African region. Above all, I would like to congratulate
you, President Mbeki, and my good friend Ambassador
Kumalo for the interest that South Africa has shown in
the search for mechanisms to strengthen and render
more effective the role of regional organizations and
their relationship with the United Nations in
maintaining international peace and security. This is a
good opportunity to recognize in general terms the
valuable contribution that regional organizations have
made in identifying and resolving the causes of armed
conflict, as well as their fundamental importance in
conflict prevention and resolution.

Panama reiterates its support for the continued
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union, as a mechanism for preventing and, if
necessary, dealing with threats to peace and security in
the region. Despite the successes achieved in these
efforts, we would like to share our concern about, inter
alia, the difficulties encountered in establishing the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the international community's
inability to provide the necessary resources to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

In the case of Somalia, the African Union has
submitted a detailed report on what the forces on the
ground require. We regret that, to date, the Security
Council has not paid heed to this request. In this
context, we must also mention Panama's deep concern
about piracy off of the Somali coast, which hampers
the vital transport of humanitarian supplies and
threatens marine commerce in the Horn of Africa.

My delegation agrees with the recommendations
of the Secretary-General to intensify the coordination
between the African Union and the United Nations in
conflict prevention and to strengthen the African
Union's early warning system by, among other
strategies, creating an appropriate multi-risk
mechanism. Similarly, we need to extend collaboration
to other aspects of great strategic importance. It is
important, inter alia, to highlight the work undertaken
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the
establishment of an African standby force that can
respond to potentially explosive situations and deter
belligerent groups from resorting to arms for resolving
conflicts and thus putting civilian lives at risk. Clearly,
that requires determination, readiness and capacity on
the part of African States.
It is difficult to discuss conflict prevention in
Africa without referring to the political crisis in
Zimbabwe. Panama highlights the important efforts
made by you, Mr. President, and by the South African
Development Community in helping to resolve that
crisis, respecting the democratic will of the citizens of
Zimbabwe and ensuring a legitimate process. However,
the actions of the current Government are disturbingly
similar to those of autocratic regimes when they refuse
to recognize the outcomes of elections and resist giving
up power. Ignoring that situation could head us for
another disruption in the peace and security in the
region.

In addition to conflict prevention, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations should seek to protect the
civilian population, particularly the most vulnerable
groups, such as women and children. That is why we
commend the important collaboration among the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
the African Union and subregional organizations to
build a more effective normative framework for the
protection of civilians in Africa. Such a framework
should be based on the principles of promotion of and
respect for human rights, which are the guiding
principles of both OCHA and the AU.

Before concluding, I must point out that the
current situation in the region of Latin America and the
Caribbean is largely the result of close cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
American States in preventing and resolving conflicts.
That cooperation is currently reflected in the progress
that is being made in Haiti. Nonetheless, the existing
regional mechanisms must be constantly evaluated and
fine-tuned so that the collaboration between those
mechanisms and the United Nations is as effective and
efficient as possible.

Finally, Panama reaffirms its commitment to
international legality, multilateralism and the principles
governing relations between States. We are firmly
convinced that it is only through dialogue,
understanding and consultation that we can unite forces
capable of developing new proposals to resolve the
major imbalances and problems suffered by our
peoples and regions. Panama reiterates that, if we are
to expand the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, particularly the African
Union, we must all become true partners in our plans
and, thus, repositories of mutual confidence and
respect.

