I thank Mr. Jacques Letang, President of the Haitian Bars Federation, and Special Representative La Lime for their briefings. Belgium fully supports the work of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti to facilitate political dialogue in Haiti. All parties need to commit to an inclusive dialogue to respond to the country's political, social, economic and humanitarian crisis. Since our last briefing, only four months ago (see S/PV.8729), the world seems to have changed several times over. Just as the cholera epidemic seemed eradicated, Haiti was hit hard by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which compounded the country's many vulnerabilities. We support the role of the United Nations in assisting the country to respond to this pandemic. With the European Union (EU), we are also working hard to refocus and prioritize our support to fight this pandemic. We are concerned about reports of stigmatization and discrimination of people who allegedly have COVID-19, including through lynching and destruction of property. We encourage political actors to seize the momentum of the COVID-19 response to build trust and work together to address the root causes of Haiti's instability. We welcome President Moise's announcement on the holding of elections and his call for clarity on the electoral calendar. Constitutional reform is needed if Haiti is to address the extreme levels of political instability and polarization. The widespread sentiment of impunity and lack of safety remains one of the main sources of frustration among the Haitian population. We call for renewed efforts to reform the justice sector, fight corruption and strengthen the promotion and protection of human rights. The high level of abductions and killings by gangs are particularly worrisome. In that regard, the finalization of the national strategy on disarmament, dismantlement, reintegration and community-violence reduction is encouraging, as is the reactivation of the Haitian National Police's (HNP) round table with civil society. To address those challenges, it is clear that the HNP needs a credible budget. With regard to human rights, we urgently call for progress in ensuring accountability for the violence in Grand Ravine, La Saline, Bel Air and, more recently, Village de Dieu. Perpetrators continue to escape justice. The progress demonstrated by the national human rights institution and the inspectorate general of the HNP is encouraging. We call for the national action plan for human rights to be endorsed and implemented. We are also concerned about the right to food for the most vulnerable. Haiti cannot face its challenges alone. Together with our EU partners, we are providing financial, technical and political support, and we call on all international partners to follow suit.
