Peru welcomes the holding of today's open debate and appreciates the enlightening briefings and statements by all the speakers, who agree on the crucial importance of strengthening cooperation between two of the principal organs of the United Nations - the Security Council and the International Court of Justice. As a country committed to multilateralism, international law and the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes, Peru can testify to the relevance and effectiveness of both organs. On five occasions as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, we have closely monitored the substantive contributions and commitment of that organ to the maintenance of international peace and security. Similarly, we have in the past resorted to the contentious jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice, which has led to the resolution of disputes and given our relations greater stability, to the benefit of our populations and those of other States. To that end, we recognize the capacity and competence of the eminent judges who make up the Court, as well as the representativeness of the various legal traditions that they stand for. Those attributes undoubtedly enhance the prestige and legitimacy of the highest international court, which is reflected in its sustained level of activity. The diversity of the geographical distribution of the cases it hears confirms the universal nature of its jurisdiction. We note, however, that the Security Council has historically not taken advantage of the full potential offered by its interaction with the Court. The practice indicates infrequent contact, which contravenes the organic and synergic relationship that both organs should maintain, in accordance with the provisions of the United Nations Charter. The Security Council is empowered, at any stage of a dispute, to make recommendations within the framework of its functions. In that respect, in accordance with Article 36, paragraph 3, of the United Nations Charter, "legal disputes should as a general rule be referred by the parties to the International Court of Justice". In line with that provision, we consider it essential that the Council recommend on a more regular basis that situations between States that jeopardize international peace and security be referred to the Court. Similarly, in accordance with Article 94, paragraph 2, of the Charter, if one of the parties to a dispute fails to comply with the obligations arising from a ruling of the Court, it is essential that the Security Council take a more active role, discussing the matter in depth and dictating the necessary measures to ensure its implementation. All that is in keeping with the unequivocal defence we believe it is up to the Security Council to exercise in order to preserve the prestige and credibility of the Court. We also recall that the Court is called upon to serve the international community and contribute in particular to the maintenance of international peace and security by issuing advisory opinions at the request of the Security Council, in accordance with Article 96, paragraph 1, of the Charter. In that regard, we encourage the members of the Council to promote the effective use of that prerogative because of the benefits it can bring to resolving a dispute that threatens international peace and security or to clarifying the legal basis of certain decisions of the Council. Recourse to the means for the peaceful settlement of disputes under Chapter VI of the Charter is an underutilized tool with areal capacity to offer positive alternatives for action before, during and after conflicts. Among those, the submission of legal disputes to the Court on the recommendation of the Security Council, as a visible element of a rules-based international system, is certainly worth emphasizing.
