Mr. Bamba (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
It is my honour to take the floor on behalf of the
15 States members of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). I would like, first, to
thank the Pakistani presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January for its initiative in organizing
today's important debate on peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his important statement at the start of today's debate.
Finally, ECOWAS welcomes the Council's adoption of
resolution 2086 (2013) at the start of today's debate on
peacekeeping operations.

As we all know, the Charter of the United Nations
confers upon the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Peacekeeping operations are one of
the key instruments used to that end, although they are
not specifically mentioned in the Charter. Moreover,
with the changing nature of conflict, from inter-State
to intra-State, peacekeeping missions have had to
adapt to that change, which increasingly places the
protection of civilians at the heart of their mandates.
They are dangerous missions, which have cost the
lives of peacekeepers, in particular in Cote d'Ivoire.
We take this opportunity to hail the memory of fallen
peacekeepers who have died in the line of duty.

In addition, we must acknowledge the appearance
of new non-State actors, radical terrorist groups and
their transborder criminal networks that threaten the
stability of States, particularly in West Africa and
the Sahel. In other words, we are talking about the
complex and changing character of crisis situations
and conflicts that threaten regional and international
peace and security, as is the case in Mali right now. In
the face of such threats, the international community,
in particular the Security Council, must provide
appropriate responses.

When it comes to conflict management in West
Africa, ECOWAS can boast of considerable experience
forged over more than 20 years of engagement in the
settlement of crisis situations, in particular in Liberia in
1990, in Sierra Leone in 1997, in Guinea-Bissau in 1998
and 2012, in Cote d'Ivoire in 2002, and today in Mali.
The ECOWAS Protocol Relating to the Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Security in the subregion enables
the immediate deployment of the ECOWAS Standby
Force in the case of crises, following a decision of the
ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council, and above
all with the consent of the legal authorities of the
country concerned.

Those two conditions were satisfied in the case
of the Mali crisis. However, mindful of supporting
its action in Mali on a robust international legitimate
basis, ECOWAS requested the prior authorization of the
African Union and the United Nations Security Council
before any deployment took place. Resolution 2085
(2012), adopted by the Security Council on 20 December
2012 to authorized the deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA), was
obtained at the end of lengthy negotiations that reflected
the full complexity of peacekeeping mandates.

But the recent offensive by terrorist groups in
the south of Mali, which provoked the decisive and
beneficial reaction of France in response to a request
by Mali's legal authorities, as well as the deadly
hostage-taking situation at the natural gas facility in
Algeria by a radical terrorist group, means that the
United Nations has to attempt to seriously adapt its
capacity to respond more effectively to those types of
crises. In that respect, there is a need to further explore
the possibilities offered by the normative framework
for peacekeeping operations, in particular in the timely
articulation of the provisions of Chapters VI, VII and
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

In that respect, the analysis (see S/PV.6702)
conducted on 12 January 2012 during the high-level
Security Council debate organized by the South African
presidency on the crucial cooperation in the context of
Chapter VIII of the Charter between the United Nations
and regional organizations, including the African
Union and ECOWAS, in the prevention, management
and resolution of crises in regional theatres, needs, in
our View, to be deepened.

It is often said that the job of the United Nations
is not to wage war; that is true, and we agree. But in
the light of the large-scale massacres of civilians, mass
atrocities and human rights violations, in the light of the
attempts by radical terrorist groups and transnational
criminal networks to destabilize sovereign States, is the
United Nations to stand idly by and passively watch as
crisis situations and violence develop? The experience
of recent events in Mali leads us to hope that, when the
situation requires it, the Security Council will formulate
more robust mandates for the imposition of peace, which
would subsequently evolve into peacekeeping mandates
and, subsequent to that, peacebuilding mandates.

ECOWAS believes that a multidimensional
approach to peacekeeping operations is a positive
development. Their scope is broad and comprehensive.
Their goals are, inter alia, to restore public order
and security, allow for the provision of humanitarian
assistance, protect and promote human rights, ensure
the protection of civilians in situations of danger, as
well as of women and children, taking into account, in
particular, the situation of child soldiers, support the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants, assist in and facilitate electoral processes,
support security sector and justice reform, and help to
restore administration, the economic sector and the
rule of law.

Peacekeepers therefore play a key role in the
stability of all regions of the African continent. They
need to have clear and viable mandates and the political
support of all members of the Security Council and
the international community. They must have human,
material and financial resources at a predictable
and sufficient level so that those operations can be
successful.

We know that the military spending of the
15 biggest countries of the world in 2010 alone represents
the sum of $1.6 trillion, while the total cumulative
spending of all peacekeeping operations from the first
one in 1948 to 2010 was only $109 billion, or 23 times
less. Recent events involving the actions of terrorists
demonstrate the global nature of the threat of terrorism
as it affects all citizens of all the countries of the world.
That reality cannot be ignored, and therefore requires
enhanced international solidarity to strengthen the
United Nations international collective security system.

In conclusion, in the light of what I have referred to,
I would like to echo what was just said on the financing
of AFISMA and to reiterate the formal request made on
Saturday, 19 January, by President Alassane Ouattara,
Chairman of ECOWAS, at the ECOWAS extraordinary
summit on Mali, held in Abidjan. He called on the
Secretary-General and the Security Council to quickly
adopt the logistical package financed by the United
Nations and to establish a special trust fund to ensure
that the actions of AFISMA are effective.

