Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer of
the European Union.

In my national capacity, I would like to thank the
Malaysian presidency of the Council for convening
today's open debate. Austria welcomes the discussion's
particular focus and condemns the extremely worrying
rise in abductions of children by parties to armed
conflict, in contravention of the applicable international
law.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's submission
of his most recent annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2015/409), including the list of perpetrators
in its annexes. We support his call to the Council to add
abductions as a fifth trigger Violation for listing in the
annexes, and therefore welcome today's adoption of a
resolution (resolution 2225 (2015)) that adds abduction
as a trigger. We also welcome the hard and committed
work of Special Representative Zerrougui, as well as
that of UNICEF, the Departments of Peacekeeping
Operations and Political Affairs and the Resident
Coordinators as co-Chairs of the country task forces,
along with that of the task force members and recognized
partners in the field. Together with the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, chaired by Malaysia,
they implement the Security Council's well-established
framework for protecting children in armed conflict.

The signing of action plans, especially with
non-State armed actors, which make up the vast majority
of listed parties, must be facilitated and efforts must
made to implement them. The Governments concerned
should play a supportive role in that process and
allow the United Nations access to the relevant areas.
Furthermore, provisions on child protection should be
included in peace talks and agreements. Austria stresses
the importance of fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability under national and international
jurisdictions. And we should pay special attention to
the victims of armed conflict, especially girls. Crimes
must not go unpunished, and their effective prosecution
must be ensured through regional justice mechanisms
and the International Criminal Court if efforts at the
national level do not produce the expected results.

Every child should have access to education,
including in regions of armed conflict. Recent events
have shown the timeliness of a focus on protecting
schools against attacks and avoiding their use for
military purposes. Austria actively supported the
consultations on the Safe Schools Declaration, adopted
at the Oslo Conference on Safe Schools at the end of
May. We are pleased to see how many countries have
already endorsed the Declaration and encourage all
other Member States to do so. Furthermore, Austria
urges all parties to armed conflicts to use the Lucens
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict.

We strongly condemn the recruitment of children
by armed forces. We support the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers and
children affected by war and reiterate our commitment
to the 2014 United Nations Children, Not Soldiers
campaign. Monitoring and reporting on the detention
of children for their association with armed forces or
groups must continue. Austria actively supported the
elaboration of the United Nations Model Strategies
and Practical Measures on the Elimination of Violence
against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice (General Assembly resolution 69/194, annex) and calls on Member States to use them.

We commend the Secretariat's efforts, including
the expert seminars organized in the past two years
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in London and Oslo, to raise awareness
about the devastating humanitarian consequences of
explosive weapons for civilians, including children,
and to restrict their use in populated areas where they
cause indiscriminate harm. Austria itself will host an
expert meeting in Vienna on 21 and 22 September 2015.
We welcome the Secretary-General's recommendation
to avoid the use of explosive weapons with wide-area
effects in populated areas and the Secretariat's efforts
to develop practical measures and guidance to reduce
their humanitarian impact. In that regard, we welcome
the Secretary-General's initiative to study national
practices, and we encourage countries to support him
in that regard.

Finally, we urge Member States who have not yet
done so to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict.

