Mr. Wetangula (Kenya): I speak on behalf of
President Mwai Kibaki of Kenya who, regrettably,
could not join his brothers at this very critical debate in
the Security Council.

The imperative for the Security Council to focus
sharp attention on Eritrea could not come at a better
time. The Council is arguably the most important
custodian of world peace and security. Kenya joins the
Presidents who spoke ahead of me in placing our case
before the Security Council - a case that is not new.
We are simply asking for an enhancement of the
sentence and punishment already meted out on the
offending party.

In the past couple of years, the region of the Horn
of Africa has experienced serious peace and security
challenges. Indeed, the United Nations and the African
Union (AU) have partnered with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), our regional
organization, to face some of those challenges. IGAD
has been a very serious and committed player in that
regard. However, we regret that one of our members,
who has since disengaged from membership, namely,
Eritrea, continues to engage in activities that are
inconsistent with, and hostile to, the peace efforts that
we all are interested in. As it is now, the region is not
coming to the Security Council for the first time;
neither should the argument that we have bypassed the
AU hold any water. The Security Council is already
seized of this matter. The Council is simply being
asked to review, enhance and enforce a sentence
already passed on the offending party.

My country, Kenya, alongside other countries of
the region, has a whole raft of issues we can place
before the Council - indeed they have been placed
before the Council - that are linked to the activities of
destruction of our neighbour Eritrea. As you know,
Mr. President, Kenya has suffered a series of terrorist
attacks - on the American Embassy in 1998, as well
attacks on our tourist installations and kidnappings
committed by Al-Shabaab. What do we get from our
neighbour Eritrea? It says that Al-Shabaab does not
constitute a significant threat in the region. Since
Kenya launched Operation Protect the Nation, on
16 October, in conjunction with forces from the
Transitional Federal Government, to try to clean up the
Al-Shabaab menace in the region, we have evidence
that Eritrea has supplied arms, ammunition and other
logistics to Al-Shabaab. This is truly a hostile and
enemy act by a country that ought to be an active
member of IGAD.

It should not be forgotten that it is on the record
that, two or three years ago, Kenya was forced to expel
an Eritrean diplomat in Nairobi after establishing
beyond any doubt that this diplomat was a critical link
between supplies of ammunition, arms and explosive-
making materials from his country to Mogadishu,
sometimes through Kenya. Those materials had the
effect of being used to kill and maim troops of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, innocent civilians,
women and children, some going about their legitimate
business in local markets in Mogadishu.

Kenya has suffered, including today when an
explosion in the Dadaab refugee camp, which is run by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, killed a policeman and injured several
refugees. After each of those violent incidents, what we
normally get is Al-Shabaab saying that it lauds the
heroic acts and that more will come. It has even said
that the skyscrapers of Nairobi are now legitimate
targets. Yet, Eritrea first of all says that Al-Shabaab
does not pose a significant threat to any country in the
region.

It is now time for the Security Council to take
cognizance of and act on the draft resolution that the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development has
placed before it in document S/2011/744, which is
unanimously supported by all countries and will in
some small way help to bring Eritrea to order. I have
no doubt that the Council has the will, the means and
the capacity to do even more than the region is
requesting. It may be too little, too late, but we believe
that a step in the right direction is a step in support of
peace and security in the region, of which the Security
Council is the ultimate custodian.

Once again, I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving us the opportunity to speak to the Council,
and I fully support and endorse the statements made by
my senior colleagues, the Presidents who have spoken
before me, and urge you and the Council to realize that
a failure to act today to sanction Eritrea in the manner
6
requested - albeit somewhat watered down - is
perhaps to add a feather to the cap of impunity. And
that will not help the region in any way.

