Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Sweden and my own country, Norway.

The United Nations ability to create effective
partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations is important for the prevention of and
effective response to violent conflicts. The ongoing
reforms in the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) can further improve our ability to address the
present challenges to international peace and security.
Regional actors are often the first to experience early
warning signs of conflict and can play a key role in
prevention. They can also be essential partners to the
United Nations in ensuring the implementation of peace
agreements, countering terrorism, preventing violent
extremism and addressing migration issues.

Partnerships with regional organizations are, quite
rightly, given priority in the Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. Mandates for United Nations
peace operations must be tailor-made to conditions on
the ground, taking into account the importance of such
partnerships. The ever-stronger partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, including
subregional organizations, is very positive.

The Nordic countries welcome and support the
efforts of the United Nations and the AU to strengthen
cooperation and coordination in the area of peace
and security and the implementation of Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
African leadership and ownership are essential, as
are partnerships. By joining forces, the AU and the
United Nations can provide more efficient and coherent
support to member countries' efforts to sustain peace
and build resilient and prosperous nations.

It is encouraging to see how relations between the
United Nations and the African Union are maturing and
growing stronger. In less than two years, the institutions
have signed and embarked upon the implementation of
two important framework agreements. We will actively
support the establishment of an open-ended group
of friends of the United Nations-AU partnership in
Addis Ababa. The purpose is to provide the support
and backing of member States for further joint United
Nations-AU efforts for sustainable development,
conflict prevention, preventive diplomacy and
mediation, including enhanced cooperation between
the AU Peace and Security Council and the United
Nations Security Council. The Nordic countries remain
committed to continuing our substantial support to AU-
United Nations cooperation.

The cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
remains essential to maintaining peace and security, as
well as preventing conflicts and achieving sustainable
development in that region. It is inspiring to see how
members of the United Nations family and ASEAN
are working closely together in implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the ASEAN
Community Vision 2025.

The Nordic countries are consistent partners in
the efforts of the United Nations to further deepen
existing arrangements with regional and subregional
organizations and seek new opportunities for our
common future. In order to realize the full potential
of the AU-United Nations partnership, additional
financial and political support is needed. We therefore
welcome the ongoing work to enable access to assessed
United Nations contributions.

