Major General Asarta Cuevas (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I should like to thank all
members of the Council for their kind words addressed
to our French soldiers in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) who suffered a criminal
terrorist attack yesterday.

The French Ambassador asked three questions.
The first was about how our soldiers can be better
protected. The second was about coordination with the
Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF). The third related to the
transfer of responsibility to the LAF.

Turning to the question about how our soldiers
can be better protected, I must say that UNIFIL has
enough robust means and protection to achieve its
missions. The protection of vehicles is a national
responsibility. In this case, France, Spain and Italy
have had no problem providing us with armoured
vehicles. Following the attack of 27 May on an Italian
patrol, in which six soldiers were wounded, I sent a
directive to my soldiers containing additional security
measures. The most important of those measures
included the orders that convoys, where possible,
should always take place at night and with jammers;
that two vehicles at a minimum must always travel
together; that our soldiers should wear flak jackets and
helmets; and that, whenever possible, the LAF should
also provide bodyguards and maintain ongoing contact
with the joint operations centre.

It is important to stress that those instructions were
for convoys travelling outside our area of operations,
because the two terrorist attacks on us - the first in May
and the other yesterday i took place outside of UNIFIL's
area of operations. Similar attacks took place in 2008 in the
same zone. What that means is that, in cooperation with the
LAF and the population, we can control our area of
operations, but outside that we do not have control. That is
the national responsibility of the Lebanese Government and
Armed Forces. They must guarantee security along the
coastal highway, which is basically UNIFIL's only route for
relief troops and supplies and to access the Beirut port and
airport where our soldiers arrive at and leave the country.

Having discussed convoys, I will turn to the safety of
individuals, towards which we have taken certain additional
measures, including a ban on the use of marked UNIFIL
vehicles for personal use outside the area of operations.
However, if individuals need to leave the area of
operations- to go on vacation via the airport, for
instance - we have painted 14 unmarked vehicles, using
various colours, that are made available to soldiers and
other UNIFIL personnel for individual needs.

We have taken one additional measure that I
proposed to General Kahwaji and the chief of intelligence
of the LAF for the southern sector. That measure involves
daily reconnaissance of the highway that connects our area
of operations with the port and airport of Beirut. For us, it
amounts to an extension of our area of operations, but it is
not actually within that area. We therefore need to work
closely with the Lebanon Government and the LAF. I have
proposed daily reconnaissance of that road, at different
times each day, together with the Lebanese Armed Forces
and security forces, but only in sensitive areas that are
highly vulnerable to attack.

I have been waiting for a response for two months.
Finally last Friday, I sent a formal letter to the Commander
in Chief of the Lebanese Armed Forces, proposing this
initiative yet again and asking for a response. Sadly,
yesterday there was another attack. I am not saying that we
could have avoided it had we taken the measures 1
proposed, but we might have.

I also want to update the Council on what happened
with the incident yesterday. There were four vehicles, three
of which were armoured, while the third was not. The
attack was against the fourth vehicle, which was an
armoured vehicle with jammers. Of a total of 12 soldiers,
six were wounded, all lightly except one who has an eye in
quite bad condition, but he will not lose it. Of those, three
were flown home to France today. The other three are still
working in their units. We were actually lucky.

Turning to the second question about our
coordination with the LAF, it is excellent in our operations
area. They have officials and representatives at all levels
and in every location. They are aware of our activities on a
daily basis and there is complete transparency. Beyond the
area of operations, at the Force Commander level we
coordinate with the chief of intelligence and the
Commander in Chief of the LAF. If they have information
or anything important that I need to know, they
communicate it right away.

Regarding the transfer of responsibilities from
UNIFIL to the LAF, in keeping with the joint technical
review that I mentioned earlier, we have a strategic
dialogue in place with the LAF. The purpose of the
dialogue is to assess UNIFIL capacity and the tasks that it
must fulfil pursuant to its mandate under resolution 1701
(2006). It is also to assess LAF capacity and which of our
missions it can undertake, with the ultimate goal of leaving
the Lebanese Armed Forces to fulfil all the tasks conferred
on UNIFIL under resolution 1701 (2006). We recognize
that UNIFIL cannot be in Lebanon forever. At some point,
we must withdraw. The LAF will have to assume the
responsibilities currently now assumed by UNIFIL. When
will that day come? We do not know, but we are working
towards it.

By way of conclusion, I can say that the most recent
meeting on 7 July saw the creation of four
subcommittees - one for infrastructure, one for command
and control, another for troop capacity and movement, and
another for operational issues. All of that is geared to
making headway towards being able to transfer all our
responsibilities - and I underline again that this is
mandated by resolution 1701 (2006) - to the Lebanese
Armed Forces.

