Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I would first like to
express my appreciation to Poland for organizing
today's debate.

This week Indonesia experienced a series ofterrorist
attacks. As a nation, we are not afraid. I repeat, we are
not afraid. We will not give space to violent extremism
or terrorism. Our whole nation is standing together
to strengthen its fight against terrorism, and I thank
the Council for its support and words of condolence.
Inshallah, we will succeed in fighting them. Let us
unite to develop a global comprehensive approach to
combating terrorism and violent extremism.

Violent extremism and terrorism are just some of
the many challenges we face today, from transnational
organized crime to conflicts, wars and extreme poverty.
Such issues help to focus our attention on the role of
the Security Council. The Council's main mandate is to
ensure that peace and security prevail. To that end, it is
very important to uphold international law and ensure
the implementation of all the Council's commitments
and resolutions, including those on Palestine, many
of which have not been fully implemented. It is also
important to ensure that all members are part of the
solution and not of the problem.

It is also essential that Article 25 of the Charter
of the United Nations be implemented in tandem with
the Charter's principles, particularly those outlined
in Articles 1 and 2. Why is it important to uphold
international law? It protects the weak and, more
importantly, prevents a mighty-takes-all approach.
An issue's rightness should not depend on the degree
to which the most powerful determine that it accords
with their own interests. The Security Council must not
neglect its responsibility to maintain peace and security
for all. The peoples of the world are our constituents.
The Charter begins with the phrase "We the peoples of
the United Nations". We are responsible for them. The
beneficiaries of the products of the Security Council
must be all people worldwide.

I would like to convey some of our thoughts on
strengthening the maintenance of world peace and
security. First, it is the Council's responsibility to
function in accordance with international law. The
Council is an executive organ of the United Nations and
must remain on track.

Secondly, ensuring peace and security in our
immediate neighbourhood is key to global peace and
security. In that context, regional arrangements, as
mandated by Chapter VIII, are crucial as a building
block for global peace and stability. The Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is an example.
ASEAN contributes significantly to creating an
ecosystem ofpeace, stability and prosperity in the region
by upholding the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, the habit of dialogue and a win-win rather
than a zero-sum approach. ASEAN will remain at the
forefront in this area, including by helping to develop a
peaceful, prosperous and inclusive Indo-Pacific region.

Thirdly, we should ensure synergy between peace
and development. Only through development, guided
by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, can
we build a peaceful world where people live in harmony.

As a true partner for world peace, Indonesia will
continue to contribute to the maintenance of the world
order. We are ready to share our experience, play our
role in strengthening respect for international law
and promote the peaceful settlement of disputes in
our region and beyond. Indonesia has made concrete
contributions to shaping norms and maintaining peace
in the past and the present, and will continue to do so
in the future.

