Mr. Castaneda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to congratulate the
Malaysian delegation on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and to express our appreciation for
the concept note (S/2016/712, annex) that is guiding our
discussions today.

As a country strongly committed to disarmament
and non-proliferation, Guatemala welcomes the
convening of this open debate. Resolution 1540
(2004) plays an important role in the international
non-proliferation regime, as it seeks to enhance the
focus on the commitments in terms of non-proliferation
without affecting its direct relationship with the
fulfilment of the obligations of all States with the
other disarmament pillars, including the peaceful use
of nuclear energy. In the current complex international
environment, it is imperative that all Member States
fulfil their obligations in preventing the proliferation of
all weapons ofmass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials, as well as their acquisition by
non-State actors and ensure that States possess the
necessary resources and capacity to that end.

The universal, comprehensive and balanced
implementation of the resolution is possible only if all
Member States play a key role and the Committee fully
implements its mandate. As expressed during the formal
open consultations held in June, it is essential that the
review of resolution 1540 (2004) be carried out in the
broadest and most transparent and inclusive manner,

including an in-depth analysis of its implementation to
date with a view to identifying successes, as well as
shortcomings and gaps, in order to focus efforts and
resources on areas that have lagged behind, particularly
through improved outreach and assistance mechanisms.

In our View, assistance and information exchange
are the two key elements remaining in the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In that
regard, in addition to continue seeking ways to improve
and advance its role as facilitator, the Committee should
consider the possibility of moving beyond that function
and seek ways to expand and develop a more direct role,
perhaps by directly providing assistance or via dialogue
among the donors and recipients of assistance, or even
by creating its own training programmes in capacity-
building for States.

Just as it is important to establish a close relationship
with States, it is necessary to continue strengthening
and fostering communication and cooperation with
specialized regional and international organizations
to ensure the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). In that context, we would like to highlight the
role of the Regional Centres of the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs. In our region we
welcome the role of the Regional Centre for Peace,
Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean and the Organization ofAmerican States
in assisting the States that so request in establishing
national action plans, reforming legislation in
accordance with the resolution and capacity-building
in various Government agencies, inter alia. Moreover,
we appreciate the efforts of the Chair of the Committee
in establishing more flexible communication channels
with Member States, including, for example, by setting
up national and regional focal points.

Guatemala is committed to the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). During our term as a
non-permanent member of the Council, we held the
role of coordinator of the 1540 Committee Working
Group on monitoring and national implementation.
Furthermore, in addition to providing its third national
report and updated matrix pursuant to resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1673 (2006), Guatemala requested technical
assistance from the Committee in developing a national
plan of action for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and in several ongoing legislative processes.
Finally, we must remember that the best way to

prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and prevent them from falling into the hands of non-State

actors is to ensure that they no longer exist. In that
respect, it is unacceptable that nuclear weapons are the

only weapons of mass destruction that have not yet been
prohibited. Guatemala, via its long-term commitment
to disarmament and non-proliferation, supports the
multilateral efforts currently under way to initiate
negotiations towards a legally binding instrument
prohibiting nuclear weapons, which threaten the very

existence of humankind, and in that regard we reaffirm

our unequivocal commitment to the cause of a safer
world in which weapons of mass destruction - nuclear,

chemical and biological - no longer exist.

