The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his very comprehensive briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan.

Let me begin by thanking all Council members
for supporting Pakistan in putting the theme of "A
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism" on the
Council's agenda for an open debate culminating in the
adoption of a presidential statement. In this regard, we
are also particularly thankful to the Secretary General
for his constant help and guidance.

In choosing the theme for this debate, we knew that
it was a difficult subject but certainly one that needed
the Council's attention and pronouncement because,
as the threat of terrorism continues to evolve, so must
our strategies to deal with it. The struggle against this
threat is not for today or tomorrow or for the next week
or even for a year. It is a long haul. We all have to brace
for it. We all have to continue to prepare for it.

Pakistan's initiative for this debate is rooted in our
shared objective of attaining global peace, security,
stability and development. As a threat to international
peace and security, terrorism has a direct bearing
on all of our countries and regions, as well as on all
individuals and societies. The past decade has shown
that terrorism knows no geographical boundaries.

In the past decade, one lesson we have all learned
is that a lopsided or unidimensional approach will not
work as we try to defeat the hydra-headed monster of
terrorism. This monster has tentacles all around the
world. It is truly a global threat. Our strategies and
responses must therefore also be global in nature.

The Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole have already done an impressive body of work
by developing the legal and normative framework for
countering terrorism and by creating mechanisms
for implementation. So what is it that we all wish to
accomplish under this new initiative?

After fighting terrorism for the past 10 years, we
have the benefit of the hindsight and an unprecedented
opportunity to deal both with the symptoms and the
causes of terrorism. We all are deeply aware of the
unintended consequences of political decisions that can
fuel the scourge of terrorism. Short-sighted methods
of dealing with terrorism can offer ideological fodder
to the causes of terrorists. What we are looking for,
therefore, is a comprehensive and interlocking approach
that is much more effective than our present effort and
that is geared towards winning not only the battles but
also the war.

We condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, committed by whomever, wherever and
for whatever purpose. All acts ofterrorism are criminal
and unjustifiable, regardless of their motivations. In the
past decade, we have collaborated, as the international
community, to impede, impair, isolate and incapacitate
the terrorist threat. We must attack and dismantle
terrorist networks because they defy the writ of the
State and kill innocent civilians, and we must persevere
in our efforts to deter and defeat terrorists militarily.

And yet our success has been at best only
partial. It is conventional wisdom and a compelling
reality that terrorism will not be defeated by law
enforcement measures, intelligence operations or
military and security strategies alone. That is why
we need a comprehensive approach. If we are to find
sustainable solutions, we need to intensify our efforts
to resolve long-festering conflicts and crises that spawn
extremism.

Terrorists' misleading, distorted and malicious
narrative, and their demented ideology that justifies
the killing of innocent people must be quashed by the
international community and the Security Council. It
is our responsibility to counter terrorists' propaganda.
Our stories about human dignity and values should
be louder than their criminal sagas. We must move
in concert to decrease the ideological space in which
terrorists operate freely.
Development and security are interrelated.
Development helps to meet basic human needs, build
community resilience, and prevent terrorism. Job
creation for young people and their participation
in socioeconomic development create an enabling
environment for the success of counterterrorism
policies. Special emphasis needs to be laid on creating
opportunities for people in regions scarred by terrorism
to be gainfully employed so that terrorists can no longer
lure them to their side.

We in Pakistan have seen that nothing works better
as an effort ofthe international community in this regard
than allowing preferential market access to products
produced within the regions wracked by terrorism. An
even more important track - perhaps - is dialogue.
All those who have chosen the path of terrorism but are
willing to renounce violence should be brought back
into national and societal mainstreams. Reconciliation
must be promoted. Fissures must be bridged.

We also have to foster a culture of the promotion
of the rule of law, the protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms and prevalence of good
governance and tolerance.

I would just like to add a few more points to
emphasize why counter-terrorism needs to be the focus
of the Council.

First, terrorism continues to mutate every day
into newer and different forms. Terrorists use new
information and communication technologies and
the Internet for recruitment and incitement, as well
for planning and financing their activities. Counter-
terrorism efforts need to adapt to those challenges
and to develop quick-response strategies for real-time
response.

Secondly, we should address the root causes of
terrorism. Deprivation, marginalization, exclusion
and stereotyping often create conditions for a drift to
terrorism. That drift must be stemmed.

Thirdly, our collective and national measures to
countering all forms of the financing of terrorism,
including through the proceeds of organized crime and
illicit narcotics, should be made much more effective
than they are today.

Fourthly, terrorism and extremism cannot, and
should not, be associated with any religion, race, region,
value system or society. Attributing the encouragement,
incitement or inspiration of terrorist acts to any religious
tradition or doctrine is unacceptable. An honest
dialogue among different religions and civilizations is
therefore a continuing political imperative.

Regional and subregional efforts are extremely
important in the fight against terrorism. We need
regional cooperation to impart education, bolster
criminal justice systems, enhance connectivity, secure
borders and tighten financial controlsBesides, regional
cooperation is necessary to guarantee lasting peace and
security.

Pakistan and Afghanistan have taken steps
towards a strategic partnership to jointly fight
terrorism - a multipronged approach to countering
terrorism. We are supporting an Afghan-led and
Afghan-driven reconciliation process and efforts
aimed at creating a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
We believe that peace and stability in Afghanistan will
have a direct, salutary impact on Pakistan.

Terrorism remains a serious threat to Pakistan.
We have been one of the biggest victims of terrorism.
We can therefore relate to, feel and share the pain and
suffering caused by terrorism anywhere in the world.

Pakistan's comprehensive approach to countering
terrorism is based on three d's, namely, deterrence,
development and dialogue. The entire nation, the
Government, the Parliament, the judiciary and civil
society are determined to fight the scourge of terrorism
and extremism.

Under the leadership of President Asif Ali Zardari,
we have pursued a multifaceted policy to deal with the
threat of terrorism in a holistic and sustainable manner.

Pakistan has led from the front in the international
community's fight against terrorism. Much of the
success in the global fight against terrorism has been
made possible with Pakistan's support and active
cooperation. However, that success has come with
a heavy cost for Pakistan and for Pakistanis; but that
has not deterred our resolve. Pakistan's community
resilience has been second to none.

The Pakistani armed forces and law enforcement
officials have defended Pakistan and the rest of the
world against the terrorist threat, at great cost. Some
150,000 troops are currently deployed on the Pakistan-
Afghanistan border to detect and degrade those
ubiquitous terrorists who are enemies of our people.
Seven thousand brave Pakistani soldiers, police and
para-military forces and more than 37,000 innocent
civilians, including men, women and children, have
fallen victim to the blight of terrorism. Thousands more
have been injured and disabled.

Pakistan's most popular leader, Shaheed Mohtarma
Benazir Bhutto, was assassinated by terrorists in 2007.
Recently, Khyber Pakhtoonkhwa leader and senior
Minister Bashir Bilour, who spoke courageously against
terrorism, was killed in a suicide bombing attack. Even
the young, innocent teenage girl Malala Yousafzai,
whom the Secretary-General referred to, could not
escape the bullet of a terrorist. She survived, and we
hope that her life will be a testimony to the resilience
of the Pakistani people, including Pakistan's women.

Terrorists gain strength from various sources of
financing. We should continue to refine measures to
prevent and suppress their sources of funding coming
from the abuse of charitable non-profit organizations,
as well as from the proceeds from organized crime and
illicit narcotics. Pakistan recently hosted a successful
regional conference on counter-narcotics. We have also
launched a thorough public-awareness campaign about
the atrocities committed by terrorists.

The success of a counter-terrorist offensive cannot
be measured only by the defeat of terrorists. After
a successful operation in Swat and Malakand, for
instance, we first had to absorb and then rehabilitate
no fewer than 2.2 million displaced persons, through a
massive national effort.

We also are focusing on the well-being and
appropriate rehabilitation of victims of terrorism. We
have invested energy and resources in deradicalization
so that misguided youth can be reintegrated into society.
We have established one such deradicalization centre at
Saboon for that purpose, and we wish to establish many
more.

The capacity-building needs of partner countries
must be addressed with seriousness. The reluctance to
share critical equipment and intelligence amounts to
weakening those pitted against terrorists.

Terrorism undermines global stability and
prosperity. It has undermined Pakistan's stability and
economic prospects. That is why we have asked our
partners in the international community to enhance
our market access for the products on which we have
comparative and competitive advantages.

We believe in balancing hardcore national strategies
with socioeconomic and community-driven plans.
The Government of Pakistan is also investing in the
development of affected areas, including in education,
health, tourism, sports, the construction ofroads, dams,
canals and hydroelectric projects.

The United Nations and its subsidiary bodies
have an important role in the implementation of its
resolutions, the development of discourse on counter-
terrorism and the dissemination ofbest practices among
nation-States. The United Nations should continue to
play a visible and effective role in leading counter-
terrorism efforts. In that regard, it is critical that we
maximize transparency, efficiency, coordination and
synergy within the United Nations system.

Let me conclude by emphasizing that terrorism
threatens us all. Joining forces and strengthening
cooperation are key to success at the national and
international levels. States need to continue to work
more closely in the implementation of their counter-
terrorism strategies. Terrorism can be defeated only
by comprehensive and collective endeavours on the
part of the international community in a cooperative
framework. Pakistan will continue to play its role in
that collective undertaking.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.

