Mr. McCully (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes this Security Council debate on the resolution
of conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa, and
we welcome the fact that it involves Foreign Ministers
from so many members of the Council.

But we do not welcome the fact that today we will
adopt no resolution, and not even agree a presidential
statement; we will not stop the fighting. Sadly, this
is symbolic of the dysfunction and mistrust that has
characterized the Council's performance on Syria and
too many of the conflicts that rage in the region today.
And it must stop.

In Syria, 250,000 dead people and 12 million
displaced by conflict should tell the Council that it must
stop - that we must work together to find a resolution.
We can all see what the path forward must involve.
On the one hand, we must be pragmatic; we must take

the situation as it is and the actors who are there, and
collectively impose a transition process that will enable
institutions and services to operate as we allow Syria
to rebuild. On the other, we must uphold the principles
of justice and international law that would rule out
impunity for those responsible for mass atrocities.

In his introductory remarks to the General
Assembly at this year's general debate (see A/70/PV.13),
the Secretary- General named five countries whose
deep differences need to find resolution if the conflict
in Syria is to cease. Each of these five countries, along
with most others, has declared its implacable opposition
to the brutal terrorist threat that is the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. To that extent, the concept behind
today's debate can claim success.

Where it fails is in its inability to unite these key
actors and the members of the Council behind a process
that marries the pragmatism that must be employed to
stop the conflict with the more principled solutions that
will enable Syria to start rebuilding, displaced people to
return, and the other conflicts in the region, involving
largely the same actors, to be addressed - those in
Libya, Iraq, Yemen and Palestine.

Until members of the Council learn to cooperate
to broker these compromises, we will live in a world
which is eternally destabilized by the rivalries of the
Middle East and North Africa; a world of constant
workarounds as substitutes for Council leadership,
and a growing and ultimately deafening demand for
Security Council reform.

