Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): It is a great honour to have
you, Sir, presiding over today's meeting.

Let me begin by paying tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira
de Mello, whose leadership has been instrumental in
making the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET) a success story we all should
be proud of. I would like also to welcome Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, the Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of East Timor and one of the greatest
leaders of his country.
The work of Sergio Vieira de Mello and his team
has been made easier thanks both to the vision of the
East Timorese leaders, such as Senior Minister Ramos-
Horta, and to the political maturity ofits heroic people.

At this critical juncture, as we prepare for
independence and plan for the successor mission to the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), it is important to convey a clear
message to the East Timorese people. This must be a
message of encouragement and unflinching support: we
will not let you down, you will not be alone, your
struggle for freedom was not in vain.

Independence will be declared in a few months,
but that will not be the end of the United Nations
involvement in East Timor. It must be the beginning of
a new phase in which the exercise of sovereignty by
the East Timorese will have to be shored up by our
cooperation and support in a vast array of critical areas.

The mission of the United Nations in East Timor
was not merely the creation of new State; it was, and
still is, the creation of a functioning, stable and
democratic State. As our Secretary-General rightly
points out in his latest report, a number of difficulties
facing the nascent State will require significant
assistance from the international community. We must
ensure a smooth transition to independence - one that
preserves stability and security as well as continuity in
the public administration. For that to happen, we
cannot rely solely on voluntary contributions. It is
necessary to secure a predictable source of funding.

Brazil supports the establishment of a successor
mission, as proposed by the Secretary-General, which
would comprise a military component, a civilian police
component and a civilian component. Given the very
limited pool of professional and administrative
expertise in East Timor, it is particularly important that
the civilian component include the 100 key functions
within the administration to guarantee continuity and
ensure on-the-job training for East Timorese officials.
Undoubtedly, these positions must be included in the
assessed funding of the new mission.

As for the military and civilian police
components, their downsizing is desirable. The only
factor that must guide the downsizing process,
however, is the capacity of the East Timor Defence
Force and the East Timor Police Service to provide
external and internal security. As far as we know,
despite the relative calm in East Timor, hard-line
militias may still pose a long-term threat and continue
to be a source of concern.
If we are to apply commonsensical lessons from
our own previous experiences with United Nations
peacekeeping operations, we must hope for the best of
scenarios but prepare for the worst. I am confident that
stability will be preserved in East Timor as the
democratic process evolves and the reconciliation
efforts gain momentum. However, let us ground the
decisions concerning the level of the force and the
duration of its presence in a clear assessment of the
concrete needs of the future sovereign State of East
Timor.

We have witnessed important progress in the
implementation of UNTAET's mandate over the last
year. The election for the Assembly was a huge success
that bodes well for the future of party politics and
democracy in East Timor. The Constituent Assembly
has made strides in its deliberations. With regard to the
refugees, it is good news that there has been an
increase in the number of repatriations. This is also a
sign that the efforts of Xanana Gusmao, with a view to
healing the wounds of past animosity, are bearing fruit
despite reports of misinformation in the camps. Brazil
appreciates the efforts of President Megawati of
Indonesia to solve pending issues and build strong
bilateral ties with East Timor based on friendship and
mutual respect. This is crucial for the stability and
development of East Timor.

All these positive aspects notwithstanding, it is
clear that there remain important deficiencies that must
be addressed with the continued support of the
international community. It is also important to address
legal problems that might inhibit economic recovery
and development, particularly the need for clear and
stable legislation on property rights as well as a
commercial code.

The impressive growth of East Timor's gross
domestic product in 2001, by 18 per cent, will be
difficult to maintain in 2002. In this context, it
becomes even more important to continue to put in
place income-generating projects to minimize the
possible adverse impact of the decrease in United
Nations personnel and expenditure. In addition, it is
essential to maintain the current level of public
services after independence. The deterioration of such
services, which include health and education, would
hurt the most vulnerable and could constitute a blow to
public confidence in the future State.

Anyone who deals with development issues
knows that widespread poverty, high unemployment
rates and the collapse of public services are an
explosive mixture and a recipe for trouble. This is
exactly what we must avoid at all costs, and it is why
the international community as a whole must continue
to provide generous support for the rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development of East Timor.

A mission with a mandate as broad as that of
UNTAET requires a sizeable investment. It is time to
protect the investment we made. We cannot afford to
jeopardize the progress achieved.

The day of independence will mark a new era in
East Timor, the fulfilment of a legitimate aspiration of
an admirable people. But it will also be a moment to
reflect on the complex challenges that lie ahead in
terms of making the independence of East Timor work
for every citizen. The international community must
bear in mind that the declaration of independence is no
magic wand that will turn East Timor into a full-
fledged and functioning State. Now is the time to show
solidarity and ensure that independence becomes more
than a symbolic event to celebrate the glory of those
who fought for self-determination.

The celebration of the deeds of the East Timorese
heroes is important, but it will be really meaningful
only if the people of East Timor are given the
opportunity to use their independence to attain a
dignified livelihood. To that end, the assistance of the
international community continues to be vital. We hope
that the Security Council and other organs of the
United Nations will continue to give high priority to
East Timor. This will require matching our words of
support with resolute decisions and firm actions.

