The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

As I am speaking at the end of this part of today's
meeting, and as we share many of the views and opinions
presented so far by the members of the Council and
associate ourselves with the statement to be delivered by
the delegation of the Netherlands on behalf of the
Security Council 37451h meeting
Fifty~sccond year 5 March 1997

 

European Union, I should like to limit myself to the
presentation of the fundamental elements of the Polish
position on the present situation in the occupied territories.

First, we believe that there is no alternative to the
peace process in the Middle East. Therefore, the Polish
Government welcomes every manifestation of progress in
the peace negotiations between the Israeli and the
Palestinian sides, as in the case of the successful conclusion
of the agreement on the redeployment of Israeli soldiers
from Hebron. It is extremely important that the entire peace
process be implemented smoothly and in a way that would
help to enhance confidence among the parties. That is why
we encourage the parties strictly to abide by the agreements
already reached and to continue their efforts to advance the
peace process.

Secondly, we hold the strong view that all sides
should refrain from any action that could have negative
implications for the peace process. The recent decision by
the Israeli Government to approve the construction of the
Jabal Abu Ghneim/Ear Homa settlement in East Jerusalem,
if carried out, poses a danger to the peaceful future of the
region. We join others in appealing to the Israeli
Government to reconsider its position. Existing international
obligations and commitments should be respectedThis is
of paramount importance on the eve of the resumption of
the final status negotiations.

Thirdly, the Polish Government is aware of the efforts
undertaken by several States aimed at defusing the present
tension and safeguarding the achievements of the peace
process. We welcome and support these initiatives, and we
call upon the parties to cooperate.

Finally, the Polish delegation is convinced that the
Security Council should send an appropriate message to the
parties reaffimting its interest in the situation in the
occupied Arab territories and calling upon them to
overcome the predicament in which the peace process has
found itself in recent days.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I should like to inform the Council that I have just
received a letter from the representative of the Philippines
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformitywith the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mabt'langan
(Philippines) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Norway. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.


