Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to thank you, Mr. President, and the entire
Mexican delegation for having organized this
important meeting. I should also like to thank Mr. Hedi
Annabi, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing today and for the work that he
has done in Haiti since he assumed his duties in 2007.

Canada attaches great importance to the Haitian
dossier. Haiti is the second-largest recipient of
Canadian development aid, after Afghanistan. Our total
commitment has risen to $555 million for the period
2006-2011. Furthermore, Canada believes that the
inter-American nature of the efforts in Haiti is a
fundamental aspect of international action in that
country. That regional solidarity also makes
partnerships with the Organization of American States
and the Caribbean Community imperative. In addition,
Canada promotes an approach that includes the whole
island of Hispaniola and recognizes the importance of
the Dominican Republic to the Haitian dossier.

This is the first open debate of the Security
Council on Haiti since March 2006. Much progress has
been made over the past three years. We can be proud
of what has been accomplished by the Haitians and by
the international community. We wish to thank the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for its work to stabilize Haiti and for its
role in the re-establishment of security. We also
commend the United Nations country team, led by
Mr. Joel Boutroue, for its work in the development and
coordination of humanitarian aid. I should also like to
highlight the exceptional work done by UNICEF and
the World Food Programme in response to the damage
caused by the four hurricanes that hit Haiti in August
and September 2008. Their intervention, including in
partnership with the Canadian frigate St. John's, made
it possible to save many human lives.

Last summer's hurricanes were a reminder that
all the progress made in Haiti remains fragile.
Consolidating security requires concerted action in the
area of development. On the other hand, truly useful
action in the area of development requires unwavering
political support. To that end, all United Nations actors
in Haiti must support one another. In particular, the
Special Representative must provide the added value of
his political role to the country team's activities.

(spoke in English)

In a context such as that in Haiti, where
everything must be done immediately, certain priorities
must be set. Progress has been made in Haiti over the
past few years because there was a political consensus
among Haitian authorities. Given the multiple
challenges that the country is facing, it is essential to
maintain that consensus among Haiti's decision-makers
in order to work for the common good of the Haitian
population. The Special Representative's role is crucial
in that regard. We know that the great majority of
Haitians want reform in order to develop their country.
Only those who profit from instability and insecurity
have an interest in maintaining the status quo. But
maintaining the status quo would only set the stage for
another crisis. Eight United Nations interventions over
the past two decades should be sufficient proof of that.

We think that MINUSTAH must remain in Haiti
for as long as it takes to guarantee the security and
stability of Haitian institutions. It must continue to be
given appropriate resources and an appropriate
mandate. MINUSTAH's work must clearly be paired
with progress in reforming the Haitian National Police
and with reforms made to the judicial and correctional
systems.

Canada would also like to point out the
usefulness of the indicators of progress presented by
the Secretary-General last summer, when the future of
MINUSTAH was being considered. We believe that
those indicators must be developed further to allow the
Haitian Government and the international community
properly to measure the impact of their joint
stabilization and reconstruction efforts.
Resolution 1840 (2008) contains all the elements
needed for appropriate follow-up through the next
renewals of the Mission's mandate. Haitian leadership
and ownership of reforms are crucial ingredients, but
this must not delay required reform. Inertia cannot be a
response to the complex problems facing Haiti.

The donor conference to be held in Washington,
DC, in a few days' time is an important step for Haiti
and its international partners. It will be a good
opportunity to strengthen the coordination of
partnerships with the road map that is the national
growth and poverty reduction strategy paper.
Moreover, we thank the Secretary-General for
commissioning Professor Paul Collier's report, which
highlighted objective factors specific to Haiti and
provided a boost and needed optimism for the
country's economic prospects and for the generation of
new jobs.

This July, in the light of the results of the
Washington, DC, meeting, the Economic and Social
Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti, which
Canada has the privilege of chairing, will make
recommendations regarding long-term development
strategies for Haiti. The Senate elections, also being
held in a few days, should help to stabilize
Government institutions there.

In conclusion, Canada will continue to cooperate
with Haiti by fully respecting its Constitution, its
culture, its history and its diversity. We stress the need
to work with a united Haitian people and with national
authorities who are politically inclusive and convinced
of the need to move forward together democratically
towards true political, economic and social
development. The damage inflicted by hurricanes last
year was indeed a setback, but the progress that has
been achieved in other areas gives hope for the future.
The international community has no alternative but to
remain committed to helping Haiti to move ahead to a
better future. That is why, despite the extent of the
challenges, Canada remains determined to continue to
contribute to Haiti's development.

