Mr. Sadeghi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
timely and important debate to address the pressing
issue of the Middle East, particularly the crimes of the
Zionist regime in the region. We appreciate your skilful
stewardship of the Council's work for this month. We
extend our sincere gratitude to the ambassador of
Greece and his colleagues for the efficient way they
presided over and handled the work of the Council last
month. I also thank Mr. de Soto for his comprehensive
briefing this morning.

For almost six decades now the atrocious Israeli
aggression and its State terrorism, coupled with several
unfortunate efforts on the part of some quarters to
support the atrocities of the Zionist regime as the
source of crises and conflict in the region, have made
the Middle East the most tense region in the world. The
Israeli regime has based its very existence on pursuing
war, violence and bloodshed in Palestine and in the
wider region.

Just recently, the people of the United Nations,
particularly those in the Middle East, witnessed with
anguish and indignation the blatant ill-intended and
preplanned aggression and multiple war crimes
perpetrated by the Israeli regime against the peoples of
Palestine and Lebanon. For 34 long days an extensive
indiscriminate and unspeakable bombing campaign
against civilians and civilian infrastructure across
Lebanon went on before any action was taken by the
Security Council. As a result, thousands of innocent
Lebanese civilians were murdered or maimed and
hundreds of thousands turned homeless, while the
stability of the wider region was also seriously
threatened. Throughout that period of horror and Israeli
terror, the whole world witnessed the unbridled and
indiscriminate barbarism of the Israeli regime against
Lebanese civilians as, joined by its allies, particularly
the United Kingdom and the United States, it pursued
their desire to wreck havoc in a whole country despite
the tragic human toll.

The brutality of the Israeli regime was too blatant
to be concealed by their own mass media, and the
Israeli newspaper Ha'aretz reported recently that
"Israel flooded Lebanon with cluster bombs and
phosphorous shells" during its deadly aggression. The
same newspaper reported that the Israeli army fired
more than 1,800 cluster bombs, containing over 1.2
million cluster bomblets, during that onslaught. It
quoted an Israeli military official as saying, "we
covered entire villages with cluster bombs. What we
did there was crazy and monstrous." The same Israeli
military official has said,

"Multiple-launch-rocket-systems platforms were
used in Lebanon despite the fact that they are
known to be highly inaccurate and that a high
percentage of them do not explode and become
mines. Even reserve soldiers were shocked by the
army's decision to use these rockets in Lebanon
because these are the judgment-day weapon that
would be used only in a full-scale war."
Describing the Israeli regime's use of cluster
bombs in Lebanon as immoral, the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Jan Egeland, also reported very
recently that thousands of civilians in south Lebanon
are at risk from unexploded cluster bombs dropped by
Israeli forces in the last three days of the war. He
further said recently,

"What is shocking and completely immoral is
that 90 per cent of the cluster bomb strikes by
Israel occurred in the last 72 hours of the conflict,
when we knew there would be a resolution, when
we knew there would be an end".

He also said that the bombs may have been
manufactured "in a number of places, including the
United States".

All this simply went on while inaction and
handicaps, were imposed on the Security Council for
many weeks, preventing it from fulfilling its primary
responsibility. That inaction allowed a whole
population to suffer such terrible pain and loss and
proved very costly to the Council's credibility and
integrity. The people of Lebanon courageously resisted
and defeated the wicked Israeli aggressors and proved
yet again that while the war machine of the aggressor
may be able to shatter the lives and livelihoods of the
people and lay waste to buildings and infrastructures, it
is impossible to intimidate a nation that is determined
to resist aggression, is resolute in the fight for its
dignity and is unwavering in its determination to live
free from occupation and terror.

Although belatedly called for, the cessation of
hostilities was nevertheless a relief for Lebanese
civilians and for the whole international community,
which was frustrated by the horrors of Israel State
terrorism and disappointed by the inaction of the
Security Council.

Ever since the adoption of resolution 1701
(2006), another tired and expected pattern of defiance
by the Israeli regime has been on display. As the result
of such Israeli defiance, the Secretary-General stated
on 19 August 2006 that he was "deeply concerned
about a Violation by the Israeli side of the cessation of
hostilities". Later on, the Secretary-General, in his
report dated 12 September (S/2006/730), further
reported many instances of Violations by the Israeli
regime of the cessation of hostilities and of resolution
1701 (2006). These violations have continued to date
and need to be seriously addressed and resolutely
countered by the Security Council.

The crimes of the Israeli regime have continued
and even increased in the Palestinian territories as well.
The Gaza Strip was enduring the same aggression by
the Israeli regime when Lebanon was attacked. The
criminal Israeli regime is continuing those atrocities
unabated. Warplanes, tanks and thousands of troops
invaded the Strip only a few days before the Israeli
regime's onslaught in Lebanon, targeting civilians and
purely civilian infrastructures, destroying main
bridges, disabling the only power plant, making main
roads impassable and bombarding the Strip with heavy
artillery fire and from the air. Indiscriminate use of
force by the Israeli army, collective punishment,
extrajudicial killings, targeted assassinations,
abduction of the Palestinian authorities and the
expansion of illegal settlements are but a few of the
other clear breaches of basic international standards
and law committed by the Israeli regime in the
Palestinian territories.

In addition, in defiance of the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice and the unambiguous
calls of the international community, the Israeli regime
not only continues the construction of the illegal wall
in the occupied Palestinian territories but has even
accelerated plans for completion. Moreover, the
Palestinian economy is already strangulated and under
an unjust and illegal embargo. In this regard,
Mr. Egeland, the top United Nations humanitarian
affairs official, referring to the misery and hardships
inflicted on the innocent Palestinian as a result of the
illegal practices of the Israeli regime, said recently that
Gaza "is a ticking time-bomb" - as was also
mentioned by Mr. De Soto this morning.

The United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) also recently warned that the
Gaza economy could shrink next year to the level of 15
years ago and unemployment could rise to more than
50 per cent. It is regrettable that, despite such
unspeakable crimes by the Israeli regime and so much
shocking suffering inflicted on the Palestinian people,
the Security Council has been rendered incapacitated to
address this issue, thus completely failing to live up to
its responsibility in addressing a crisis which is in the
truest sense of the word a threat to international peace
and security.

Undoubtedly, attaining a peaceful and just

settlement of the question of Palestine is imperative for

the realization of comprehensive and lasting peace and

stability in the Middle East. Aggression, State

terrorism, intimidation and occupation will not bring
about peace in the Middle East.

It has become a patented and indeed a tired
practice and a smokescreen for the Israeli
representative to raise baseless and absurd allegations
against others, including my country, in this Council in
a failed attempt to deflect the international
community's attention from the horrendous terrorist
acts and crimes against humanity that have been and
continue to be perpetrated by the Israeli regime in the
Middle East.

Before concluding, allow me to place on record
that my Government categorically rejects the baseless
allegations against Iran that were repeated today in the
Council by the representative of the Israeli regime.
These allegations are part and parcel of a preplanned
Zionist scam to break resistance to aggression and
invasion in the region and deflect attention from the
root causes for all tensions in the Middle East, namely,
the Israeli regime's aggression, occupation and State
terrorism. Undoubtedly, the State terrorism in the truest
sense of the word has been on display by the criminal
Israeli regime in the Middle East in the last six
decades.

This regime, which has been perpetuating a
never-ending practice of State terrorism, killing, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and property
destruction, has been deeply suffering from the lack of
legitimacy from its very inception. Therefore, it is not
surprising that the representatives of such a regime,
ruled constantly by perpetrators of various crimes
against humanity and war crimes, would make such
baseless and fabricated propaganda as a remedy for the
illegitimacy of that regime and in an attempt to draw
the international community's attention away from its
various crimes in the region.

Moreover, it has also become a patented practice
of the Israeli regime to deliberately and constantly defy
many international rules and regulations, not to
mention hundreds of Security Council resolutions, in
clear contempt for the international community and for
the fundamental principles under which it operates.

In this context, particular reference should be
made to the wicked and mischievous policies of the

Israeli regime on the nuclear issue, which is a clear
example of its dangerous and unabated pursuit of a
nuclear arsenal during the past decade. Undoubtedly,
the Israeli regime's clandestine nuclear weaponry
coupled with its dangerous missile capability and its
irresponsible policies and practices present a real threat
to international peace and security, and also to the
volatile region of the Middle East.

Therefore that regime should be kept under
continuous pressure by the international community to
abandon its terrorist acts and its nuclear programme
and place all its nuclear facilities under international
monitoring. Obviously, the Israeli regime is the single
existing obstacle for the establishment of a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle East. This regime,
which has been extensively assisted by the United
States in its continuous clandestine operation of
unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, has never been a party
to the international instruments on weapons of massive
destruction, namely, the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the Biological Weapons Convention and
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). It has also paid no attention to the
constant international call in different forums,
particularly in the 2000 NPT Review Conference,
which called upon this regime by name to accede to the
NPT immediately and without conditions.

My delegation also rejects the unfounded
allegations raised against my country by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom in this Council
today. It is unfortunate that that representative, whose
Government shares the responsibility for the Israeli
crimes because of its support to the Israeli regime in its
State terrorism, failed to mention even one word or one
sentence about the atrocities and the crimes of the
Israeli regime and instead made baseless allegations
against others.

