Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie for his briefing.

Today's meeting of the Security Council follows
a national day of mourning in Australia yesterday,
when all Australians remembered those who died
when Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 was shot down
over separatist-held territory in eastern Ukraine. That
deplorable crime, unanimously condemned by the
Council, is a reminder of the terrible consequences of
the violence in eastern Ukraine and of the deliberate
actions of armed separatist groups. It is a reminder to
all those who stoke the flames of division that fuelling
violence has widespread, devastating and often
unpredictable consequences.

In the days immediately following the adoption
of resolution 2166 (2014), an international mission for
the protection of the investigation was established, led
by the Netherlands, with Australian and Malaysian
participation. Despite intimidation by separatists and
their frequently imposed restrictions on access to
the crash site, the unarmed mission accessed it on a
number of occasions, locating and recovering human
remains and personal effects and recovering evidence.
We worked swiftly and thoroughly in the areas of
highest priority, and the mission has now completed the
substantive part of its work at the site at this stage. On
Wednesday the Netherlands announced the mission's
withdrawal from the site. When search and security
conditions improve we will return there to ensure that
we have recovered all identifiable remains.

The investigation into the cause of the crash will
of course continue, led by the Dutch safety board with
input from the International Civil Aviation Organization
and other international partners. As with the parallel
investigation into possible criminal responsibility for
the downing of MH-l7, this is again an international
effort coordinated by the Dutch. The results of those
investigations will be crucial elements in ensuring
accountability, as demanded by resolution 2166 (2014),
and it is imperative that all States cooperate fully with
those efforts.

We are very concerned about what the fourth
report on Ukraine by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie today have said. The
report tells two stories. In most of Ukraine under
Government control, the Government has taken steps
towards making constitutional and political reforms,
including protecting minority rights, and there has been
some movement towards establishing accountability.
Judicial reform has also begun, although that needs
much more work. Those steps are still incomplete, but
they are going in the right direction.

Conversely, the report paints a dire picture of
the human-rights situation in separatist-held parts of
Ukraine - abductions, torture, extra-judicial killings
by armed groups, increasing numbers of civilians
killed, deliberate targeting by armed groups of critical
public utilities such as water, electricity, sewerage, and
growing numbers of internally displaced people. These
illegal armed groups have seized Ukrainian territory
through violent means and - I quote from paragraph
26 of the report - "inflicted on the populations a reign
of intimidation and terror to maintain their position of
control". These groups have no legitimacy; their actions
have had terrible consequences. In separatist-controlled
areas, as the report says, the rule oflaw has disappeared
and been replaced by the rule of violence. This is now
the fourth time that the Council has received a United
Nations report documenting these human-rights abuses.
The pattern has continued, and in some places under
separatist control it has worsened significantly. Those
responsible for the violations have acted with impunity.
This cannot continue, and they will be held accountable
for their crimes.

No country can accept illegally armed insurgents
taking control of parts of its territory. In these
circumstances of continued destabilization and use of
force by separatists, the Ukrainian authorities have the
right to protect their own citizens and reassert control
over their sovereign territory. They must of course do
so in a manner proportionate to the circumstances, and
all parties must comply with international humanitarian
law. It is self-evident that the human rights and
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine will improve
only with an end to the conflict. That requires that
separatist groups lay down their arms and cease using
violence against the Ukrainian State.

It also requires that Russia stop its provocation
and destabilization of eastern Ukraine and use
its considerable influence over the separatists to
de-escalate the situation. But Russia has not done so.
It has not taken action to control its borders. Weapons
and fighters continue to flow from Russia into eastern
Ukraine, fuelling the conflict. The build-up of Russian
troops along the Ukrainian border, the Russian military
exercises in the area and the rapid deployment of new
and sophisticated military capabilities only add to the
destabilization of eastern Ukraine. Serious concerns
about Russian military preparedness - what actually
looks like combat readiness - are widespread among
countries in the region and around the world. Our
concerns have been aggravated by Russia's attempts to
construct a case for intervention in eastern Ukraine, a
case that is fraudulent and cynically self-serving. The
humanitarian problems in eastern Ukraine are a result
of the instability and conflict deliberately manufactured
by armed groups and supported by Russia. That has
inevitably produced a worsening humanitarian situation
in eastern Ukraine, but effectively one limited to areas
occupied by the separatists and certainly not on the
scale of what we understand by a humanitarian crisis.
Russia can most usefully contribute to alleviating the
situation by ending its support for separatist groups and
influencing them to end the conflict.

In conclusion, the human-rights situation, the
downing of MH-17 and the humanitarian plight of
many are all the result of the systematic, manufactured
destabilization of eastern Ukraine. The consequences
have been grave for Ukraine and its people, and now
also for the people of many other countries who have
lost their citizens. This destabilization must stop.

