Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I too
would like to thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing, and
you, Mr. President, for responding quickly to the urgent
request and scheduling today's meeting at short notice.
As others have already said, the situation on the ground
is deeply alarming and of great concern to us all.

The United Kingdom has three objectives: to secure
a ceasefire, to alleviate humanitarian suffering and to
keep alive the prospects for peace negotiations, which
are the only hope of breaking the cycle of violence and
devastation once and for all. My Government's position
remains clear. We want to see immediate de-escalation
and agreement on a durable ceasefire. The people of
Israel have the right to live without constant fear for
their security. The people of Gaza have the right to live
safely in peace. Steps must be taken now to address the
underlying causes of the conflict.

We welcome the Egyptian proposed ceasefire.
We welcomed Israel's acceptance in principle of the
terms of the proposed ceasefire agreement and we
welcome the Palestinian Authority's endorsement of
the Egyptian initiative. We also welcome the United
Nations-facilitated humanitarian pause on 17 July. We
call on Hamas and all militant factions in Gaza to cease
hostilities, ending all rocket fire into Israel. We utterly
condemn the firing of rockets into civilian areas.

Let me reiterate our support for Israel's right to self-
defence. Israel faces a tough dilemma in responding to
unacceptable rocket fire from Gaza. But in exercising
its right to self-defence, Israel must act proportionately
and take all necessary steps to minimize civilian
casualties. As we have heard this afternoon, many
innocent civilians are being killed.

On our second objective, we are deeply concerned
by the dire humanitarian situation. There are hundreds
of thousands of extremely vulnerable civilians in Gaza
who are suffering acutely from the crisis. Access
to clean water, power and medicines is becoming
critically difficult. We urge all parties to continue to
allow unhindered access throughout Gaza. The United
Kingdom's support has enabled United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East to respond to the crisis by continuing to provide
crucial health services.

On the third objective, any ceasefire needs to be
genuinely sustainable. It is important to tackle the
underlying causes of instability in the Gaza Strip
without which the long-term security of both Israel
and Gaza cannot be secured. As part ofa ceasefire, we
need to consider establishing a viable verification and
monitoring mission to ensure the implementation of
any ceasefire agreement by all sides, learning lessons
from the past.

However, the implementation of a ceasefire
agreement must be only one part of a wider effort to
improve conditions in Gaza. Without that, we are likely
to see further such cycles of violence. That should
include the restoration of Palestinian Authority control
in Gaza, the opening up of legitimate movement and
access, and a permanent end to the unacceptable threat
of rocket attacks and other forms of violence from
Gazan militants against Israel.

The responsibility lies with both sides to make
progress towards a permanent peace, enshrined in a
two-State solution. No other alternative option exists
that guarantees peace and sustainable security for both
Israelis and Palestinians.

