Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin, Sir, by joining other speakers in
congratulating you on the skill with which you have
presided over the Security Council this month and in
thanking you for having convened this timely open
debate. I also wish to extend our thanks to Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing to the Council this
morning.

Like every single other day in the past six
decades, the period under review has been witness to
an unabated bloody campaign and racist and aggressive
policies and practices by the Israeli regime. The
defenceless Palestinians continue to be subject to some
of the most vicious measures ever employed and to
abhorrent war crimes perpetrated by Israelis, as a result
of which dozens more Palestinian civilians have been
killed or injured and more and more have been
displaced.

In violation of the most basic principles of
international law, human rights law and international
humanitarian law, and in clear contempt for and
defiance of the unambiguous calls made by the
international community, the Israeli regime's illegal
colonization of the occupied Palestinian territories
continues, the demolition of Palestinian homes and
properties and confiscation of Palestinian lands have

intensified, and the construction of settlements and
settlement infrastructure, as well as the transfer of
Israeli settlers, have increased.

At the same time, and despite United Nations
resolutions and the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, the construction of the
illegal apartheid wall is continuing unabated, bringing
more and more brutal damage to Palestinian lives,
livelihoods, lands, freedom and property. The
Palestinian people are suffering from daily humiliation,
hardships and deprivation caused by criminal and racist
Israeli policies and practices, including the continued
existence of at least 613 checkpoints and other
obstacles to the movement of persons and goods
throughout the West Bank.

One and a half million Palestinians in the Gaza
Strip are subject to collective punishment and are
facing an unprecedented humanitarian crisis as they are
deprived of their most basic goods and health care
services as a result of the inhumane Israeli blockade of
the Gaza Strip.

Continuation of this brutal siege has not only
worsened the already dire humanitarian crisis in the
Strip but also made reconstruction in the wake of the
devastation caused by the Israeli aggression against
Gaza a few months ago - the rebuilding of even the
most urgently needed basic infrastructures -
impossible.

The aggressive and expansionist Israeli policies
and practices against Lebanon and the occupied Syrian
Golan have also continued. In flagrant violation of the
fundamental principles of international law, the Geneva
Conventions and Security Council resolutions, the
Israeli regime insists on its illegal occupation of the
occupied Syrian Golan, on its criminal settlement
activities and on the alteration of the legal, physical
and demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan.

It also continues its aggression against Lebanon
through its continued occupation of Lebanese
territories, violation of Lebanese airspace on a daily
basis and the deployment of spy networks in the
country.

The reports of the Secretary-General on
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) note that
violations of Lebanese airspace, and defiance of the
provisions of Council resolutions, including resolution
1701 (2006), have become a matter of routine policy
by the Israeli regime. Statements by officials of the
Israeli regime, together with the policies and practices
of that regime in the past several months, have yet
again shown that it has no belief in, or respect for,
peace. Under the slogan of peace, it only tries to
mislead others in order to buy time and pave the
ground to further pursue its aggressive policies.

Israel's intransigent insistence on the pursuit of
its illegal campaign of colonization and settlement
construction in the occupied Palestinian territories on
the absurd and false pretext of so-called natural growth
shows its vicious intention to continue to expand its
occupation of the Palestinian territories rather than
heed the international community's calls to stop it.

The remarks by the Speaker of the Israeli Knesset
just a few days ago, in which he called for the
expansion of the territories occupied by the Israeli
regime to include territories on the east bank of the
Jordan river, displayed once again the dangerous,
aggressive and expansionist policies that this regime
harbours for the entire region.

The international community's failure to stop the
Israeli crimes against Palestinians and others in the
region has only emboldened the regime to continue
with its inhumane and criminal behaviour. Concrete
and resolute measures by the international community
and by the Security Council are imperative in order to
stop this vicious cycle of Israeli aggression and
violence.

The time to act is now. The international
community should not continue to turn a blind eye to
these abhorrent crimes. There should be no doubt that
occupation lies at the centre of the Palestinian conflict
and overall tension and instability in the Middle East.
Unless this principal cause of conflict is effectively
addressed, the crisis will never subside.

We expect the Security Council, in particular, to
shoulder its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security by putting an end to
the Israeli regime's inhumane and aggressive acts. It
should force the Israeli regime to completely and
permanently cease settlement activities, lift the
blockade against the Gaza Strip, cease and desist from
its inhumane violation of Palestinian rights and end its
occupation of all Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian
territories.

I wish to conclude by putting on record that my
delegation rejects the baseless and absurd allegations
made against my country by the representative of the
Israeli regime in the Council today. This is another
tired attempt by the Zionist regime to divert attention
from that regime's war crimes and crimes against
humanity. This wicked ploy has not worked in the past;
nor will it work in the future. It is preposterous that a
criminal regime that possesses nuclear weapons, is not
a party to the international treaties on weapons of mass
destruction and feeds on terrorism and bloodshed can
accuse others groundlessly. Nothing could be more
dangerous for the world and the region than nuclear
weapons in the hands of the terrorist Israeli regime,
which has proved to have no respect for any human
right or any international regulation. This danger
should be countered resolutely and urgently.

