Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Madam
President, you spoke eloquently in extending
condolences to our colleague from Egypt on behalf
of all Council members. I now do so on behalf of the
Senegalese delegation, as my Government did on Palm
Sunday, to condemn the heinous murder of persons who
were praying in a holy place during a holy month.

I thank Ms. Sandra Honore, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her high-
quality briefing on the situation in Haiti. I also thank
her for her outstanding work at the head of the Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH).

Over the past six months, the political situation
in Haiti has made significant progress, including the
holding of presidential, legislative and parliamentary
elections in a climate of calm, transparency and freedom
under the auspices of the Transitional Electoral Council.
I commend the people and the authorities of Haiti, in
particular the Provisional Electoral Council and the
Haitian National Police, for their outstanding work
accomplished in a professional and impartial manner.
I also commend MINUSTAH for its good offices and
work, which have made a major contribution to the
stability and security of the country and to lending
credibility to the electoral process.

These joint efforts have allowed Haiti to return to a
fully functional constitutional order after several years
of institutional stalemate. The election and swearing in
on 7 February of the new President, Mr. Jovenel Moise,
who was elected in the first round with 56 per cent of
the vote; the holding of legislative and parliamentary
elections on 29 January; and the establishment of the
Government of Prime Minister Jack Guy Lafontant
with a governing programme approved by the Haitian
parliament perfectly demonstrate the renewal of the
constitutional order.

The international community, and particularly
the United Nations, while recognizing the significant
progress made, must continue to support the Haitian
Government, as MINUSTAH is doing through the
implementation of several projects to promote good
governance and democracy, strengthen State authority
and improve the living conditions of the people in a
humanitarian context that remains difficult and marked
by the consequences of Hurricane Matthew.

This situation has been compounded by a cholera
epidemic that has raged in Haiti for several years, with
devastating impacts that should be duly managed by the
international community, especially now that the United
Nations, through its former Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, has publicly acknowledged responsibility in
the spread of cholera in Haiti. Senegal supports the new
approach of the Secretary-General on cholera and calls
on Security Council members to collectively promote
the effective implementation of this new approach, in
close cooperation with the Haitian Government and
the victims.

There is a need for a regular follow-up of the
situation in Haiti, which remains fragile. Much remains
to be done, in particular in the areas of security, justice
and human rights. This pertains particularly to the
draft criminal procedure code, which is an important
element for benchmarking the stabilization of the
country. Following the withdrawal of the Mission, we
must prevent a security vacuum and the recurrence of
past errors and failures that once give rise electoral
crises and large-scale public unrest.

Despite the outstanding progress made by the
Haitian National Police, which has become far more
professional and effective, work remains to be done
with respect to crime due to ongoing insecurity over the
past six months, as indicated by statistics, which reveal
546 homicides in the reporting period, as compared
to 510 from 1 March and 31 August 2016. I recall
that during that same period, 200 cases of rape were
reported, 20 kidnappings took place, 30 police officers
were killed and 635 violent protests were recorded.

Regarding MINUSTAH's mandate, Senegal reiterates
its confidence in Ms. Honore and the entire MINUSTAH
team. It supports the recommendations made by the
strategic assessment team, which conducted its work
from 6 to 11 February. concerning the configuration of
a new mission to succeed MINUSTAH at the end of its
mandate, 15 October.

In conclusion, Senegal belieaves that Haiti finds
itself at a crossroads. That is why we urge Security
Council members to continue to pay particular
attention to the humanitarian, security and economic
situations in Haiti, which have been put to the test in
recent years. When the President assumed his new
functions, the outgoing provisional President J ocelerme
Privert highlighted the importance of assessing losses,
damages and needs following Hurricane Matthew in
October 2016. The provisional President stressed in
particular that environmental, social and economic
vulnerability was inexorably increasing with each
passing day, with 96 per cent of the Haitian population
living under the constant threat of two well-known
factors: droughts and floods. Mr. Privert added that,
in the framework of the draft three-year document
for 2017-2019, the Government needed to mobilize
upwards of $900 million in order to strengthen coastal
infrastructure, secure transportation and capacities
across productive sectors, all in a consistent manner,
in order to reorganize national territory in the social,
economic, environmental and institutional spheres.

At his inaguration, the fifty-eighth President of
Haiti, Mr. Moise, responded as that by the end of his
five-year term, the changes that he promised during
his electoral campaign would become a reality. Those
promises included restoring the confidence of the
Haitian people in the political system and class, as well
as in the elite; strengthening inclusion and national
sovereignty; and rebalancing the national territory.
That is why Senegal appeals to the Council, through
me, to assist Haiti, which is, as we see it, the first
black republic to gain independence and the first South
American democracy with a Parliament of more than
200 years old and a Senate that is 207 years old. I think
that the international community must continue to
support the country.

