Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Today's debate proves
that the consideration of humanitarian aspects of the
maintenance of international peace and security has firmly
taken its rightful place on the agenda of the Security
Council. We are glad that this debate is being led by the
Foreign Minister of Bangladesh, whom we warmly
welcome. The commitment of his country to humanitarian
principles is well known and highly appreciated all over
the world. We would also like to thank his delegation led
by Ambassador Chowdhury, for organizing this important
meeting.

As was stated on many occasions, there is a close
interrelation between security and humanitarian crises.
Warfare, whether internal or international, gives rise to
humanitarian crises which, in turn, fuel further the
escalation of conflicts and makes them likely to spread to
other countries and regions. It is therefore critically
important that when dealing with such situations the
Council address humanitarian issues as part of its general
strategy aimed at restoring peace and security in conflict
zones.

As has already been pointed out by previous
speakers, present-day wars are in most cases civil or
inter-ethnic conflicts that involve internal struggles among
rival factions. Sadly, many of those conflicts also entail
gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. More and more often we witness
situations where the main purpose of warring sides is not
to subdue the rival group, but rather to exterminate or
banish it. In this event, civilians are not simply collateral
victims of atrocities committed by parties to a conflict but
rather become direct targets of them.

 

It is encouraging that these challenges are increasingly
at the focus of the Council's attention. By addressing these
issues the Council not only promotes the protection of
civilian populations from the impact of war, but it also
contributes to the goal of conflict resolution, thus advancing
the maintenance of peace and security.

One of the most acute and recurring challenges in the
context of maintaining access to war-affected populations
remains the problem of the safety and security of
international humanitarian personnel. In this regard Ukraine,
as one of the initial sponsors of the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,
reiterates its support for the idea of drafting an additional
protocol to the Convention to provide legal protection to the
currently uncovered humanitarian personnel of the United
Nations and other international organizations.

It is also important to ensure that humanitarian
concerns are fully taken into account in the negotiation of
comprehensive peace agreements, and that the relevant
humanitarian components are included in such agreements.
The inclusion of provisions on the resettlement of refugees
and internally displaced persons, assistance to and re-
integration of demobilized combatants, restoration of public
security, establishment of a functioning judicial system, as
well as other similar provisions in peace accords, has
successfully prevented the recurrence of hostilities and
ensured the return to normalcy in a number of countries
and regions, among them Mozambique, Cambodia and
Central America. In this regard, it would be extremely
useful to take stock of the experience gained during the past
decade in this area and to carry out an analytical review of
existing peace agreements, as well as practices in peace
negotiations, in order to formulate general approaches to
preparing and negotiating future peace arrangements.

Finally, I would like to recall that the growing number
of armed conflicts, as well as their brutal character, is to a
large extent the result of poverty and decreasing resources,
which bring about extensive migration of populations,
unemployment and the growth of crime. In this connection,
we wish to underline the role that sustainable economic
development, the preservation and strengthening of the
fabric of society, education and other factors can play in
eliminating the causes of conflicts and in preventing them.
As far as the mandate of the Security Council is concerned,
the drafting and introduction of a long-term preventive
strategy concerning the potential sources of conflicts can
become one of the practical steps towards - as the
Secretary-General put it - the start of "the transition from
a culture of reaction to a culture of prevention".

In conclusion, I would like to underline the
importance of the draft presidential statement to be
adopted at the end of our debate.

