Mr. Lang (spoke in French): I think we have now
come to the end of this debate, and I certainly do not
wish to take up more of the Council's time. I would
just like to say how much I personally appreciate the
positive comments expressed by various speakers
today. In that regard, Assistant Secretary-General
Mathias comprehensively clarified the legal scope of
the proposals put forward today and the way in which
they dovetail with the proposals made by the

Secretary-General in the Council last August. We
should therefore all welcome the fact that this
convergence is emerging.

I also find it positive that a strong, powerful and
determined collective resolve is emerging from the
Council, on behalf of the international community, to
seek to defeat this dangerous and destructive criminal
activity that is disrupting both economic and social
activity. I therefore think that this meeting provides
hope and shows that the United Nations and the
Security Council in particular are determined to take a
new course.

I should like to repeat what every speaker has
said in their own way: we must not waste time. This
race between the whole host of international forces and
highly mobile, well equipped and swift pirates is at the
moment being won by the pirates. In a civilized world
in which national and international law continue to
make progress it would be a great flaw in our laws and
civilization if we were unable to prevail over this
phenomenon that is spreading across the Indian Ocean.

I hope that the Council will, if possible, very
quickly take into account the various statements that
have been made and the conclusions put forward by the
Secretary-General and in the report (see S/2011/30) I
have submitted and come up with a resolution of
historic importance that is firm, clear, determined and
useful to the countries of the world, international
organizations and the private sector in more robustly
tackling piracy.

As several representative have said today, I
should like to reiterate that not only is it desirable that
the Council adopt a clear and firm resolution, but also
that the Council - and this is its responsibility, not
mine - ensure that the resolution it adopts be swiftly
followed up with real, practical action on the ground. It
must be clear that the world is ready to act quickly,
vigorously and well.

