The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Chergui for his informative briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru.

I wish to extend a welcome to the high authorities
present here and to thank Secretary-General Antenio
Guterres, the Secretary of State for Strategic Affairs
of Romania, Mr. Dan Neculaescu, in his capacity as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission; and Mr. Sma'il
Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for their important briefings.

Peru has convened this meeting because of the
importance it attaches to the promotion of the sustainable
peace approach with a view to preventing and resolving
conflicts with greater coherence, efficiency and
effectiveness; addressing their root causes in an integral
manner; and strengthening the institutional framework
required to do so. In that regard, we are also pleased
to have been able to provide a draft resolution for the
Council with content considerably identical to that to
be adopted by the General Assembly (A/72/L.49). We
consider it very important that both main bodies remain
committed and coordinated in the promotion of this
agenda item.

The priority that we accord to sustaining peace
has also been reflected in the Security Council's high
visibility under the presidency of Peru for the month
of April and its agenda, which included the topic of
women and peace and security (see S/PV.8234) and
the convening of the Council's first open debate (see (S/PV.8241) this past Monday on youth, peace and
security, concerning which we have been working on
a draft resolution together with Sweden. We believe
that the participation of women and young people is
key to contributing to a shared, peaceful, inclusive and
sustainable vision of the future.

Peru, which chairs the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism, is promoting more effective responses to that
scourge through greater cooperation and coordination
aimed at severing its links with organized crime. We
believe that the concept of sustaining peace and its focus
on the root causes of conflicts is consistent with our

own experience in achieving peace and consolidating
democracy following the period of violence and
instability created by terrorist groups in our country.
Peru was able to overcome that tumultuous period
thanks to a broad national consensus on national policy
related to security, development and human rights.

We underscore that there are no one-size-fits-
all models or recipes for achieving sustainable peace
and that every country must find its own way under
international law and with the commensurate support
of the United Nations and the international community.
However, as our times are characterized by deep-seated
global interdependence, we need to work together to
confront shared challenges and vulnerabilities that
can potentially degenerate into threats to international
peace and security. I am referring to climate change,
desertification, increasing inequality, corruption, the
threat of an arms race and violent extremism, which
leads to terrorism, among other phenomena of a global
scale and transnational nature. We see as obvious the
causal link between such phenomena and the tragic
proliferation of violent conflicts and humanitarian
crises, which have significantly expanded the Council's
agenda in recent years. In response, we deem it crucial
to strengthen multilateralism as it relates to the concept
of sustaining peace as an overall goal and a continuous
process focused on prevention.

There is much that the United Nations and the
Security Council can and must do to support Member
States in their work to build and strengthen capacities
in order to confront the serious challenges of today. We
therefore welcome the Council's cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission and convey our support
for the restructuring of the Organization's peace and
security pillar, initiated by the Secretary-General, with
the ultimate goal of contributing to sustaining peace.
In addition, we believe that the Council must adopt a
more systemic approach to conflict prevention, based
on timely risk assessments and management plans
that the Secretary-General and the various United
Nations system agencies and programmes must be able
to provide.

That is a long-standing demand. We recall that,
in 1991, in his last annual report (A/46/1), former
Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cue'llar highlighted
the importance of preventive diplomacy and,
consequently, the need for early-warning mechanisms
able to provide the Council with reliable information
for its timely consideration. Furthermore, we must
encourage greater synergies linking peace operations
deployed by the Council with agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations development system
in countries affected by conflicts and humanitarian
crises, as well as with regional and subregional
organizations, neighbouring and donor countries and
financial institutions. It is crucial to step up cooperation
with all relevant actors on the ground.

We underscore the important role of the African
Union, which has accomplished outstanding work in
various countries affected by conflict, and the need
to continue bolstering its diverse efforts in sustaining
peace. Sustainable peace must be the ultimate goal of
Security Council missions, and the degree to which
they adhere to and fulfil their mandates must be judged
in terms of the actual capacities of the country in
which they operate to move from a conflict situation
to one guided by the rule of law and the precepts of
sustainable development.

In that regard, we highlight the need to adopt, on
a case-by-case basis where appropriate, exit strategies
for peacekeeping operations, in cooperation with the
respective United Nations country teams, with the
aim of ensuring a coherent and orderly transition of
the Organization's activities to support sustaining
peace on the ground. We believe that the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular
Sustainable Development Goal 16, dedicated to the
promotion of peaceful societies with inclusive and
accountable institutions, provides an appropriate
universal normative framework for the United Nations
system to support national efforts to consolidate and
maintain peace.

In conclusion, I affirm that Peru - a country
committed to multilateralism, international law and
the principle of peaceful settlement of disputes ~ will
continue to actively work to promote those concepts
and see them reflected in more coherent, efficient
and effective action taken by the Organization and
the Council.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Sweden.

