Mr. Gambari: I want to begin by thanking all of
the members of the Council for the kind words
addressed to me for the work that I carry out on behalf
of the Secretary-General in trying to move towards a
political settlement of the conflict in Angola.

A number of issues have been raised, and I will
summarize them in three categories: first, the
humanitarian situation; secondly, the political situation,
and in particular the peace process; and thirdly, the role
of civil society.

With respect to the humanitarian situation, I
should like to confirm that the figure provided me in
Angola on the number of internally displaced persons
is indeed 4.1 million.

I should like also to associate myself with the
assessment that, although in some areas the situation is
bad and getting worse, the efforts of the Government of
Angola really constitute good and positive news in
terms of the acceptance by the Government of Angola
that it has the primary responsibility to provide
humanitarian assistance to its own people, the
internally displaced persons.

As I also mentioned, every effort is being
made- and in this respect I was put in touch with
personnel in the Office of the President - to ensure
the improvement of the physical infrastructure to
promote the delivery of humanitarian assistance: roads
and bridges, and the important airport in Kuito, which
is being repaired. I believe that we need to continue to
encourage the Government to do more to take
advantage of the window of opportunity in the areas
where humanitarian assistance can be delivered safely,
in cooperation with the United Nations, the
international aid agencies, the international non-
governmental organizations and all of the stakeholders.

As to whether the Security Council would want a
specific briefing on the humanitarian situation, as has
been done in the past, that, of course, is for the
members of the Council to decide. I agree with those
who have observed that the crux of this matter is really
the peace process and the way forward, because if the
peace process accelerates, the issue of humanitarian
assistance will also be positively affected.

I would like to respond to some of the questions
asked. On the issue of next steps for getting dialogue
off the ground and the new role for the United Nations,
I believe that the Government of Angola is very clear
that what the United Nations needs to do is to assume
the role of mediator, without ruling out a
complementary or supplementary role for civil society,
with other Governments as facilitators. We have pretty
much been given the go-ahead to explore how we can
get such a dialogue going, and in the next few days or
weeks we will be thinking, within the Secretariat, about
the necessary steps. Once we get clearance from the
Secretary-General, we will proceed accordingly.

On the question as to whether the advice to move
the peace process off the streets and into serious
contacts and negotiations enjoys the general consensus
of those to whom we talked, I would say that the
answer is "Yes". The challenge is how to establish
credible contacts between the Government and UNITA
and to make such contacts regular and, we hope,
productive.

With regard to the role of the churches and civil
society in such a dialogue, again I would like to
underscore the need to keep each role separate. Their
role is supposed to be that of facilitator, rather than of
mediator.

The issue was also raised about creative ideas for
the way forward. In this regard, I would like to say that
what the Secretary-General has directed me to do is,
among other things, to build upon the support of those
who would like to be allies of the Secretary-General in
trying to examine the prospects of these windows of
opportunity - in other words, those who are willing to
stake political capital on encouraging both sides to
move in the direction of talks, even if, initially, they
will be talks about talks.

In this regard, I would also like to mention to
members of the Council that the Government of
Angola has sent a formal invitation for the
Secretary-General to visit Angola in the near future.
The Secretary-General was awaiting the outcome of my
visit and, of course, he will have to look at his own
calendar. But clearly - and I mentioned this to my
interlocutors in Luanda - a possible visit by the
Secretary-General will be conditional upon progress on
all fronts. These would include the peace process and,
perhaps, some of those areas in which the technical
team from the United Nations is having fruitful
discussions with the Government of Angola -
elections, the fund for peace and the pilot programme
for demobilized soldiers. I think these are opportunities
that we need to explore further.

A question was asked about the factors that have
created new windows of opportunity. I would suggest
that such factors include the two-pronged United
Nations strategy of improving relations with the
Government of Angola and imposing sanctions against
UNITA. Neither of these strategies was supposed to be
an end in itself but, rather, a means to nudge the
Government of Angola and, more particularly,
Savimbi's UNITA, towards a political settlement of this
conflict. I believe that the two-pronged strategy
appears to be bearing fruit.

I would also consider that the military weakness
of UNITA provides a window of opportunity. In any
talks with Savimbi's UNITA, the Government of
Angola would not be talking from a position of
weakness but, in fact, from a position of strength. I
believe it is also fair to say that the military pressure
against UNITA has clearly increased considerably.

I would also like to mention the important role of
civil society; I will come back to this issue later.
Members of civil society are continuing to put pressure
on both sides to try to end the war and agree to a
ceasefire, because the people of Angola have simply
suffered too much and for too long as a result of this
conflict. I would also like to refer to the role of the
neighbouring countries. Their support has been critical,
and their clear position on the need to maintain
sanctions has also been helpful. I would also add that I
believe that the strong support by the Council for a
political settlement each time it has spoken or made a
pronouncement has also been a contributing factor.

As to the question of Savimbi's seriousness about
dialogue and ceasefire, I guess my response would be
that we will have to find out. And the best way to find
out is to actually try to make some contacts and clarify
situations.

How will the current sanctions be affected if the
opportunity for dialogue bears fruit? I think we need to
draw attention to the various elements of United
Nations sanctions. The first is the political element -
the travel ban on some members of UNITA. Secondly,
there is the dimension of closing down their offices in
some key capitals. And thirdly, there is the military
dimension of the sanctions. I believe that a time may
come when the political aspect might have to be
reconsidered, perhaps, regarding the suspension of the
travel ban on some UNITA officials. I would not say
that that time has come yet, but the issue might have to
be considered at an appropriate time by the Council -
those officials who need to travel for the sake of
peace -though this will have to be clearly identified
and specified.

Finally, with regard to the role of civil society, as
I mentioned earlier, I believe that the Government has
no objection to the role of churches -I use the
plural - and all other members of civil society as
facilitators.

As for the Arria-formula meeting with the
Security Council, that is, of course, in the hands of
Council members. But I would suggest that we proceed
on that issue with great caution, because we must be
careful not to damage the relationship which has been
carefully built up between the United Nations and the
Government of Angola.

Furthermore, I would suggest that we have not
yet exhausted the United Nations capacity to continue
to encourage the work of civil society in the peace
process - through, for example, the policy statements
emanating from the Secretary-General and the Security
Council. The United Nations Development Programme
could also provide support for serious national non-
governmental organizations and other members of civil
society in the area of peace and the promotion of
capacity-building and human rights, and even in
humanitarian assistance.

Finally, there is the possibility of a meeting with
the Secretary-General. That has been requested by
leaders of the churches - again, not one church - and
civil society. I think that we should try to exhaust those
avenues for encouraging civil society at this point.

I want to take this opportunity to wish all
members of the Council a very happy holiday season.

