Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa is
gravely concerned about the escalating conflict
between the Sudan and South Sudan. This escalation
has seriously damaged relations between the two
countries and brought them to the brink of war. It is
clear that there can be no military option for resolving
the outstanding issues and differences between the
3
Sudan and South Sudan. What is instead required is the
political will on the part of the parties to complete
negotiations and commit to the realization of two
viable States living in peace and each respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the other.

Pursuant to the achievement of that objective, the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council
recently met at the ministerial level and adopted a
communique on 24 April that provides a clear road
map calling on the parties to cease hostilities, commit
to unconditionally resuming negotiations, and reach
agreement on outstanding post-secession issues. In this
regard, the AU Peace and Security Council called on
the international community in general, and the
Security Council in particular, to support and endorse
this road map under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. That call was made to ensure that the
parties would commit to the processes and agreements
that they have already agreed and resolve outstanding
issues, and that these measures can be applied only in
support of a negotiated political solution to the conflict
in the Sudan and South Sudan.

We are pleased that the Security Council has
today been able to unanimously adopt resolution 2046
(2012), which we hope will add momentum to the AU's
effort to assist the parties in extricating themselves
from the logic of war and embark on a process of
constructive negotiations within the time frames that
have been set. We call on both parties to accept the AU
road map and the resolution unconditionally, and to
resume negotiations under the leadership of the AU
without delay.

The onus now rests with the political leadership
of the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve all
outstanding issues, which should lead to the complete
normalization of relations between the two countries
and ensure that all the peoples of the Sudan and South
Sudan can enjoy peace, dignity, democracy and
development. We therefore urge them to seize the
opportunity and fully comply with their obligations
under the AU road map, so that they can give effect to
their commitment never to return to war and resolve
exclusively by peaceful means any differences that
may arise.

