Mr. Serrano (European Union): Many thanks,
Mr. President, for giving the floor to the European
Union (EU). Many thanks, too, to Special Coordinator
Robert Serry for his briefing and to the representatives
of Palestine and Israel for their statements.

The candidate countries Croatia and Montenegro;
the countries of the Stabilisation and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; and Ukraine and the Republic
of Moldova align themselves with this statement.

While dramatic events are unfolding in the
Middle East region, the Arab-Israeli conflict continues
to be caught in a worrisome stalemate. It is a matter of
the highest priority for us to continue to make every
effort to contribute to the ending of this conflict. The
legitimate aspirations of the peoples in the region,
including those of Palestinians for statehood and of
Israelis for security, are at stake.

The meeting of the Middle East Quartet on
11 July confirmed the need to set out a reference
framework to help the parties to resume negotiations.
Efforts are continuing to find the formula that can best
achieve this goal. EU member States have repeatedly
expressed their full support for High Representative
Ashton in her continued efforts for the Quartet to
create a credible perspective for the relaunching of the
peace process, most recently in the Foreign Affairs
Council Conclusions adopted on 18 July 2011.

The EU stresses the central role of the Quartet.
Indeed, the complexity of the transformational moment
witnessed across the Arab world calls for multilateral
efforts aimed at supporting a negotiated solution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. The European Union continues to
believe that this is the best way forward. The European
Union also encourages an active Arab contribution to
this process and reiterates its view of the value of the
Arab Peace Initiative.

The European Union's goal remains the just and
lasting resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
with the State of Israel and an independent,
democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine living side by side, in peace and security and
mutual recognition.

Recalling the Berlin Declaration, the EU
reiterates its readiness to recognize a Palestinian State
when appropriate.

The European Union believes that negotiations
should include all final status issues, including borders,
Jerusalem, refugees, security and water, respecting
previous agreements and understandings. Clear
parameters defining the basis for negotiations - as
contained in Council Conclusions of December 2009,
December 2010, May 2011 and presented to this
Council on 21 April 2011 (6520th meeting) - are key
elements for a successful outcome.

This is an opportunity for the EU to recall its
positions in this regard. We believe that the following
parameters could serve as a basis for a resumption of
negotiations between the parties.

First is an agreement on the borders of the two
States based on the lines of 4 June 1967, with
equivalent land swaps as may be agreed between the
parties. Secondly, security arrangements must for
Palestinians respect their sovereignty and show that the
occupation is over, and for Israelis protect their
security, prevent the resurgence of terrorism and deal
effectively with new and emerging threats. Thirdly,
there must be a just, fair and agreed solution to the
refugee question. Fourthly, the aspirations of both
parties for Jerusalem should be fulfilled. A way must
be found through negotiations to resolve the status of
Jerusalem as the future capital of both States.

The European Union calls on all parties to abstain
from actions that are not conducive to a comprehensive
solution of the conflict. Furthermore, it expects the
parties to avoid practices that undermine trust and to
refrain from any provocative action which may
threaten the ongoing efforts to resume direct talks.

The European Union reiterates that settlements in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, are illegal
under international law, constitute an obstacle to peace
and threaten to make a two-State solution impossible.
All settlement activity, including in East Jerusalem,
should stop immediately.

The European Union remains one of the major
supporters of and contributors to the Palestinian State-
building efforts led by President Abbas and Prime
Minister Fayyad. The European Union reiterates its
strong support for the institution-building process and
welcomes the outcome of reports which state that the
Palestinian Authority is above the threshold for a
functioning State in the key sectors studied.

In this regard, the EU expresses its full
appreciation of the current Government's success in
implementing the State-building plan. The European
Union expects a future Palestinian Government to
continue the Palestinian Authority's institution-
building efforts and to uphold current standards in
terms of transparent and efficient public finance
management, as consistently commended by the United
Nations, the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank.

The European Union considers intra-Palestinian
reconciliation behind President Mahmoud Abbas to be
an important element for the unity of a future
Palestinian State and for reaching a two-State solution.

In this context, the EU commends the Egyptian role in
brokering the Cairo agreement on 3 May. The EU looks
forward to continuing its support, including through
direct financial support, for a new Palestinian
Government, composed of independent figures, that
commits to the principles set out in President Abbas'
speech on 4 May, upholding the principle of
non-violence, remaining committed to achieving a
two-State solution and to a negotiated peaceful
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, accepting
previous agreements and obligations, including Israel's
legitimate right to exist.

The EU calls for the unconditional release of the
abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit without delay.

Despite some progress following the decisions of
the Israeli Government to ease the Gaza closure, the
EU reiterates its call, in line with Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009), for an immediate, sustained
and unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza, while addressing Israel's legitimate
security concerns.

With regard to the situation in Syria, the EU
deplores the fact that the Syrian leadership has chosen
to ignore repeated calls by the international community
and continues its policy of deliberate, violent
repression of peaceful protestors. The EU reiterates its
condemnation of this policy in the strongest terms. The
violence must be stopped immediately in order to
prevent further bloodshed. In this context, the
European Union calls for a political process leading to
rapid and concrete implementation of substantial
reforms, addressing the legitimate demands of the
Syrian people on their way to a peaceful, genuine and
irreversible transition to democracy.

