Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would
like to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
for his briefing. We thank and commend him for his
hard work. We would also like to affirm our support
to the new Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, whose
task will be focused on bringing together the parties and
reaching a political solution to the conflict. I would also
like to thank Mr. John Ging for his detailed briefing on
this critical situation.

We are once again driven to lament the fact
that, despite the Security Council's repeated calls
to the parties to resume a political dialogue, as well
as the tireless efforts of the international community
to mitigate the severe humanitarian crisis that is
overwhelming Yemen, we are again witnessing a
dangerous escalation in armed clashes, with a high
humanitarian cost. It is deeply regrettable that the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/7) adopted on
15 June 2017 by the Security Council, which calls
on the parties to commit to guaranteeing immediate
and unrestricted access for humanitarian assistance,
agreeing to a ceasefire and initiating dialogue with a
view to reaching a political solution to the conflict, has
been completely ignored and violated by the parties.
There is evidence for that in the alarming increase in
violence in Hudaydah governorate, which has caused
the displacement of more than 14,000 families since the
beginning of this year, now unfortunately added to the
more than 85,000 people who have been forced to leave
their homes since December 2017, leading to a total of
more than 2 million internally displaced persons today.

Furthermore, the reports from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs say that the
road that links the people of Al-Jarrahi and Hays in
Hudaydah governorate is blocked, and other reports
state that anti-personnel mines may have been planted
along it. That situation constitutes an imminent threat
to the civilian population travelling along it or using
it to flee the clashes, as well as to convoys delivering
humanitarian assistance that rely on it.

The worrying increase in bellicose language and
activities have created a highly precarious situation
in Yemen, putting more than three fourths of the
population in need of urgent humanitarian assistance
just to survive. It is essential to ensure and to facilitate
access for, and the free movement of, cooperation and
humanitarian aid agencies to provide the assistance
and medical care needed to deal with the outbreak of
cholera in 22 of the 23 governorates, which, according
to the briefing that we have just received, has infected
more than 1 million people and caused more than 2,200
deaths. In addition to that, there is the dangerous spread
of diphtheria, which, according to the World Health
Organization report of 10 February of this year, has
led to more than 1,000 suspected cases and 64 deaths
linked to the disease.

In that context, we are concerned about the reports
of the precarious situation in which health-care centres
must operate, such as the Hays hospital, the main
health-care centre of Hudaydah governorate, which
has not functioned since 10 December, when it was
seriously damaged by aerial bombardments.

Bolivia echoes the statement of the Secretary-
General on 3 December calling on the parties to restore
access to all ports and to re-establish the entry of the
imports on which the lives of 22 million people, who
urgently need some kind of humanitarian assistance,
depend. The Security Council must be clear when
calling on all parties to ensure the full and continuous
operation of all ports, airports and their access roads, in
particular to Hudaydah and Saleef seaports and Sana'a
airport. The parties must also be urged to comply with
the provisions of resolution 2216 (2015).

For all those reasons, we reiterate our call for the
Council to maintain a unanimous and firm stance
in condemning the belligerent acts and campaigns
that exacerbate the crisis in Yemen and give rise to
a dangerous instability that threatens the lives of
the 27 million innocent people living in the country.
We call on the States and international actors with
influence on the parties and stakeholders involved to
exercise their good offices to prevent the crisis from
becoming the greatest failure of the Organization since
its establishment.

