Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We express or gratitude
for the briefings by Mr. Alexander Zouev, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Irina Schoulgin Nyoni, Deputy
Permanent Representative of Sweden, on behalf of the
Chair of the Liberia configuration in the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Mr. Liberty, whose presentation
provided us with an encouraging perspective on
his country.

We are pleased by the political and social stability
that Liberia has been able to achieve since the
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), which ended its operations on 30 March. The
inclusive democratic process and the participation of
stakeholders at all levels in the political sphere, together
with the contribution of the international community
and the United Nations, have made it possible to
achieve the goal of stability that the people of Liberia
have longed for. We commend the work of UNMIL
and its leadership in fulfilling its mandate, including
monitoring the ceasefire and supporting the Liberian
Government's efforts to strengthen peace and stability,
as well as actively contributing to the protection of
civilians, training local security forces and working to
create a peaceful environment conducive to the holding
of the elections held last year.

We also acknowledge and emphasize the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which is intended
to support Liberia's efforts in the areas of security
sector reform, the rule of law, reconciliation and
national cohesion. Similarly, we believe that promoting
development in Liberia is a priority area. It is imperative
that peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development
programmes be integrated in a coherent manner so
as to respond effectively in the post-conflict context.
We are aware that Liberia must continue to deal with
important challenges - peacebuilding is a daily effort
that requires the active participation of all the people of
Liberia and of the entire international community.

We highlight the transfer ofsecurity responsibilities
to the Liberian authorities in connection with the
democratic process the main objective of which was
the holding of the October 2017 presidential and
representative elections and the transfer of political
and administrative power to the new Government in
January 2018. The important ties linking good practices,
inclusive dialogue and strengthening cooperation
between UNMIL and the Liberian Government have
made achieving that important milestone possible. We
also appreciate the outstanding contributions and good
offices provided by the African Union and subregional
organizations, exemplified par excellence by the
outcome of the summit conference of the Economic
Community of West African States Authority of Heads
of State held in June 2017, which led to the signing of
the Farmington River Declaration, pursuant to which
the majority of the Liberian political parties committed
to carrying out the peaceful holding of elections, which
was fully borne out by the electoral process.

We also underscore the outstanding work of
Ms. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, former President of Liberia,
who paved the way leading to the stability of her
country. We are confident that His Excellency President
George Weah will continue to lead the Government and
the people of Liberia on the path towards consolidating
the process of national reconciliation through inclusion
and combating impunity for abuses committed during
the civil war. Ensuring the welfare of the population, in
particular the most vulnerable groups, must be the main
interest leading towards stabilization and definitive
peace for the sole benefit of the Liberian people.

We would be remiss if we did not mention the
impact that the Ebola epidemic, which resulted in
a situation that went far beyond a mere health crisis.
Ebola and its rapid spread throughout Liberia caused
the humanitarian situation to deteriorate drastically
and that country to become the most affected in the
region, both by virtue of the number of deaths and of
cases reported. We believe that to be an urgent wake-up
call for the international community so that a crisis of
those proportions is never repeated in any country in
the world.

Lastly, we express our gratitude to UNMIL and
pay tribute to all the men and women of its military,
police and civilian components who spared no effort in
fulfilling its mandate, while demonstrating their deep
commitment over the past 15 years and successfully
concluding the work that has laid the groundwork for
prosperity in Liberia.

