Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we extend special thanks to the Chinese presidency for convening this debate on such a critical and worrying topic, which deserves our full attention and commitment. We are pleased with the presence and the words of Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and the briefings by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye, Assistant-Secretary-General and Special Adviser to the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme. The dramatic deterioration of security in West Africa, particularly in the States of the Sahel region - in Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger - as a result of violence caused by terrorism is simply alarming, having increased fivefold - according to known official estimates, to more than 4,000 reported deaths in 2019 compared to 2016. Together with the international community, the Dominican Republic expresses its strongest condemnation of the terrorist attacks that have caused these regrettable deaths, with the expression of our most heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims and our solidarity with the affected countries. Such a high number of unjustified deaths is an urgent call to be attentive and take bold and seamless measures, based on a profound reflection that not only assesses the limitations of these States in effectively confronting the presence and threats of terrorist groups and violent extremism leading to terrorism in their territories as an additional element that exacerbates conflicts in the region, but more importantly considers the causes that give rise to it, its spaces and its followers. We must pay particular attention to the dangerous connection and collaboration of terrorist groups among themselves and with transnational organized crime syndicates that engage in trafficking in drugs, human beings, illicit arms and cultural property, piracy, exploitation of natural resources, among many other crimes. It is a true synergy of evil that is weakening the structures of States, slowing their development and distorting their social fabric. Consequently, we advocate, as we always do, especially in the context of peace and security in Africa, a proactive and broad participation of women in the development of comprehensive strategies to address the structural causes of the security crisis and actions to combat terrorism and prevent violent extremism leading to terrorism, recognizing the role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, in peacebuilding and in the management of post-conflict situations. It is also important to strengthen the role, in particular in decision-making, and to address the needs of youth, who represent the vast majority of the population. This will require a holistic approach, with a focus on the whole of Government and all of society, including civil society organizations, in efforts to combat terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism, by creating development opportunities, such as education and jobs, and minimum guarantees of governance and security. At the same time, we continue to be concerned about the threat posed by the number of foreign terrorist fighters returning to their countries of origin or relocating to terrorist groups, which represents an enormous challenge for African countries both in terms of resources and logistics. In that regard, we call for ongoing international support to strengthen their capacities for prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration, among many other areas. The fight against terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism requires the full and effective implementation of the relevant resolutions, including those on the prevention and suppression of the financing of terrorism, as well as all relevant sanctions measures against individuals, groups, enterprises and associated entities. That is where cooperation among States and the support of subregional and regional organizations becomes indispensable. We therefore commend the efforts and progress made in that regard by African countries, the African Union and other subregional and regional entities, as well as the ongoing support of relevant entities of the United Nations system.
