Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this discussion. We welcome the
participation in today's meeting of Mr. Naranjo
Trujillo, Vice-President of Colombia, and we are
grateful to Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing. We believe it is
important to receive updated information in a timely
manner from the source.

In the year since the signing of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), the situation in
Colombia has shown positive momentum. The main
achievements have unquestionably been the completion
of the process of the rebels' surrender of their arms,
the transformation of the FARC into a political party
and the agreement on a temporary ceasefire with the
Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional. We firmly believe
that the main reason for those achievements has been
Colombians' declared national responsibility for their
peace process. With regard to the agreement with the
Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional, we hope that the
Colombian side will show the necessary political will
and take decisions as soon as possible that will enable
the Council to renew the corresponding mandate of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.

In general, we share the the Secretary-General's
assessments in his recent report on the situation in
the country (S/2017/1ll7). However, we do have some
comments to make.

We would like to draw attention to a paragraph in
the report about the security situation in various parts
of the country. The information refers not only to the
police and other national bodies, but also to the data
of some non-governmental organizations. We would
like an explanation as to why this information is not
presented as coming from the Secretary-General. The
same paragraph indicates that the data provided by
non-governmental organizations is consistent with
information in the possession of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, but the
Security Council did not request data from that body.

That is concerned more with organizational issues.
With regard to the situation in Colombia, the Secretary-
General's report suggests that there are signs that the
main task - the disarming of the FARC - has already
been accomplished. We consider that to be an extremely
dangerous delusion, especially in the absence of an
agreement with the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional.
Colombia will not succeed in achieving a durable
peace until every segment of society is satisfied with
the situation. Needless to say, on that front, we support
the work of the Verification Mission, which is now
focusing on just that - ensuring that Bogota fulfils
its obligations. Those efforts should be intensified,
especially in the run-up to the forthcoming elections.

