Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to thank you
for convening this meeting.

Peace is not merely the absence of armed conflict;
peace is harmony among the various sectors of society,
equitable relations among individuals and peoples, and the
rejection of Violence and hatred in human relations.

War often leads to other wars. Armed conflicts fuel
deep-rooted hatreds and provoke reprisals. Armed violence
is an ongoing offence against the dignity and the rights of
individuals. Genuine peace requires the commitment of
all, ex-combatants and civilians alike, in the task of
rebuilding and restoring normalcy to society. Peace
requires active brotherhood among all men. In short,
peace can exist only to the extent that we all recognize
that, as human beings, we are part of the same family.

This goal is not easy to attain. Normalizing human
and international relations after armed conflict phase is an
arduous undertaking. A ceasefire does not halt the
dynamic of Violence; hatred and the lust for vengeance
still remain. The temptation to use weapons and military
contingents remains latent. The logic of violence and
military strategy persists. Unless the combatants are
disarmed and demobilized, the prospects of peace will be
darkened by the ever-present threat of the resumption of
hostilities and violent crime.

In Central America we have witnessed first-hand the
importance of the tasks of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. On the one hand, we have seen the
achievements of the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador (ONUSAL) and the United Nations
Verification Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA).
Unquestionably, these missions were key actors in
restoring normalcy and peace to those societies.

On the other hand, in Central America we have also
witnessed failed processes of demobilization and
disarmament. We have seen cycles of revolutionary and
counter-revolutionary groups that continue to cause
suffering for innocent people. We have also seen the
overabundant supply of weapons that, at the end of an
armed conflict, like an epidemic, infects neighbouring
countries with violence, crime and destruction. In Costa
Rica we are well aware of the vital need to disarm
combatants and to destroy their weapons.

The stockpiling of arms and ammunition is a real
obstacle to peace processes and a direct threat to all
countries neighbouring a conflict zone. Costa Rica calls
for the destruction of these weapons and a ban on the
transfer of weapons to anyone who does not comply with
a set of strict international standards of conduct. In this
regard, my Government firmly supports the draft
international code of conduct on arms transfers, prepared
by the former President of Costa Rica, Mr. Oscar Arias
Sanchez, and endorsed by 19 other Nobel Peace Prize
laureates, both individuals and institutions. At the request
of my delegation, this draft code of conduct has been
distributed in document S/2000/ 146.

 

In addition, while peacekeeping operations can and
must provide valuable support to the tasks of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, Governments and groups
involved in the conflicts must assume the primary
responsibility. Political and military leaders of the warring
parties must show their commitment to peace by taking
concrete measures to demobilize and disband their military
contingents. If these tasks are carried out simultaneously on
both sides, they will help reduce tension, promote stability
and build confidence.

My delegation is particularly pleased to welcome the
emphasis placed in the report on the plight of children. It
is alarming that 300,000 boys and girls are now taking part
in armed conflicts. We believe that the participation of
minors under the age of 18 in armed conflicts, be they
combatants or support staff for armed forces, is in all
circumstances unacceptable. Children are the first and the
most defenceless victims of war. All Governments need to
demobilize those minors immediately, whether they are
members of the armed forces or support staff. Similarly,
Governments must actively promote the reintegration of
boys and girls who have been demobilized from opposition
armed forces. It is essential to provide psychological and
social help to these children in order to enable them to
make a full physical and emotional recovery and to be
reintegrated into society.
In particular, we believe that it is necessary to give
greater help to the families of demobilized children so that
they have an emotional support network and a structure of
ethical and moral values that will enable them to become
constructive members of their communities. In short, we
call for a society where families take precedence - not
barracks.

Finally, we cannot ignore the economic aspect of
peace processes. The reintegration of combatants requires
the establishment of employment opportunities and
development. If no alternatives are offered to war and crime
as economic activities, then military personnel will not have
a real incentives to demobilize. Extreme poverty, hunger
and discrimination are often sources of hatred and violence.
Equity, justice and solidarity are essential, fundamental
elements for the building of real and lasting peace.

