Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow me to echo my colleagues by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council and on its very effective
work last month. I wish also to thank Minister Lajcak,
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for his briefing.
Belgium associates itself fully with the three priorities
that he has just outlined with eloquence and, above all,
conviction. He can count on our full support.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe plays a key role in promoting dialogue in
a number of conflicts, from Nagorno Karabakh to
Transnistria, including the separatist territories of
Georgia. It contributes on a daily basis to reconciliation
efforts in the Balkans.

Today I wish to focus in particular on the situation in
Ukraine, which represents one of the greatest violations
ofnot only the founding principles of the OSCE but also
of the principles set out in the Charter of the United
Nations. In that respect, I wish to highlight the OSCE's
efforts to prevent a fresh escalation of the conflict. We
hail the vital work ofthe Special Monitoring Mission of
the OSCE as an observer and a facilitator of dialogue
among all parties to the crisis.

We deplore the obstacles hampering the effective
monitoring and reporting work of the Mission in
Ukraine. We strongly encourage the parties to the
conflict to respect the Mission's mandate and to give
it safe and unimpeded access to the entire territory
of Ukraine, including in Crimea and along the border
between Ukraine and Russia.

We join the call for a lasting political solution
to the conflict, which must be based on respect for
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. The full implementation of the
Minsk agreements is essential in that respect. We
continue to support ongoing efforts in the framework of
the Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group.

We are concerned about the situation regarding
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
attacks on human rights defenders and journalists
and growing intolerance in the many regions where
the OSCE is active. Respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of
law are essential to ensuring sustainable security. We
underscore our unwavering commitment to the human
dimension, which must be a common thread in the work
of the OSCE.

The OSCE makes a significant contribution to
preventing and combating transnational threats such as
terrorism, violent extremism and radicalization. In that
regard, we welcome the memorandum of understanding
agreed between the Office of Counter-Terrorism and
the OSCE. One of the most effective ways to promote
the implementation of the Council's resolutions and
strengthen the capacities of Member States is through
good collaboration between the Office of Counter-
Terrorism and regional organizations.

With 57 members, the OSCE is the largest regional
organization of the kind envisaged in Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. It plays an
indispensable role in the protection of an international
order based on law and the promotion of peace and
security in Europe. The various dimensions of the
OSCE reflect the idea of an integrated approach to
security and sustainable peace, an approach that the
Security Council should support.

