Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
responding positively to the request for an emergency
meeting of the Security Council to discuss the grave
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. It is a
situation that is getting worse by the hour. Blood is
being shed and innocent people are being killed. Hatred
is deepening, and the problem is becoming more
complicated. We are facing a very serious situation,
which makes it imperative for the Security Council to
intervene to stop the violence, destruction and killing,
to call for an immediate withdrawal by Israeli forces
from the Palestinian cities.

The Israeli troops going into Palestinian cities are
not going to achieve security for Israel. It only
reaffirms the true intentions behind the Israeli
occupation and aggression, accompanied by the horror
faced by the civilians. The killing of innocent victims
and the demolition of installations will not solve the
problem, nor stop the violence or counter-violence.

Previously, we reaffirmed before the Council that
the Middle East question is not a security problem but
an unjust, illegal occupation of Arab territories.
Therefore, we cannot discuss the Middle East from a
security perspective only. It has to be coupled with a
political solution that will achieve a full withdrawal
from all Arab territories occupied in 1967, in
accordance with international law and Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and General
Assembly resolution 194 (III).

The Arab Summit just held in Lebanon adopted
the initiative of the Crown Prince Abdullah ibn Abdul-
Aziz, an initiative that was welcomed by all countries
and that offered a glimmer of hope and a practical
solution to a conflict that is now more than half a
century old. The Arab Summit affirmed the aspiration
of all Arab countries to achieve peace and security for
all the peoples and countries of the region, to live in
friendship and as good neighbours, to establish normal
relations after a full Israeli withdrawal from all Arab
territories occupied in 1967, to establish an
independent Palestinian State with its capital in
Jerusalem, and to find a fair solution to the question of
refugees in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (1948).

The Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia affirmed in his
statement at the Arab summit that Israel is making a
most serious mistake if it thinks that it can impose an
unjust peace on the Arabs through force of arms. Peace
is an agreement freely entered into between two equal
parties. No peace based on oppression, suppression or
injustice can endure. The peace process was based on
the unambiguous principle of land for peace. This basis
was accepted by the entire international community
and was embodied in Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973). It was adopted in the Madrid
Conference of 1991, and it was affirmed by the
Security Council in resolution 1397 (2002).

We call upon the Security Council to assume its
responsibility in accordance with the United Nations
Charter, to intervene to stop Israeli aggression, to put
an end to violence and stop the bloodshed, and to
create an atmosphere allowing the parties concerned to
resume peace negotiations on all tracks. The Council
must adopt a resolution that would stop all acts of
aggression, lead to the withdrawal of Israeli forces
from Palestinian cities, implement the Tenet plan and
the Mitchell recommendations and reaffirm resolution
1397 (2002).

I would be remiss ifl did not refer here to the
efforts and good offices of the Secretary-General and
the efforts by his representatives in the Middle East to
help the parties concerned to stop acts of violence and
resume peace negotiations.

