Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Thank you, Mr.
President, for arranging this meeting, and thanks to
Under-Secretary-General Miyet for another extremely
useful briefing.

It is clear that Bosnia is heading towards a busy
autumn, or perhaps I should say fall. General elections
will be held in November. The Constitutional Court
ruling on the constituent people's issue and the recently
passed and amended law on the Izetbegovie succession
will continue to generate strong political debate. The
Stabilization Force and the Office of the High
Representative are actively working with local leaders
on taking forward defence restructuring, and, as Under-
Secretary-General Miyet has said, refugee returns are
continuing apace and with spontaneous returns in
particular raising the temperature locally, although of
course it is extremely welcome that the numbers of
people returning are going up.

Against this background, the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and
the International Police Task Force (IPTF) are to be
particularly commended for their sustained effort. It is
very clear that Special Representative Klein and his
team deserve our thanks and compliments for a very
well-executed programme. Particular congratulations
are due for the operational successes they have had,
such as the recent opening of more State Border
Service posts, to which Under-Secretary-General Miyet
and others around the table have referred. But it will be
particularly vital for UNMIBH to maintain its pressure
on the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to make real
progress in tackling the problems of smuggling,
organized crime and illegal immigration. As
Ambassador Chowdhury said, progress in Bosnia and
Herzegovina often depends on overcoming problems
and overcoming delays, and sustained pressure in that
area will continue to be vital.
It is also clear from the complex number of issues
going on at the moment in Bosnia and Herzegovina
that close cooperation and coordination between
UNMIBH and the other international organizations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be crucial as the reform
agenda moves forward, and I am sure that we can count
on Special Representative Klein and his staff to ensure
that that cooperation and coordination take place.

Finally, when Special Representative Klein
briefed the Council in June, he indicated that UNMIBH
had started work on an exit strategy for the Mission, a
point to which Ambassador Soderberg also referred.
We would welcome more details from Under-
Secretary-General Miyet of how this work is
progressing, and it would be helpful at an appropriate
stage to have sight of a written plan. It is clear that the
financial and personnel implications of the exit strategy
will need to be carefully considered by the United
Kingdom and other contributing countries as early as
possible. As work progresses, I should also stress the
importance of tying the exit strategy to the
achievement of specific objectives. Here again the
coordination with other international organizations
working in Bosnia and Herzegovina will be crucial.

