Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): We would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his very instructive briefing on
the situation in Kosovo. We also commend the
representative of the Government of Serbia and
Montenegro for his outstanding contribution to our
debate.

We greatly appreciated the report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), particularly its annex I, on the technical
assessment of the implementation of each of the eight
standards established by the provisional administration.
It has enabled us to take stock of what remains to be
done in order to achieve the objectives set by the
policy of "standards before status".

Our comments concern primarily the holding of
the legislative elections, the situation of minorities and
the promotion of economic development in the
province. In our view, the success of the first
legislative elections in Kosovo, organized by the
Provisional Institutions, are an important indicator of
positive developments in the situation in Kosovo after
the tragic events of March 2004. We attribute this to
the efforts of those who worked as fast as they could to
stabilize and normalize the situation in the province
and to create the conditions for the proper conduct of
the elections. The key role played by local institutions,
such as the Central Election Commission, is of
particular note. We also welcome the actions of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR),
which coordinated their actions to ensure the security
and order which are necessary for the holding of any
transparent and reliable election. Here, we note with
great satisfaction that the electoral campaign and the
balloting took place without irregularities and without
significant incident.

The lower level of voter turnout compared with
previous votes was regrettable. It is clear that the
situation would have been quite different if the events
of March 2004 had not taken place, if a considerable
number of potential voters had not been forced to leave
the province, and if the Serb authorities had cooperated
in carrying out the postal registration programme for
refugees and in a timely manner, had encouraged the
active and unconditional participation of the Kosovo
Serbs.

The report (S/2004/907) of the Secretary-General
cites, among the conditions laid down by the Serb
authorities, the establishment of internationally
recognized local Serb authorities in the areas populated
by Kosovo Serbs. Those demands seemed to us to run
counter to the vision of a multi-ethnic Kosovo, which
should be administered by local structures which are
neutral from an ethnic point of view. In our view, that
is the direction in which the planned reform of the
local Kosovo administration should go. Ethnic
exclusivity is a synonym for exclusion, and exclusion
is a source of frustration and conflict. We also have
concerns regarding the fact that Kosovo's Provisional
Institutions for their part have not energetically
encouraged increased minority representation. Progress
in Kosovo towards achieving political normalization
must also be measured in terms of the integration of
minorities.

We welcome the considerable efforts made to
repair the physical and psychological damage caused
by the events of March 2004. The rebuilding of houses
and schools has been most encouraging. However, acts
of vandalism against such rebuilt but not yet reclaimed
houses are particularly harmful and undermine
confidence-building measures designed to promote the
return of displaced persons. Such acts must therefore
be condemned with the utmost vigour. It is regrettable
that the authorities of Kosovo's Provisional Institutions
have not expressly condemned those acts. The return of
displaced persons must be considered as a decisive
element in assessing the process of normalization. We
urge UNMIK and KFOR to increase their activities
aimed at ensuring the freedom of movement of
minorities wherever it is threatened. Security must be
provided in such a way as to inspire confidence in all
communities.

The battle against impunity for acts of harassment
against minorities must be strengthened and must be a
priority for UNMIK and for the new Ministry for
community matters, human rights and returns. We
welcome the decision taken by the political leaders of
Kosovo to create that new Ministry, and we consider it
a timely one. The ministry can and must become
involved in advancing dialogue between the
communities, with Belgrade and with the region. That
is the best way to ensure cohesion among the various
ethnic groups in Kosovo. The Ministry must do
everything possible to provide all of those groups with
conditions conducive to their full development. Here,
we encourage the search for the broadest possible
consensus on implementing the planned comprehensive
and integrated strategy - a strategy which takes into
account the subregional approach in creating a process
for determining the future of the province of Kosovo.

In conclusion, we fully share the view of the
Secretary-General regarding the importance of
accelerating the economic development of the
province. That must form an essential theme of the
long-term strategy, and the reforms needed to ensure it
must be tirelessly carried out. We welcome the
dynamic process of privatization and the possible
establishment of an investment promotion agency, as
well as the rationalization of tax policies. Those
measures are necessary for strengthening the
foundation of the market economy in the province, as
well as for protecting property rights, which can
greatly contribute towards stabilizing Kosovo.

