Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset we wish to express our
condolences to Turkey with respect to the destructive
earthquake that hit the country, which has claimed
human lives.

We are grateful to Mr. Pascoe for his briefing on
developments in the Middle East. We share his
concerns with respect to the stalemate in the process of
a Middle East settlement.

As of today, resumption of direct Israeli-
Palestinian talks continues to be one of the most
pressing tasks. It is distressing that the parties have yet
to progress towards establishing an atmosphere of
mutual trust, which is an important condition for a
serious and productive dialogue.
At the same time, one must be encouraged by the
fact that despite certain pessimistic forecasts, this past
September did not lead to any major upheavals. What
is more, the Quartet of Middle East mediators has
stepped up its work, within which intensive efforts are
under way to narrow the differences of the parties. We
would like to highlight the Quartet's statement adopted
on 23 September in New York, reaffirming the
importance and inviolability of the entire international
legal basis for the Middle East settlement, including
the well-known Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles - including the key principle of
land for peace - and the Road Map and previous
agreements between the parties.

Nevertheless, the authorities in Israel, in violation
of the norms and principles of international law and
ignoring the view of members of the Quartet, continue
to authorize the construction of more and more housing
units in the occupied territories. We are particularly
concerned that such decisions are adopted at a crucial
time for the future of the peace process. We believe
that settlement activities are a primary impediment to a
two-State solution. They undermine the painstaking
efforts of the international community to relaunch the
dialogue and dash existing hopes.

Now more than ever, the parties need to take
steps towards each other, and not unilateral steps that
change the situation on the ground and prejudice the
final parameters for a settlement. Israel must reassess
its plans for construction in East Jerusalem and cease
its demolition of Palestinian structures.

Despite the troublesome situation in the
Palestinian-Israeli area, Russia, as a member of the
Quartet, together with its partners, is prepared to use
any opportunity to advance towards peace in the
region. We anticipate that the Quartet's planned
contacts on 26 October with representatives of the
parties will help get the peace process moving again.

With respect to the official application of
Palestine to the United Nations for membership, we
believe that this bid is logical and legitimate. We
recognized the Palestinian State as early as 1988 and
are prepared to support the request of the Palestinians
again. We believe their State meets all criteria in the
United Nations Charter with respect to future Members
of the world Organization.

Our view is that Palestine's application for
membership in no way contradicts the negotiated peace
process or diminish its prospects. Quite the contrary; it
is complementary. It is important that the leadership of
the Palestine National Authority has unequivocally and
repeatedly emphasized its readiness to continue the
quest for ways to resume negotiations.

Our sense is that despite the dire calls since
September in the relations between the parties there
has been some positive points. This is seen in the
exchange of the Israeli soldier, Gilad Shalit, for more

than one thousand Palestinian prisoners. That is an
important humanitarian gesture of goodwill that
contributes to an overall improvement of the situation
in the region and of the atmosphere in terms of the
Palestinian-Israeli relationship. The Russian Federation
has supported the mediation efforts in this area,
including during our contacts with the leadership of
Hamas.

This arrangement gives us every reason to
anticipate that the parties will be able to move towards
addressing other sensitive issues as well, above all in
terms of improving the humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip. We share the view of those who call for
lifting all restrictions on the movement of goods in and
out of Gaza, particularly with respect to building
materials.

The inter-Palestinian reconciliation continues to
be an imperative. The leaders of all Palestinian forces,
especially Fatah and Hamas, need to step up their
efforts to consolidate the Palestinian ranks. We would
also like to call for progress on other tracks of a
Middle East settlement, including the Syrian and
Lebanese tracks. Without advancing on them, a lasting,
comprehensive and just settlement in the Middle East
is not possible.

With respect to the situation in Syria, which some
colleagues have touched upon, the Security Council
has been able and will continue to be able to put in its
constructive word, as was just done with respect to
Yemen. The Russian-Chinese draft resolution on the
situation in Syria, which is aimed at a settlement and
not at inciting conflict, continues to be available to
Council members. It is clear that the strategy of certain
members of the international community with respect
to Syria, consistiing of threats and pressure that worsen
the situation in the country through sanctions, does not
work. We are encouraged by recent initiatives and steps
proposed by the League of Arab States with regard to
the Syrian Arab Republic.

