The President: I now call on the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.

Mr. Fall (Senegal), Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People (spoke in French): Mr. President, I
am sure that you can understand how pleased I am to
see you presiding over the work of the Council, given
the key role that your country, the United States, is
playing in trying to achieve a negotiated and peaceful
settlement in the Israeli-Arab conflict, and also because
of the skill, determination and resolve with which you
personally are carrying out your tasks as Permanent
Representative.

I wish to convey to you, Sir, and to your
predecessor from the United Kingdom, my warmest
congratulations on a very fruitful presidency, and I
wish warmly to thank you for giving the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People the opportunity to take
part in this important discussion on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine -
most especially at a time when the Israeli Government
is persevering relentlessly with the construction of a
so-called security wall in the occupied West Bank and
in the environs of East Jerusalem.

Once again we have come before the Council,
this time to consider the implications and consequences
of a decision that is controversial, to say the least -
the decision taken by an Israeli Government, which,
deaf to all appeals and confident of its impunity, is
persisting in the unlawful construction in the occupied
West Bank of a wall that in many places is located to
the east of the Green Line.

According to a range of substantiated reports and
testimony, the separation wall would cut as much as six
kilometres into the West Bank, separating tens of
thousands of Palestinians from their own environment
while hermetically sealing off a number of Palestinian
communities and areas. This would have grave
consequences, undermining the territorial continuity of
the future Palestinian State and thus prejudging the
outcome of negotiations on final status.

To make matters worse, on 31 July the Israeli
Defence Minister announced the completion of the first
phase of that tremendous undertaking, which extends
along some 145 kilometres and which resulted in the
demolition of a large number of Palestinian houses and
in the unlawful confiscation of more than 1,000
hectares of very fertile Palestinian land.

Worse still, the Israeli authorities have even
issued expropriation decrees, with a View to building
the so-called Jerusalem envelope fence, which would
confine some 50,000 Palestinians on the Israeli side,
cut off from the rest of Palestine. Built on Palestinian
land, the wall geographically separates the Palestinian
people and deprives them of their lands, their crops,
their employment and essential public services, in
particular in the areas of health and education.

In what has been denounced as provocation or an
act of arrogance, the Israeli Government, according to
recent reports, has just approved the second phase of
the building of the Elkana wall in Jerusalem, where a
distinct network of fences is apparently being built.
Together with the United Nations and the Quartet, our
Committee is deeply concerned at the dangers of a
project designed to build this wall to the east of the
Ariel, Kedumim and Immanuel settlements, thus
extending the wall into areas which are 20 kilometres
within the West Bank.

In breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention, these
construction projects will have the effect of creating
walled enclaves in which thousands of Palestinians
would be confined in open-air detention camps, as the
President of Doctors without Borders has described
them. He, along with other observers, has denounced
the Israeli policy of "confining a whole people within a
pitiless system of domination and segregation".

For those reasons, our Committee has
consistently expressed its concerns at the construction
of the wall, although we understand perfectly well
Israel's legitimate right to create security structures -
on its own territory, however, not on that of another
people and contrary to its wishes. Therefore, the
Council will understand the general consternation over
the scope of the construction work and the speed of its
execution, which bode ill for the outcome of the
ongoing negotiations on the final status and
establishment of a unified Palestine State.

The wall is not only provoking resentment on the
part of the Palestinian population, but is also
aggravating tensions in an already devastated region
and undermining stability for the long term, if not
irreparably. Sadly, despite repeated appeals from the
international community - particularly the Quartet of
mediators and including Tel Aviv's own allies and
friends - the Israeli Government is calmly proceeding
to build this new infrastructure of hostility, deliberately
taking the historic risk of obliterating the prospects of
creating a unified Palestinian State - a vision that
conforms to that of President Bush - and of
annihilating the Palestinian Authority's praiseworthy
efforts to induce the people to adopt measures
promoting the peace process.

That is why it is essential that the international
community - particularly the Security Council -
persuade, if not compel, Israel to halt the construction
of this wall and to dismantle the structures already
built. Doing that will send a clear message of firm
opposition to the building of this despicable wall,
whose objective is to annex Palestinian lands on the
basis of a fait accompli on the ground.

We implore the Council to do everything
possible- with the Quartet's assistance- to bring
about a reactivation of the road map, which remains the
best alternative and the only way available to
simultaneously guarantee security for the Israelis, the
creation of an independent State for the Palestinians,
and peace and stability in the entire region.

The heart of the conflict lies in Israel's
perpetuation of the illegal occupation of the Palestinian
territory and in the commission of illegal acts related to
that occupation.

In conclusion, I urge the Israeli leaders and their
allies and friends, as well as all the members of the
Security Council, to reflect on the very lucid,
responsible and Promethean appeal by the Israeli
Member of Parliament Avraham Burg, former President
of the Knesset:

"We must remove all the settlements - all of
them- and draw an internationally recognized
border between the Jewish national home and the
Palestinian national home. The Jewish Law of
Return will apply only within our national home,
and their right of return will apply only within the
borders of the Palestinian State."

There is no doubt that Israel must make clear
choices, as urged by the former President of the
Knesset:

"... Jewish racism or democracy, settlements or
hope for both peoples, false visions of barbed
wire, roadblocks and suicide bombers, or a
recognized international border between two
states and a shared capital in Jerusalem."

May those words inspire us all - and first and
foremost our Israeli friends.

The President: The Permanent Observer of
Palestine has requested the floor to make a further
statement.


