Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia): At the outset, I wish to join my colleagues in
wishing Ms. Samantha Power and her family happiness,
peace and love.

(spoke in Spanish)

Allow me to express the gratitude of my delegation
for the report presented by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, the
statement made by the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union, Mr. Joao Vale de Almeida, as well as
for the report presented by the Permanent Representative
of Italy, Mr. Sebastiano Cardi, as facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) - which was negotiated by Germany, China,
the United States of America, the Russian Federation,
France, the United Kingdom, the High Representative
of the European Union and the Islamic Republic of
Iran - was adopted on 14 July 2015. On 20 July, the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2231
(2015), in which it endorsed the JCPOA. The Security
Council affirmed that the implementation of the Plan
of Action would contribute to building trust in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme
and highlighted the fact that the Plan promotes and
facilitates the normal development of cooperation and
economic and trade contacts with the Islamic Republic
of Iran.

That moment in recent history represented a
qualitative step forward when compared to other
conflicts facing humankind. As such, it was doubtlessly
a victory for multilateralism over unilateralism. It
was a victory for the respect of the equality of all
United Nations Member States over interventionism.
It was a victory for negotiation over compulsion. It
was a victory of diplomacy against the use of force,
and a clear illustration that diplomacy cannot and
should not be entrenched in fixed positions. Instead,
diplomacy should help us to build bridges, encourage
rapprochement and identify mutual interests that allow
us to resolve our disputes peacefully.

As has been expressed here today, it was not only
the fact that we reached this agreement that fills us
with a deep sense of satisfaction and hope, but the
implementation of the agreement as well. Iran - and
we should all recognize this - has met its obligations.
In addition, the United Nations, the European Union
and the United States have lifted sanctions related to
the matter.

The International Atomic Energy Agency has
asked the Security Council to undertake the necessary
verification and monitoring of Iran's fulfilment of its
obligations in the nuclear sphere with regard to the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) (see S/2016/589). Allow me
to point out that I do this not only in my capacity as
Permanent Representative of Bolivia, but also as a
member of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, a nuclear-weapon-free zone. We hope
to soon see the day when the Middle East in its entirety
will also be a zone declared free of nuclear weapons.
And we have not given up on the dream that our entire
planet will one day be free of these weapons, which
represent a serious threat, not only to international
peace and security, but also to the very survival of our
species and Mother Earth.
The report presented today pursuant to the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) shows
progress in the review of each case, and encourages us
to ensure that each review is independent, impartial,
comprehensive and conclusive, based on reliable
information, and its results duly verified. We are of
the view that when additional information is required,
the Secretariat should use all the necessary sources of
information so that it can include in its report those cases
that have been brought to its attention. We highlight
that the aforesaid is aimed only at contributing to the
continuity of the work undertaken by the Secretary-
General with regard to the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015).

In conclusion, we believe it vital that the next report
to be submitted to this body deal with the provisions of
annexes A and B of resolution 2231 (2015).

