Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the leadership of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for the report (see S/2018/569) on its activities.
We have been closely following its work, including all
the judicial proceedings under way.

Going on the report, since our previous briefing
(see S/PV.8278) the Mechanism's work has largely
come to a standstill. It is increasingly reminiscent of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) in the worst periods of its existence. We have
recently been alarmed as we have witnessed judges
being reshuffled, especially those presiding over the
Appeals Chamber. All of that chaos goes back a long
way and is specifically rooted in the irresponsible
approach to the procedure for selecting the judges in
the Radovan Karadfic' and Ratko Mladic' appeal cases.
As we all know, the Security Council and the General
Assembly have added a number of new names to the
roster of judges. But the Mechanism's leadership still
sees to it that it is those who worked under the ICTY
who have the most to do with those cases. Hence
the problems.

We have studied all the publicly available
information on the Mechanism's recent rulings in
the Mladic and Karadeic' cases. It seems that amid
the procedural skirmishing and mutual settling of
scores, the Mechanism's leaders have forgotten that
they hold in their hands the fate of human beings who
are expecting to see justice fairly done. However, the
Council is being asked to simply resign itself to the
fact that it will have to wait several more months for a
decision on the Karadeie case while the new presiding
judge in the Appeals Chamber familiarizes himself the
case file. We hope he will not need as much time as his
counterpart in the Vojislav Seselj case.

We have taken note of Judge Joensen's decision
not to refer a contempt-of-court case to the Rwandan
authorities. As we understand it, he believes that
the trial will very probably begin and end faster if it
remains under the Mechanism. We would like to hope
for that. We will see how things actually pan out.

The problems of providing the accused with timely
and appropriate medical care are also still on the
agenda. We are still concerned about the casual attitude
to Ratko Mladie's health and we have repeatedly
demanded that he receive high-quality examinations
and treatment. We reiterate that if that task is beyond
the Mechanism's prison doctors, Mr. Mladie should be
temporarily released for treatment in Russia or Serbia.

Our attention has once again been drawn to the
sections of the report on the Residual Mechanism's
capacity-building assistance to national judicial bodies
that are prosecuting war-crimes cases. I feel obliged to
point out that there is no such mandate for the Office of
the Prosecutor in the Mechanism's founding documents,
and certainly none for such work in countries that
have no relation to the situations under the Residual
Mechanism's jurisdiction. We once again urge the
Mechanism to cease its inappropriate expenditure
of the financial and human resources allocated to it.
We expect it not to be distracted by tasks outside its
remit according to the Statute and to focus on fulfilling
the functions assigned to it as quickly and effectively
as possible.

