Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China has followed closely the situation in the Sudan
12-32731

and South Sudan, and has been deeply concerned over
the recent deterioration of relations between the two
countries. We hope that both countries will remain on
the path of peace, put an immediate end to all
hostilities and violence, fully respect each other's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and restore peace
and stability along their borders as soon as possible.
We hope that they shall fully implement the existing
agreements in good faith, resolve the outstanding
issues through dialogue and negotiations, and make
joint efforts to forge good-neighbourly and friendly
relations of equality, mutual trust and mutual benefit.

China has always maintained that the
international community should take an objective,
impartial and balanced position on the question of the
Sudan and South Sudan, avoid taking sides or imposing
unbalanced pressure on the parties, and refrain from
interfering in the mediation efforts of the African
Union and other organizations and countries of the
region. We are always very cautious about the use or
threat of sanctions.

In the meantime, China has always maintained
that African issues should be resolved by Africans
using African means. We commend and support the
unremitting efforts of the African Union (AU) to
promote the settlement of the issues between the Sudan
and South Sudan, and welcome the road map adopted
by the African Union in that regard. We hope that the
Sudan and South Sudan will actively cooperate with
the mediation efforts of the African Union and the
international community, take practical steps to
implement the AU road map, and seek an early and
appropriate resolution of the relevant issues.

Taking the AU position and requests concerning
the situation between the Sudan and South Sudan into
account, China voted in favour of resolution 2046
(2012) a few moments ago. China will continue to play
a positive and constructive role, alongside the
international community, in promoting the proper
resolution of issues between the Sudan and South
Sudan.

