Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation highly appreciates this
open debate held under your presidency, Sir. Maintaining
international peace and security is the lofty responsibility
entrusted to the Council by the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as by the vast number of United Nations
Member States. Therefore, it is extremely useful for the
Council to listen to Member States' views on the major
issues of principle concerning international peace and
security.

The world is undergoing profound changes at the
turn of the century. The desire for peace, stability and
development has become the shared understanding and
common pursuit of all Member States of this
Organization. In regions where war and conflicts persist,
such as Africa and Central Asia in particular, putting an
end to conflicts at an early date so as to create a secure
environment for their socio-economic development has
become the international community's top priority, and
thus calls for the meaningful support and assistance of the
United Nations. The Council's primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security is both
unshirkable and irreplaceable.

Today, the Chinese delegation would like to reiterate
in particular that it is necessary for the Council to respond
positively to the repeated appeals of African countries and
to translate its attention to African issues into concrete
deeds. The Council should play an especially constructive
role in connection with the questions of Somalia, Sierra
Leone, the Great Lakes region and so forth. It should take
into serious consideration the reasonable requests of
Africa, effectively assist and coordinate with African
efforts and give active support to regional organizations,
such as the Organization of African Unity, that require
funds and technical expertise.

In recent years, the Council has become more, rather
than less, involved in the internal conflicts of some
countries. The Chinese delegation has always held that the
Council should strictly adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter, act upon the consent or request
of the country concerned and make every endeavour to
help resolve conflicts through peaceful means. We are not
in favour of interfering in a country's internal affairs
under the pretext of alleviating humanitarian crises or the
frequent Wielding of military threats or intervention by
invoking Chapter VII of the Charter.

The Chinese delegation would like to emphasize
here that all multinational military actions authorized by

 

the Council should strictly conform to norms set by the
Council and standardize the mechanism of fulfilling
responsibilities to the Council, reporting to the Council and
accepting the Council's political guidance. China is strongly
opposed to any act of power politics that unilaterally resorts
to the use or threat of the use of force in international
relations while circumventing the Council. In our view,
such an act violates international law and the norms
governing international relations and is in itself a grave
threat to international peace and security.

Maintaining and consolidating peace after conflict
requires enormous efforts. In regions where war has just
ended, effective support and assistance from the
international community are necessary, since the political
and security structures in such regions are still delicate and
their social economy has been severely damaged. China
supports the active involvement of the United Nations
system in efforts for peace consolidation and peace-building
in post-conflict regions. We would like to make the
following three observations in this connection.

First, equal attention should be given to all post-
conflict regions. We have noted with concern that certain
hot issues have become the focus of attention while others
have been unfairly put on the back burner. We see that in
some places where there is no longer a threat to
international peace and security, United Nations
peacekeeping operations are still on the ground, while at the
same time other places, such as Africa, which are
experiencing much harsher humanitarian and economic
situations, are stuck in various difficulties in obtaining
capital assistance and United Nations involvement. The
Chinese delegation calls for the elimination of such
practices of double standards in meting out post-conflict
assistance.

Secondly, in the peace consolidation process in post-
conflict regions, international efforts should be attuned to
the will of the country concerned. The international
community should get involved only on the basis of the
commitment to maintaining the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of the country
concerned. The way of development chosen by the people
of the country concerned should be respected. Consideration
should be given to the most pressing needs of the country
concerned: the funds and technical assistance that it needs
most in its rehabilitation and development. China has
always been opposed to attaching political conditions to
assistance, and even more strongly opposed to the practice
of using involvement in post-conflict peace-building to
promote specific value systems or achieve political ends.

Thirdly, frankly speaking, what is most needed in
post-conflict reconstruction is capital and technical
assistance. The Chinese delegation maintains that the role
and capacity of United Nations organs in the socio-
economic field should be strengthened. We are gravely
concerned at the marginalization of relevant United
Nations functions, including those of the Economic and
Social Council, on major international economic
development and assistance issues. We are even more
strongly opposed to the weakening of the role of United
Nations organs in the socio-economic fields, on the one
hand, while placing a large load of social issues on the
Security Council agenda, on the other. We are not in
favour of placing all the problems of all conflict areas in
the hands of the Security Council, not least on the ground
of the division of work among the various organs of the
Organization. That is not good for the normal functioning
of other United Nations bodies, including the General
Assembly, which is composed of all States Members of
the United Nations. At the same time, such practices
might affect priorities in the Security Council's work and
impair its efficiency. We believe that it would be helpful
for the maintenance of international peace and for the
promotion of world development if the United Nations
and, in particular, the Security Council were to improve
its practices with regard to those three elements.

