Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We join in congratulating your delegation and your
presidency, Mr. President, for the effectiveness and the
leadership you have shown throughout the month of
August. We also thank you for convening this wrap-up
session.

We welcome your choice of conflict prevention
as the theme of your presidency. We also welcome the
holding of the open debate (see S/PV.7247) and the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2171 (2014). That
reaffirms the commitment of Member States and of the
Council to the peaceful settlement of disputes through
mechanisms established in the Charter of the United
Nations and elsewhere, based on the principle of free
choice and the strictest respect for international law and
international treaties in force. That made it possible to

acknowledge the need to continue working on the use,
implementation and improvement of the mechanisms
for prevention and early warning that we rely on today
and the need to improve communication among the
various actors of the system and of the system with civil
society.

An analysis of the Council's efficiency must
necessarily include its response to the situation in
Gaza. We welcome the consensus reached among the
members on the idea that the status quo in Gaza is
unsustainable and on the need to address at one time
the issues underlying the conflict. We hope that after
the ceasefire agreed between the parties last Tuesday,
26 August, the Council can speak in a firm and
consistent manner on this issue, shouldering its role in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

A forward-looking analysis indicates that the
situation in Iraq will continue to occupy a central
place on our agenda. We believe that the adoption of
resolution 2170 (2014), on terrorism in Iraq and Syria,
which Chile co-sponsored, will provide us a useful tool
that will enable us to be prepared. The adoption of that
resolution shows that the Security Council, when it
so intends, is capable of finding, quickly and through
dialogue, common elements to contribute to tackling
serious threats to international peace and security.

The Council's visit to Europe and Africa was a
milestone in the month's work and has special value
in supporting the discussions in New York. While
this has already been discussed, at our meeting on
19 August (see S/PV.7245), I would like to mention
that we appreciate the fact that in both South Sudan
and Somalia we met with civil society and women's
groups and could pass along the message on the need to
ensure their full and effective participation throughout
all stages of the political processes.

Finally, we would like to point out that for my
delegation it was a special honour to co-chair, together
with Luxembourg, the segment on the international
courts and tribunals in The Hague. This reflects
the standing commitment of Chile to the peaceful
settlements of disputes.

We welcome the presidency of the United States
delegation and we wish it all the best.

