Ms. Adamson (European Union): I would first like
to express our condolences to our Egyptian, Swedish
and Somalian colleagues for the recent attacks in
their countries.

(spoke in French)

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union and its member States. The candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/223) and the Special Representative for her
briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Haiti for his statement.

The European Union is pleased that the long period
of institutional instability in the electoral process in
Haiti is finally over. The completion of the electoral
process resulted in the transparent and credible election
of a President by an ample majority and a renewed
National Assembly. A new Government has been
formed, and its programme has the support of the new
National Assembly. We congratulate the Haitian people
and their political stakeholders. Despite enormous
difficulties and the weaknesses in their system, they
have succeeding in restoring constitutional order to the
country based on the will of the voters, something that
Haiti desperately needs ifit is to tackle its many political,
economic, social and environmental challenges.

As has been the case for the past few years, the
efforts of all to ensure stability and security will
continue to be crucial to the process of democratic
consolidation. Thorough reform of the electoral system,
agreed on by consensus, will be key to avoiding new
crises and regaining the people's trust. In that context
and while we regret the fact that the mandate of the
United Nations Independent Expert on human rights
has not been renewed, we emphasize how important
it is to ensure that the Government's new structures
and mechanisms for protecting human rights take
up and further develop the Expert's work so far. The
European Union will continue to be a faithful partner
to the Republic of Haiti and is committed to supporting
it in this sensitive phase, in consultation with its
other partners.

The European Union is one of Haiti's major donors
in emergencies and for development, as its response
following the recent devastating effects of Hurricane
Matthew testified. The member States of the European
Union and the European Commission have launched
a series of short-, medium- and long-term actions
ranging from immediate assistance to assistance for
reconstruction and prevention amounting to tens of
millions of euros.

We take note of the Secretary-General's proposal to
close the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and replace it with a reduced presence
focused on consolidating the rule of law and the police
service, with the principal aim of supporting political
stability and good governance, including election
monitoring and reform. MINUSTAH plays a key role
in providing political stability and security in Haiti,
including by ensuring security during particularly
difficult times, such as the recent holding of elections.
We must, therefore, consider making decisions
with commensurate caution and responsibility in
the framework of a permanent dialogue with the
Haitian authorities.

Furthermore, the European Union believes that the
security situation in Haiti needs to be closely followed,
as was recently illustrated by the attack against former
President Aristide, which could have had serious
consequences for public order and the stability of the
country. We therefore believe that it is essential to
continue the work of strengthening the Haitian police.

When the time comes, during the transition period,
it will be essential to ensure a well-prepared continuity.
The security and welfare of citizens, as well as the
stability of the country, are at stake. In that regard,
we welcome the emphasis placed on issues relating
to the rule of law and human rights in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/223), and we encourage
further clarification on the steps to be taken and
future responsibilities.

In conclusion, I would like once again to express the
appreciation of the European Union for the fundamental
contribution made by MINUSTAH in terms of security,
democracy-building and the rule of law in Haiti. It is
now necessary that the sequence of events that will
ultimately make the Haitian State fully responsible for
the security and protection of its citizens be precisely
defined, planned and fully implemented in close
consultation with the new Haitian authorities.

With the United Nations and the international

community, the European Union will support the
Haitian authorities, so that they can strengthen their
commitment and efforts to ensure a better future
in peace, democracy and the well-being of all the
Haitian people.

