Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): Since I am taking the floor for the first time
during your presidency, Sir, on behalf of my delegation
I would like to sincerely congratulate you on your
thoughtful stewardship of the Council's work for the
month of October.

As described in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/922), the situation in the Central African
Republic remains a source of serious concern in the
light of the clashes and attacks on civilians in the
past few weeks. The briefings by Mr. Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), Mr. Bedializoun Moussa Nebie, Special
Representative of the African Union to the Central
African Republic, and Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing
Director for Africa of the European External Action
Service, included information that makes us realize that
there are still many obstacles on the road ahead, despite
the commendable progress that has been made in the
quest for ways and means to achieve peace. The violent
atmosphere created by the clashes between armed
groups vying for control of land and access to natural
resources shows that much remains to be done. As the
report suggests, the continuing climate of instability
created by the armed groups means that the risk of a
relapse into crisis is still serious. However, thanks to
the efforts under way in many different areas, we can
hope for a future free of this fear.

I strongly support all of the report's recommendations
and observations as well as other proposals such as
those of the Peacebuilding Commission. We feel we
can legitimately hope that if these recommendations
are implemented in drafting the resolution renewing
MINUSCA's mandate, we have a real chance to make
progress towards a sustainable settlement of the crisis
in the Central African Republic. The briefings by the
two Special Representatives highlighted every aspect
of the crisis. What is important is ensuring that we
faithfully heed the proposed recommendations and
comments with a view to giving MINUSCA a more
robust new mandate.

The Secretary-General's report clearly shows that
my country is still a long way from regaining peace
and stability, despite enormous efforts on the part of the
international community, including the Member States
represented here and the United Nations itself, through
MINUSCA. I want to note that the Government has
worked closely in every way with its partners and with
MINUSCA in implementing political and security
strategies aimed at defusing the crisis, without success.
The report highlights shortcomings on the part of the
Government, MINUSCA and partners in the provision
of resources for implementing the policies and strategies
we have devised.

MINUSCA alone cannot provide sustainable
protection for civilians across the entire country.
Training and equipping our national defence and security
forces should be a top priority for our partners, given
that the national authorities' resources are practically
non-existent. In that regard, I would like to quote the
Secretary-General in paragraph 66 of his report:

"The peace process in the Central African
Republic is contingent on security conditions
conducive for dialogue. The effective negotiation
and implementation of any outcome will need to be
backed by credible, adequate and sustained military
pressure to prevent any further strengthening or
expansion of the armed groups."

That recommendation, together with the commitment
of our partners to respecting my country's priorities
in terms of peacebuilding, and to providing adequate
resources to the United Nations system so that it can
deliver on its agenda, can create the conditions we need
to restore the peace and stability in the Central African
Republic that we so desire.

Finally, I would like to thank all the members of
the Security Council for their encouraging statements.
We are particularly grateful to the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic for
his leadership in managing the sanctions regime. My
delegation looks forward eagerly to the important work
of the French delegation in presenting us with a draft
resolution adapted to the new tasks to be entrusted to
MINUSCA and its Head of Mission.

