Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. President,
to the Security Council.
First and foremost, I would like to echo the words
of condolence that my colleagues have expressed to the
American people and to the family and friends of the
forty-first President of the United States of America,
the late Mr. George Herbert Walker Bush. He served
his country faithfully, first on the field of battle during
the war years and then in high governmental positions.
Mr. Bush did much to strengthen Russian-American
cooperation on matters of international security and
earned sincere respect in my country.

We thank you, Sir, for organizing today's Security
Council meeting on post-conflict peacebuilding, and
we are grateful to the Secretary-General for his views
and for his serious attention to peacebuilding issues.

For many years United Nations peacebuilding
assistance has been an important tool for helping States
to deal with the consequences of conflicts. As a rule,
countries that have survived the hot phase of a crisis
do not have the human and institutional resources to
resolve the whole complex of problems facing them
on the security, law-and-order and socioeconomic
development fronts, as well as other pressing issues,
which is why they may need international assistance.
At that sensitive stage, the main tasks for a country
are establishing national reconciliation and restoring
safe living conditions for its population as a whole, as
crucial conditions for preventing relapses into armed
conflict and transitioning to sustainable development.

Many issues related to the early stages of
peacebuilding are included in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In fulfilling their
main task of helping to advance peace processes,
peacekeepers make an important contribution to
establishing the initial conditions for the start ofa full-
fledged recovery. However, it should be understood
that peacebuilding's key efforts take place at the
national level. Those efforts do not consist in a short
list of objectives but in a long process that begins
before the drawdown of a United Nations mission and
continues afterwards right up until all the goals have
been successfully implemented. In that way it differs
from international peacebuilding assistance, which
is necessary only until the host State achieves self-
sufficiency - that is, the ability to exist without critical
support from the international community.

As we have seen in practice, the help that is
provided during a conflict is not always effective, since
it is often impossible to consolidate its positive results
and the processes have to be started again from scratch
in the event of a relapse into conflict. International
peacebuilding assistance therefore gets results only
when it is accompanied by a sustainable truce and a
political process.

While the primary responsibility for developing and
implementing peacebuilding strategies unquestionably
belongs to Governments, all national stakeholders
should recognize their shared responsibility for peace.
It is difficult to conceive of effective post-conflict
recovery, let alone development, without constructive
contributions from all segments of society.

As for international support, it should be based on
the Security Council's fundamental resolutions 1645
(2005) and 2282 (2016), which outline the basic principles
of peacebuilding - the consent of host States, respect
for its sovereignty and political independence, and
the recognition of national ownership and leadership.
Needless to say, international peacebuilding assistance
should aim to enhance host States' national capacity and
independence, not act as a substitute for their functions.

With regard to the work of the United Nations in
the area of peacebuilding, it is important to strengthen
its internal coordination and maintain its division of
labour in accordance with the existing mandates of
the various Secretariat departments. In developing
peacebuilding assistance programmes, it is important
to bear in mind that each country's situation is unique
and each has its own reasons for where it has ended
up. A one-size-fits-all approach simply will not work.
Every option for international peacebuilding assistance
must have the unconditional support of the host State or
risk exacerbating existing problems.

The key role in coordinating peacebuilding
assistance belongs to the Peacebuilding Commission.
That intergovernmental advisory body's potential has
still not been fully realized. It would be particularly
helpful to the Security Council to have information
about the national peacebuilding priorities of States
whose situations are on both bodies' agendas. The
transmission of that information and the Commission's
unanimous advice could be an excellent complement
to the Secretary-General's reports without duplicating
them. That would be especially helpful during the
transition from the peacekeeping to the peacebuilding
stage, or when the Council reviews missions with a
view to increasing their cost effectiveness. Needless
to say, where financing United Nations peacebuilding
assistance is concerned, an increase in predictability
would not go amiss. We believe that the best way
to encourage Member States to make voluntary
contributions is by ensuring proper transparency and
accountability in the use of the funds provided.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that we
firmly believe that only an impartial and transparent
approach to peacebuilding and sustaining peace can
ensure the effectiveness of efforts in this area. It is
important to provide that assistance in support of the
efforts of host States themselves without imposing
ready-made solutions or unnecessary mentoring. The
main purpose of peacebuilding is to help States get
back on their feet as soon as possible and manage their
sustainable development issues independently.

