Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank the United
States presidency of the Security Council for organizing
this emergency debate on the unprecedented outbreak
of Ebola. Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the European Union.

My delegation commends the leadership of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations quick and
focused response to the crisis, including the plans to
set up an emergency health mission to coordinate
the international community's response to the Ebola
outbreak.

We express our full support to the senior United
Nations system coordinator for Ebola, Dr. David
Nabarro, and the Deputy Ebola Coordinator and
Operation Crisis Manager, Anthony Banbury. We
also thank the Director General of the World Health
Organization (WHO), Ms. Margaret Chan, for her
briefing today and for all the efforts the WHO is taking
to address the spread of Ebola.

Our thoughts are with the families of the victims
and the patients, as well as with the courageous and
dedicated doctors and health-care workers, such as
those of Medecins Sans Frontieres, who, at a risk to
their own lives, have been doing all within their power
to stop the further spread of the disease and help the
patients.

The economic, social and security implications, as
others have said, of the health crisis will fall heavily
on the countries concerned. The exponential outbreak
of Ebola has struck countries, which only a short
decade or so ago emerged out of devastating conflicts,
threatening now to cripple their economies, instilling
fear and tearing apart the fragile social fabric, reversing
the gains of a peaceful development.

Fear spreads like fire. We have already seen the
closures of airports, which prevent the delivery of aid
where it is most needed. We have seen suspected patients
denied access and travelled bans imposed. The Ebola
outbreak is a test of international solidarity and our
readiness to respond to unconventional threats which, if
unchecked, can be as devastating as any conflict, with
far-reaching consequences. As the Secretary-General
has noted elsewhere, "Every day we delay, the cost and
the suffering will grow exponentially."

We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) on the ground, including
communicating information to the Liberian public on
the safety and health protocols and other measures for
preventing the transmission of Ebola. Clear, accurate
and effective public communication on prevention
measures and well-coordinated preventive actions are
of utmost priority. It warms my heart to know that
there's a modest Lithuanian footprint in UNMIL, as it
carries the vital work of helping a country stricken by
such an unprecedented outbreak.

My delegation welcomes the strong political
commitment to combating the Ebola outbreak expressed
by the Heads of State of the Mano River Union - Cote
d'Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone - at their
Extraordinary Summit held in Guinea on 1 August. We
also commend the commitment of the African Union,
whose Peace and Security Council recently authorized
its first ever humanitarian mission to the region, and
the Economic Community of West African States for
their efforts in combatting the further spread of this
deadly disease.

On its part, as our French colleague has mentioned,
the European Union is working on a comprehensive
response to the Ebola epidemic and has already
pledged some €150 million of funding for West African
countries affected by Ebola virus.

Within a generation, the people of Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Guinea have gone through conflict and
tragedy, which have left multiple human scars that
inevitably take time to fully recover and heal. We
must all work together to ensure that the response of
the international community and the United Nations
system is prompt, focused and lasting enough to stop
the spread of the disease and keep the hard-won gains
of those nations.

We commend the efforts and contributions by
various countries, including those announced today.
My country's decisions on our national contribution are
being finalized.

