The Secretary-General: First of all, I would like
to thank President Santos Calderon of Colombia for
convening this high-level debate during his country's
presidency of the Security Council. At a time when the
world faces multiple crises, it is important that we
reaffirm our collective commitment to Haiti. I am
particularly grateful to the Group of Friends of Haiti
and the countries contributing troops and police for
their unwavering support. I also wish to express my
deep appreciation to my Special Representative,
Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his leadership and dedication,
as well as to President Clinton, United Nations Special
Envoy, for his contributions to Haiti's reconstruction
and his inspiring advocacy on the country's behalf.

We meet as Haitians and their international
partners look to consolidate progress following last
month's presidential and legislative elections. We are
all very encouraged that the second round of polling
was peaceful. I commend the people of Haiti for that
important step towards the consolidation of democracy.

That achievement builds on the gains Haiti has
made, with the support of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti towards security, respect
for basic freedoms and an end to the State-sponsored
violence that was carried out with impunity for so long.
Today, the Haitian press enjoys greater freedom than at
any point in the country's history. Urban slums are no
longer controlled by criminal gangs. The National
Police has become a capable and trusted institution.

I commend President Preval and his
Administration for their role in those advances. As
President Preval will leave the presidency next month,
I would like to take this opportunity to express to him
my deepest appreciation for his leadership and valuable
contribution in building his country after many difficult
challenges, including last year's earthquake. I urge the
next Government of Haiti to build on this legacy of
political tolerance and respect for human rights.

Recovery and reconstruction are slowly gathering
momentum. More than 20 per cent of the estimated
10 million cubic metres of rubble has been removed.
The number of earthquake-affected people living in
camps has decreased, from more than 1.5 million in
July of last year to 680,000 today. Unfortunately, some
of that reduction has not been entirely voluntary, and
many camp dwellers are at risk of forced eviction.

The cholera epidemic appears to have stabilized.
The number of new cases has decreased, and the
nationwide mortality rate stands at 1.8 per cent.
However, only large-scale investments in Haiti's water
and sanitation system will protect against another
outbreak, and the withdrawal of some humanitarian
agencies from cholera-treatment centres and camps
risks creating a shortage in the provision of services.
The cholera appeal is 45 per cent funded, with the
overall Haiti appeal having received only 10 per cent
of the funds requested. Additional financial support is
urgently needed. Strong coordination between United
Nations agencies, the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission and the new Government will also be
crucial.

While important progress has indeed been
achieved, Haiti continues to face daunting challenges.
The country's economy is on its knees. Public
institutions are barely able to deliver essential services.
Millions of Haitians remain dependent on the
assistance of non-governmental organizations to meet
their most basic needs. Too many women and girls live
in fear of sexual violence. Without the rule of law,
lasting peace and prosperity will remain elusive.

Haiti's judicial system is deeply dysfunctional. Its
prisons remain dangerously overcrowded. Property
records are unreliable or non-existent. Public
expenditures often lack transparency. As a result,
citizens have lost confidence in the State and investors
remain reluctant to do business in Haiti. Rule of law
reform must be a top priority for Haiti's next President.

The people of Haiti are looking to the next
Government and Parliament to deliver. As a signal of
its commitment to change, the incoming Parliament
should complete the process of amending the
Constitution before the next President is inaugurated.
The international community must also seize this
opportunity to make a fresh start. Assistance should
empower Haitian actors and institutions, not prolong
their dependency. The United Nations will continue to
stand shoulder to shoulder with the Haitian
Government and people in the noble and necessary
work of building a more just and prosperous future.

