Mr. Sareer (Maldives): The Maldives congratulates
Colombia on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council, and commends the work it has
completed to date. We further thank Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry,
for his briefing.

One year ago, in an open debate on this very
same topic, the Maldives called for peace in Syria, for
settlement activity in the occupied territories to cease,
and for the recognition of the sovereign and independent
Palestinian State. It is unfortunate to note again today
that the international community has been unable to
make any meaningful progress on these issues.

Every day we hear tragic news of the number of
deaths in Syria. We hear the stories ofthe many atrocities
committed. Many more thousands of people are being
displaced as a result of the ongoing violence. That is
precisely the reason that the issue is not a domestic one,
but one that calls for an internationally led remedy. It is
now clear that, with the increasing number of incidents
occurring along the border with Lebanon, the violence
in Syria is bound to destabilize the entire region.

The Maldives applauds the efforts of Mr. Kofi
Annan, Join Special Envoy of the League of Arab
States and the United Nations, as well as those of the
United Nations Supervision Mission. Yet, regrettably,
the United Nations is seen as helpless in giving hope
to the people of Syria, who are paying the price of the
conflict. It is our hope that the Security Council can
come up with an effective response to address the need
of the hour, before the situation spins out of control. In
this, the holiest month of the Islamic calendar, we pray
for a way forward. Let peace find its way.

Trying to find peace in the Middle East has become
the quest of our generation. Yet, it is also increasingly
clear that the possibility for a two-State solution
is diminishing the longer that the peace process is
stalled. As Special Coordinator Serry emphasized, the
continued Israeli settlement activity is transforming the
very demographics of the two nations into one that is
inherently Israeli. The Maldives believes that the single
most important issue concerning peace in the Middle
East is the recognition of Palestine as an independent
sovereign State. We do not believe that there can be
a meaningful dialogue without the acceptance of
statehood.

My delegation fails to understand how the peace
process in the Middle East could continue while it is
absolutely undermined by the existence of an unequal
power relationship. While that dynamic will not change
until real peace is established, we as the United Nations
have an obligation to level the playing field. We have an
obligation to ensure that all elected Governments have
the representation that is equal to the mandate given to
them by their people.

The Maldives believes that Palestine has a
Government that is capable of administering its affairs,
and an administration that is ready to take on the full
burden of governance. The only way forward, therefore,
is through international recognition of Palestine as
a State, with a view to Palestinians negotiating their
own interests and concentrating on developing their
own social and economic infrastructure, while being at
peace with the State of Israel.

After six decades of inaction, it is time to move
forward. The Maldives calls on the international
community, and especially the members of the Council,
to support three generations of Palestinians who
have lived their lives under the yoke of occupation.
The United Nations has an obligation to protect the
full enjoyment of rights of the Palestinian people by
supporting a free and independent Palestinian State.

