Mr. Llorenty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): To begin, Bolivia would like to
reiterate its robust condemnation in the strongestpossible
terms of the use of chemical weapons. Such acts are
unjustified and criminal at all times, irrespective of the
pretext for the use of chemical weapons, whomever the
victims may be or wherever such an attack takes place.

Bolivia would also like to underscore the pressing
need for an independent, impartial, thorough and
conclusive investigation to take place into the events
that took place a few days ago in Syria. Bolivia voted
against the draft resolution because it believes that
the Security Council should not be used as a sounding
board for the propaganda for war or interventionism.
It should not be used as a pawn to be sacrificed in the
chess game of war. The draft resolution submitted
today was the result of negotiations from which some
members were unfortunately excluded. We would like
to draw attention to the fact that draft resolutions that
are not supported by consensus are being introduced.
We already know in advance that they will be vetoed
by permanent members of the Security Council. What
is the point of such exercises?

These draft resolutions seem to be used as an
instrument to influence the discussions that are taking
place between Russia and the United States in Moscow.
Is that perhaps the pretext for what happened today?
Is the Security Council being used as a pawn for such
purposes? Are those who put forward such proposals
really doing so for the benefit of the Syrian people or
are they doing so for their own political or military
reasons? We believe that it is a contradiction to submit
to the Security Council draft resolutions - making
use of multilateral tools - after unilateral steps have
already been taken.

Bolivia will make itself fully available to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and support its efforts as it pursues its required
investigation. We once again call for unity in the
Council. It is notjust about supporting the peace process
in Syria and guaranteeing humanitarian access so that
aid can reach all victims of the terrible conflict raging
in the country. We also have to uphold unity in order to
fulfill our responsibility as outlined in the Charter of
the United Nations and by the international community.

