I would like, first and foremost, to congratulate Germany on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to participate in today's meeting. At the same time, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing and his assessment of the situation. At this critical juncture of the conflict, and in the light of the risks of a deterioration of the situation, the Berlin process remains the anchor of the international community's efforts towards a genuine political solution. Respect for Security Council resolutions and for the Berlin Conference conclusions should be our guiding principles. That will lead to a viable and credible ceasefire and to the eventual return of the parties to the negotiating table. The strict implementation of, and respect for, the arms embargo, along with the cessation of hostilities by all parties, are the key elements that will pave the way to the resolution to the conflict. In this vein, Greece fully supports the efforts of the Secretary-General and of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya for a Libyan-led and Libyan- owned process towards a peaceful and stable Libya. Any solution should be free from external interference and from actions that exacerbate the conflict or that are contrary to the interests of the Libyan people. At this point, allow me to highlight, as other colleagues have before me, the European Union's tangible contribution to the implementation of the arms embargo through the establishment of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI. In addition, any initiative aiming at the resumption of inter-Libyan dialogue, under the Berlin umbrella, such as the Egyptian initiative of 6 June, should be encouraged. No frank discussion on Libya can take place if we ignore the fact that international legality is being violated in the country through the provision of weapons, military means, mercenaries and ammunition; the conclusion of illegal agreements, in violation of the international law, including the law of the sea and the sovereign rights of third parties; and the conclusion of agreements that further complicate the Libyan conflict, posing, at the same time, a risk to the peace and stability of the wider region. We would like to stress, in the strongest possible terms, that this is no way forward. As a neighbouring country, with a long-standing interest in the stability, peace and prosperity of Libya, we also bear the consequences of this crisis. I was recently in Tobruk, in my second visit to Libya in just a few months, during which I met with Speaker Saleh. We underline to all our interlocutors the need for a political solution, and we stand ready to contribute to international efforts in order to observe the arms embargo and the ceasefire in Libya. We do this by working towards a viable political settlement of the conflict. At this critical juncture, we believe it is high time to exert every possible effort in promoting peace and stability for Libya. It is also time for those who use Libya as their proxy-war battlefield to respect the commitments under Security Council resolutions and those made at the Berlin Conference. The time is also ripe for Libyans to take ownership of this process in order to reach an inclusive negotiated solution that can offer a viable, long-term way out of the conflict. It is therefore time for all of us to step up, by actively and genuinely contributing to the efforts of the international community in bringing back peace, stability and prosperity to Libya.
