Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Under-Secretaries- General Rosemary DiCarlo and Jean-Pierre Lacroix for their briefings on the situation in the Sudan and for the report on the activities of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and progress in the deployment of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) (S/2020/912). We would like to begin by sincerely congratulating the people and the Government of the Sudan. I think that we can say without exaggeration that a historic event was achieved. On 31 August, in Juba, agreements in principle were reached on peace in and the future of the country. We look forward to the official signing of a peace agreement and the start of implementation by the parties of their obligations. In that connection, we must note the mediation efforts made by the South Sudanese people and personally by President Salva Kiir. This is yet further proof of the effectiveness of the formula "African solutions to African problems". We agree with the conclusions contained in the report of the Secretary-General that the Sudan faces complex tasks in terms of restoring the country's economy and implementing peacebuilding projects. That is precisely why we believe that the new United Nations special political mission should reach its planned capacity as soon as possible. Khartoum has a right to expect that the international community will be able to quickly provide the necessary assistance, and the Security Council should not disappoint the Sudanese people. We took note of the proposal by Secretary- General Guterres on the need for rapid agreement on the modalities for the transfer of assets and support capacities from UNAMID, which is finalizing its mandate, to UNITAMS. We deem this initiative very timely and urge the Secretariat to get to work on the issue. We reiterate our position in favour of the final withdrawal of UNAMID, which has successfully completed the tasks entrusted to it. The challenges facing Darfur today are of a peacebuilding rather than a peacekeeping character. The time has come to focus on the recovery and economic development of Darfur; this should be the priority. We believe that it is vital to stay the course towards the gradual drawdown and withdrawal of UNAMID, in accordance with the time frame set out in resolution 2525 (2020). We note that the way in which events are evolving in Darfur has not shown any significant negative change. Intercommunal clashes in certain states, which are provoked, inter alia, by the seasonal transhumance of cattle, do not change the overall picture. Furthermore, the immediate and coordinated response of the authorities to the events, as well as the implementation of the national strategy to protect civilians, on which the Sudan reports to Security Council regularly, once again demonstrate Khartoum's commitment to a holistic approach to addressing the root causes of the conflict. We can only welcome that. In addition, it is worth recalling that the main spoiler of the peace process and the person responsible for the hostility of the Sudan Liberation Army in the Jebel Marra region remains Abdul Wahid Al-Nur, who has refused, inter alia, to join the peace agreement. We again call on those countries that have an influence on that intransigent opponent to bring the necessary pressure to bear on him. We note that the Secretary-General has called once again for the lifting of unilateral economic sanctions, including such an anachronism as the fact that the Sudan remains on the American list of countries that sponsor terrorism. Obviously, we would like to endorse that appeal. It is impossible to speak of the importance of the economic recovery of the country and at the same time continue to hinder the implementation of initiatives through international financial institutions. We see that the lifting of unilateral sanctions is subject to conditions that have no relation to the peace process in the Sudan but that reflect the agenda of those who introduced those restrictions. That kind of cynicism does not surprise us and has not surprised us for a long time.
