Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation fully associates itself with the statement
made this morning by the Greek presidency of the
European Union. We also wish, in our national
capacity, briefly to explain the reasons why France
decided to abstain on the draft resolution submitted by
the United States, to renew for one year, beginning on
1 July 2003, the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1422 (2002), which the Council adopted on
12 July 2002.

Paragraph 2 of resolution 1422 (2002) did not
contain a commitment to automatic renewal. That
paragraph, of course, expresses the intention of the
Council regarding renewal of the resolution, but it
stipulated that such renewal would be "for as long as
may be necessary". That wording clearly implies an
obligation to judge the appropriateness of renewing the
resolution according to the circumstances.

Last year, after long and sometimes difficult
negotiations, France, like the other States members of
the Council, supported the one-year exemption
provided for under resolution 1422 (2002). We did so,
in particular, to take into account two very important
circumstances: the risk existing at the time of the non-
renewal of the mandate of certain United Nations
forces or missions, and the concern, at the request of
those missions, to provide the United States with more
time to find a lasting solution to their concerns with
respect to the Statute of the International Criminal
Court. Those two elements belong to a context that
now lies in the past.

Since then, other developments have occurred
that we think can respond to the concerns that the
United States has expressed. The past year has
demonstrated that it is highly unlikely that a case could
arise triggering the application of resolution 1422
(2002). That was pointed out by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan in his statement this morning. This is
especially true since the International Criminal Court,
which now has 90 States Parties, has become a reality,
given the election this year of its 18 judges and its
Prosecutor and the forthcoming appointment of its
Registrar. The Court's professionalism will be judged
on the facts. The recognized quality and competence
the Court's members ensures without doubt the
credibility of that international body. That credibility
provides the best safeguard against any possible
suspicion of a politically motivated Court.

Finally, at the very moment that the International
Criminal Court is being established, we did not think it
was appropriate to renew for one year the exemption
given to certain personnel of non-States parties to the
Rome Statute that are participating in forces or
missions under the aegis of the United Nations. Such a
renewal risks lending credence to the perception that
such exemptions are permanent. That appearance of
permanency can only weaken the Court and harm its
authority.

The Council has just adopted resolution 1487
(2003). A new one-year extension has been created.
My delegation expresses its wish that this time period
will allow the States that still have a bias against the
International Criminal Court to overcome that bias.
That bias does not seem to us to be well founded.

