Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's meeting. I also want to thank the
representatives of The Elders, Ms. Mary Robinson and
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for their words of genuine wisdom,
which should serve as an inspiration to us. Their words
were also candid, and I believe they made us confront
our individual and collective responsibility as members
of the Security Council.
Belgium has made conflict prevention one of its
priorities. It is one of the foundations of the inclusive
approach to the sustainability of peace, to which we
subscribe. As you point out in your concept note for
today's debate (S/2019/456, annex), Mr. President,
the underlying causes of conflict come under various
areas - peace and security, development and human
rights. It therefore makes sense that the Security
Council should obtain information from all three of
those pillars in order to assess possible threats to peace
and security. It is not only human rights violations and
restrictions on the political space, but also increasingly
scarce natural resources, the degradation of the living
space as a result of human activity, natural disasters and
climate change that are all indicators of tensions that in
the right circumstances can degenerate into conflict.
The Council can and should use them as a basis for its
analysis and action.

In that context, Belgium supports the continuation
of early-warning exercises and especially information
exchanges between the Council and the Secretariat,
including information related to the development
and human rights pillars. Early responses, including
through mediation, following early warnings, are not
necessarily the prerogative of the Security Council
alone but can include, as appropriate, the good
offices of the Secretary-General, his Special Envoys,
representatives and resident coordinators. It can also
take place outside the United Nations system, as we are
currently seeing with Venezuela and Cameroon. But if
need be the Council can send signals that help generate
the political will to resolve a crisis and support these
mediation efforts. However, that is possible only if the
Council is duly alerted well in advance.

That brings me to my second point. The
information that the Council receives is worth more
if it can include a regional dimension. The United
Nations regional offices offer added value both for
identifying risk factors and monitoring progress. We
believe that more dynamic and probably more frequent
informational meetings with the heads of those regional
offices would be correspondingly more valuable. For
example, we look forward to hearing the regional
analysis of the Secretary-General's new Special Envoy
for the Horn of Africa. The regional offices are also
an ideal vehicle for supporting or collaborating with
regional and subregional organizations. We believe
these organizations have a leading role to play in
conflict prevention and mediation, and we encourage
them to further develop their capacities in that regard.
Dialogue between countries in the same region and
outside formal organizations can also have added value
by possibly enabling convergence on measures to ease
tensions, which would be very useful in the Middle
East, for example. The United Nations could provide
support for informal dialogues in this area as well.

Thirdly, I would like to emphasize the importance
of the link between prevention and mediation, including
at the local level, and peacekeeping operations. Belgium
supports the Secretary-General in his desire to increase
mediation expertise within missions and strengthen
partnerships with local and national mediation
actors. Mediation needs an integrated, tailored and
well-coordinated approach. Engaging missions with
communities, including local authorities, traditional
or religious leaders and other relevant actors on the
ground, helps to prevent local tensions from fuelling
conflict and, more positively, helps to build peace
through local reconciliation.

Although community engagement is of course
the primary responsibility of the civilian and police
components, it is important that it also be supported
by missions' military components. We welcome the
efforts made in that regard within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, for example. National
ownership of mediation and prevention processes
increases their chances of success. That is particularly
the case when women are involved as mediators,
negotiators and witnesses in those processes.

The meeting rose at 12.30p.m.
