Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council on this important agenda item. My
delegation welcomes Mr. Vieira de Mello's
participation in today's meeting. We are grateful to him
for his comprehensive briefing, which has provided us
with an objective and, I must say, regrettable picture of
the situation in the region.

A simple comparison with the situation that
prevailed in the region only a few months ago makes it
clear that, unfortunately, there has been a considerable
deterioration in the security situation. The numerous
acts of violence that have taken place in West Timor
have become a challenge to the efforts of the United
Nations. Resumed militia activities have also been
reported from East Timor.

The timely and decisive steps taken by the
Security Council, including the adoption of its
resolution 1319 (2000), have demonstrated its
readiness to stop the escalation of violence in the
region. We all are concerned about these acts of
violence, and we condemn them. We all wish to see the
situation in the region return to normal.

In this context, we are pleased to note that the
plan of action adopted by the Indonesian Government
rests on a responsible, rational, results-oriented
approach aimed at ensuring the safety and security of
United Nations personnel, humanitarian workers and
refugees.

However, greater efforts should be made by the
Indonesian Government to stabilize the situation, and it
should certainly take a more cooperative approach
towards the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET).

In this context, the task of putting an end to the
militias' activities and disarming and disbanding them
should be given top priority. We welcome the fact that
the disarmament process is under way. It is quite
important to ensure its prompt completion.

My delegation also strongly supports the
suggestion put forward by Mr. Vieira de Mello that all
those responsible for the terrible crimes committed in
West and East Timor be brought to justice.

We strongly agree with a number of previous
speakers that continued success in the areas that
constitute the major task of UNTAET, such as the
return of refugees, reconciliation and the stable
development of East Timor, will depend largely on the
maintenance of a secure environment. We believe that
sending a Security Council mission to the region is the
best way to support the efforts of the Indonesian
Government to this end.

We attach a great deal of importance to the
security situation, and, as such, we would like to
commend the activities of UNTAET as well as pay
tribute personally to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. We believe that these activities are
strategically coherent, not only in terms of responding
to the challenges posed by recent events but also in the
context of a long-term perspective of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1272
(1999).

