Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks you, Sir, for convening today's open debate.
Our thanks also go to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Foreign Minister Mohamed of Kenya and African
Union (AU) Commissioner Chergui for their briefings.
Ten days ago, the United Nations celebrated Nelson
Mandela International Day, commemorating the
enormous contribution made by that great statesman to
peace in Africa. Africa today is full of vigour. Joining
hands towards self-improvement and the pursuit
of peace and development is now the main theme
heard throughout the continent. African peace and
development are critical to the security, stability and
common prosperity of the entire world.

Peacebuilding - which spans the political,
security and development realms - can offer important
support to Africa's efforts to achieve lasting peace and
sustainable development. The world today is facing
growing challenges from terrorism. Terrorist attacks
occur frequently and in many locations, resulting in
heavy casualties and damage. Africa is also a victim of
terrorism. Some countries and regions continue to suffer
from conflict and war. As traditional and non-traditional
security threats are interlinked, effectively enhancing
peacebuilding in Africa to tangibly help the continent
achieve lasting peace is a major challenge for the
international community. In that regard, China would
like to make the following points.

First, it is imperative to vigorously help Africa to
respond to the challenge of terrorism. Africa's counter-
terrorism efforts are an important part of the global
fight against terrorism. The international community
should apply a uniform standard on counter-terrorism,
support the counter-terrorism efforts in Africa and
resolutely combat terrorist activities regardless of their
pretexts, targets and means. The United Nations should
concretely help African countries to enhance their
counter-terrorism capacity-building, prioritize that
endeavour and provide more substantive assistance to
African countries.

Secondly, with regard to respecting the independent
choices of African countries, Africa belongs to
the African people, and an African approach is the
more effective and feasible way of resolving African
problems. Peacebuilding in Africa should abide by
the principles of national ownership and respect for
the sovereignty and will of the countries concerned,
while avoiding imposing outside will on them. The
United Nations should align its priorities with those of
African countries and be empathetic and concentrate
on resolving the issues deemed most urgent by the
countries concerned. When it comes to peacebuilding
activities, United Nations special political missions
should strictly abide by their respective mandates and
division of responsibilities in order to avoid duplication
of effort and trying to take on all things at the same
time, so as to strike a comprehensive balance between
efficiency and benefits.

Thirdly, with regard to letting regional organizations
play an active role, the African Union and the relevant
subregional organizations have in-depth knowledge
of the countries in the region and their peacebuilding
needs. They have long mediated and dealt with
complex conflicts and possess unique geographical,
historical and cultural advantages. We also support
African countries in proposing holistic peacebuilding
strategies from a regional perspective. We support the
AU's peacebuilding initiatives, such as its policy on
post-conflict reconstruction and development and the
African solidarity initiative, as well as an active role for
regional mechanisms.

Fourthly, with regard to helping Africa resolve
development issues, peace is the fundamental guarantee
for development. Many post-conflict African countries
face multiple challenges in the areas of the economy,
infrastructure, reconstruction, poverty elimination,
employment, education, public health and social
security. The international community should work hard
to help the countries concerned achieve early economic
recovery and, through industrialization, agriculture
modernization and human resources development, help
Africa's peoples enjoy a peace dividend at an early date.

China is committed to an African policy and concept

based on sincerity, delivering outcomes, affinity, good
faith and a proper approach to justice and interests,
and has steadfastly supported peace and development
in Africa. China has participated in 16 United Nations
peacekeeping operations in African. At the moment,
there are more than 2,600 Chinese peacekeepers
deployed in Africa. Over the past two months, three
young Chinese keepers gave their precious lives for
peace in Africa.

The Johannesburg Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation proposed 10 cooperation programmes,
including in the areas of industrialization cooperation,
agricultural modernization, infrastructure development,
financial cooperation, green development, trade and
investment facilitation, poverty elimination to benefit
the people, public health, culture and people-to-people
exchanges, and peace and security cooperation. China
is moving forward to comprehensively implement those
plans.

Over the next five years, China will provide AU
$100 million in gratis military assistance to support the
setting up of the African Standby Force and the Crisis
Rapid Response Force, including for the training of
2,000 peacekeepers from around the world, including
from Africa. China stands ready to work with the rest
of the international community to continue to make our
contribution to the maintenance of peace and security
in Africa and to promote its development.

