Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): My delegation would like
first of all to welcome into our midst the First Deputy
Foreign Minister of the Czech Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Alexander Vondra. We also wish to express our most
sincere condolences to the Government of the United States
of America and to the families of those who lost their lives
in the tragic explosion in Oklahoma City.

Nigeria had the opportunity during the informal
consultations of the Security Council of expressing its
thanks to the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of
the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia for
their latest report concerning the operations of the
International Conference's Mission to the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). It is the View of
my delegation that the work of the Co-Chairmen and their
staff remains crucial in the international effort to mediate
peace in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It was a bold and courageous decision when, on
14 August 1994, the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) - against the
backdrop of our disappointment at the failure of the
Bosnian Serb party to agree to the Contact Group peace
plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina - decided, inter alia, to
sever political and economic relations with the Bosnian
Serb party and close the border of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to all transportation across that border except
for food, clothing and medicines.

This positive step by the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia was duly reciprocated by the
Security Council in its adoption of resolution 943 (1994),
under which existing sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia were partially lifted. It is
therefore important for the Secretary-General and the
Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia to continue to monitor closely the full
implementation of Belgrade's commitment to close the
border as a quid pro quo for the partial suspension of the
sanctions. The present porousness of the border must be
corrected, and corrected faithfully.

What is of special concern to my delegation today is
that, in spite of the border closure, the continuing positive
contributions of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia and the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's acceptance of the Contact Group peace
plan, the peace process in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still at an impasse. It is my delegation's
considered View that, in the overall context of the search
for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the present draft
resolution makes a contribution for at least two reasons.
Firstly, it rightly underscores the need to strengthen the
existing border-closure regime and the need for a more
assiduous investigation of reported violations, such as the
helicopter flights that may have crossed the border
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Secondly - and related to the previous
point - the draft resolution recognizes that the
continuation of the border-closure regime constitutes an
invaluable pressure point on the Bosnian Serb party and
accordingly extends the suspension of sanctions on
Belgrade, albeit for a reduced period.

The Nigerian delegation believes that the matters
relating to the border closure are only one part of the
problems stifling progress in resolving the Bosnian
conflict. There is no doubt that the Contact Group
countries themselves have a unique role to play, as
members of the Security Council, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, the European Union or, in some
cases, all three. As in my subregion, where the apparent
lack of unity of interests and positions of member States
has not augured well for the peace process in Liberia, so
too in Bosnia and Herzegovina the diversity of interests
and perspectives of countries in the subregion with the
necessary leverage has not helped matters at all.

 

Hence, we believe it is necessary for the States in the
Contact Group to harmonize their views as soon as possible
on how best the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina may be
resolved. Unless the interests and perspectives of the
Contact Group are harmonized and adequate pressure is
promptly brought to bear on the parties in a non-
discriminatory manner, the draft resolution we are about to
vote for, like several others before it, may not achieve the
desired objectives after all. And what a great pity that
would be, once again, in the continuing tragedy in the area.

