Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It is
very good to see the High Representative with us again
today. We very warmly appreciate and fully support
what he and his team have been doing over the past six
months, particularly the progress that has been made in
the implementation of the commitments undertaken at
the Brussels meetings of the Peace Implementation
Council. His Office's refined focus on refugee return,
economic reform and state-level institution-building is
beginning to bear fruit in a very welcome way. What is
happening in Mostar, with strong European Union
support, is another encouraging indication of the
change under way.

Perhaps the main downside has been that the bulk
of progress over the past year has been through the
efforts of the international community rather than of
the Bosnians themselves. What the High
Representative said about the growth figures over the
recent period is another indication of that. We very
much commend what Ambassador Petritsch has been
doing in targeting the use of his Bonn powers and his
determination to remain above the fray when a local
solution is obtainable. Instances of that have been seen
in the Council of Ministers and in the current pension
law debate.

We share his hope that the general elections on 11
November will see a more responsible group of
politicians elected. That will be an opportunity to
develop the High Representative's concept of local
ownership of the peace implementation process. Full
implementation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court's decision on constituent peoples,
including any amendments to the election law, is in our
View an essential part of Dayton implementation and
another key challenge for the next entity and state-level
Governments. We share his view that those decisions
are non-negotiable and we urge his Office to do all it
can to assist the new Governments once they are
formed.

We share the High Representative's concern
about the deterioration in Republika Srpska in the lead-
up to the elections in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The collapse of the Milosevic regime is
undoubtedly good news for Bosnia, but President
Kostunica has something to learn about Dayton
implementation. We welcome the High
Representative's early engagement with Mr. Kostunica
and efforts to manage his visit to Trebinje last
weekend. It is essential that the Office of the High
Representative continue to engage President Kostunica
as a partner in Dayton implementation and to
emphasize the relationship between development of
state-level institutions and a sovereign State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

It is really remarkable to think that five years
have now gone by since Dayton. We think that the
international community's interests are now in good
hands in Sarajevo and we wish the High Representative
and his team every success in the important months of
further change that are to come.

