Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
The Security Council has been considering the question
of Sudan since the beginning of the year. It took up the
question following serious events that endangered the life
of the Egyptian President. It was following the attempted
assassination of Mr. Mubarak that the Council requested,
in resolution 1044 (1996) of 31 January 1996, that Sudan
extradite the three suspects and renounce terrorism.

Thus far, Sudan has not fully satisfied these two
basic points. The Council emphasized this once again
when it adopted a second resolution on 26 April 1996,
resolution 1054 (1996), to prevail upon the Sudanese
authorities to meet their obligations.

We must say today that that second warning by the
Council has not been completely heeded. It is true that the
Khartoum Government has made some efforts to
implement the two Council resolutions, but we believe
that the efforts made to date are inadequate.

It therefore seems timely to us for the Council to
step up its pressure on the Sudanese authorities so that
they will fully discharge their obligations under
resolutions 1044 (1996) and 1054 (1996).

 

That is why the Council has just adopted a resolution
containing a decision to impose air sanctions against Sudan.
The text also provides that the date of entry into force of
those sanctions, as well as the modalities of their
implementation, will be the subject of discussions to take
place within 90 days.

The Government of France intends to see to it that
these new sanctions are understood not as a punishment but
as an incentive. That is why the Council must think about
how they should be applied, and in particular about their
duration. In our View, these measures should not penalize
the people of Sudan by making them suffer additional
restrictions that could have serious humanitarian
consequences.

In any event, these measures will not enter into force
yet. And we hope that the Sudanese authorities will take
advantage of the three-month period granted them to bring
themselves into compliance with resolutions 1044 (1996)
and 1054 (1996).

The sanctions against Sudan are not inevitable. It is up
to the Government of Sudan to demonstrate that they may,
indeed, be avoided.

