Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the situation in Darfur. Following the publication on
15 April of the periodic report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/279) onthe activities oftheAfricanUnion-United
Nations Hybrid Mission in Darfur (UNAMID), I would
like to share with the Council the latest developments
regarding the peace process in Darfur and the current
security and humanitarian situation in the region. I will
also take this opportunity to apprise the Council of the
measures that the Secretariat has taken, in consultation
with the African Union and UNAMID, to implement
the recommendations contained in resolution 2148
(2014) for strengthening the Mission and streamline its
operations.

As Council members are aware, after a period
of relative calm Darfur is currently experiencing
a resurgence of violence. The current situation is
characterized by mass population displacements and
notable discord among the local allies of the Sudanese
authorities, which is exacerbated by growing political
rivalries. Such unrest is particularly strong in North
Darfur, where control both of the local governorate
and of mineral resources, in particular gold deposits,
is at stake. All of this has led to fighting among the
supporters of the main actors, leading to often serious
casualties among the civilian population. And we
should not forget the economic context in the region,
which is very problematic and further aggravates the
difficulties.

A pro-Government militia known as the Rapid
Support Forces has been deployed in the region and
has contributed to exposing the civilian population
to further serious risks, especially in various parts
of North and South Darfur. The violence and abuses
this militia is said to have been responsible for include
the targeting of civilians, ransacking and burning of
villages and looting of property and livestock. At the
same time, the rebel groups that have not signed the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur have intensified
their attacks on Government positions, especially
in the area of Jebel Marra in North Darfur and more
sporadically in parts of South Darfur.

The Sudan Armed Forces have responded by
stepping up their operations, using shelling and aerial
bombardment. These have resulted in numerous civilian
casualties and displaced many people, particularly
on 19 and 27 February, when the Sudan Armed
Forces, with the support of the Rapid Support Forces,
launched an operation near Um Gunya, 50 kilometres
south-east of Nyala. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) estimates that this
operation alone displaced between 30,000 and 40,000
people, who fled and took refuge closer to Nyala, and in
the El Salaam, Kalma and Labado camps for internally
displaced persons (IDPs).

All this violence has clearly worsened the
humanitarian situation in Darfur. OCHA estimates
that the numbers of those displaced since January now
exceed 370,000, of whom two-thirds have still not
returned to their homes. Also according to OCHA,
the total number of displaced people in Darfur is now
more than 2 million, which makes this humanitarian
crisis one of the worst in the world. As the Secretary-
General's report emphasizes, while most of the newly
displaced people have received at least some form of
assistance, the restrictions on movements imposed by
the warring parties have prevented humanitarian aid
from reaching them quickly enough and in sufficient
amounts. This restricted movement has also prevented
UNAMID from fulfilling its mandate, in the way we
would have wished to see it, to protect the Civilians
dealing with this growing insecurity.

(spoke in English)

In this challenging environment, UNAMID has
focused on concrete actions and measures that reflect
the key priorities of the strategic review outlined in the
Secretary-General's report of 25 February (8/2014/138)
and endorsed on 3 April by the Security Council in
resolution 2148 (2014). As the Councilknows, those three
priorities are, first, mediating between the Government
of the Sudan and armed movements that have not signed
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, while taking
into account the ongoing democratic transformation
at the national level; secondly, supporting mediation
of community conflict, including through measures
to address its root causes taken in conjunction with
the country team; and thirdly, protecting Civilians,
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and ensuring the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel.

In regard to those strategic priorities, I welcome
the Joint Chief Mediator's proposal to develop, with
the African Union, a common framework for political
negotiations within the context of the national dialogue.
As announced by President Al-Bashir, that national
dialogue has the potential to lay the foundations for a
stable and prosperous Sudan if it is inclusive, transparent
and open and takes into account the concerns and
interests of a broad cross-section of Sudanese society.
The Doha Document has an important role to play
in that context, since it seeks to address concerns
that are specific to Darfur, which include the much-
needed economic development envisaged in the Darfur
development strategy.

In accordance with its mandate and within its
capabilities, UNAMID has continued to protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence
irrespective of its source, in accordance with its mandate
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Particular attention has been given to protecting highly
vulnerable IDPs, especially women and children, in
coordination with humanitarian partners, with whom
the Mission has worked closely to ensure that the IDPs
are provided with protection, shelter and water, as well
as other emergency support. Through its programme
for inter-communal reconciliation, UNAMID has
played a significant role in addressing local conflicts,
promoting peaceful coexistence by providing its good
offices in local mediation of tribal conflicts, such as the
reconciliation signed between Rezeigat and Gimir on
12 March, one example where the Mission's facilitation
of reconciliation has worked in North Darfur.

In the light of the political and security environment
in Darfur and the challenges UNAMID is dealing with
in effectively discharging its mandate, we have taken
steps to strengthen and streamline the Mission. A work
plan has been developed and its implementation is being
regularly monitored, including by the country team. In
accordance with the reprioritized strategy recommended
by the review, UNAMID's police component is being
reduced by 723 individual officers and four formed
police units; the military component will be reduced
by 200 military observers, staff officers and liaison
officers, following a review of their deployment and
tasks. One heavy transport company will be repatriated
shortly. My department, together with UNAMID, is
developing a plan to put these reductions into effect as
soon as possible while of course taking into account the
skill sets that will still be needed.

The first phase of streamlining the civilian
component has begun, based on our priorities and what
can be achieved. We have already identified reductions
in a number of sections, including HIV/AIDS, gender,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, child
protection and the rule of law. But all other civilian
sections will be looked at as part of a second phase in
the coming weeks, which we will report on in the next
Secretary-General's report.

At the same time, with the support of Headquarters,
UNAMID and the country team are getting together
to work on more effective strategic operational
planning, implementing an oversight mechanism
designed to make the best possible use of available
resources. Essential mechanisms related to integrated
operations and reporting are being put in place, and
we are tightening overall operational and strategic
management. More effective communication is being
pursued with the Government of the Sudan in order to
improve cooperation on issues of contingent-owned
equipment, visas and access. Thus while capabilities
that cannot produce an effect on the ground in the
current political and security environment are being
streamlined, the Mission is beginning to Show more
progress on the ground by building stronger relations
and integrated management. I promise that we will
continue to pursue and build on those efforts.
(spoke in French)

Once again, Darfur is at a crossroads. Since the
start of this year, new dynamics have emerged that
are having a considerab impact on the population, a
situation that we feel should lead us to re-adapt our
response. That means in particular that cooperation in
various contexts - first between the African Union
and the United Nations, then between UNAMID
and the Government of the Sudan and finally
between UNAMID and the United Nations country
team - should be improved in order to better support
the Mission's activities.

More than anywhere else, mediation efforts in
Darfur should receive all possible political support,
and the involvement of the principal stakeholders
should be consistent and constant, with the aim of
achieving a constructive dialogue whose goal remains
a lasting peace. In that regard, the political support of
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council, together with the ongoing efforts
of the Joint Chief Mediator to convince the parties to
engage in direct negotiations and the rebel movements
to join the peace process, is more than ever before of
paramount importance.

