Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Terrorism, which has been strengthened ideologically
and logistically and through its ties to transnational
organized crime, is fuelled by drug trafficking, seized
oil fields and extremist ideas, including those based on
religion and ethnicity. Terrorism penetrates the fabric
of regional conflicts.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the
Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist groups have long
existed in the Middle East. They have acquired
additional capacity for their criminal activities in the
context of weakening of State institutions owing to
foreign support. With their increased power, extremist
groups jeopardize the future of entire States, as is
clearly seen in the examples of Iraq, Syria and Libya,
which are under attack, as well as Lebanon, Yemen,
Mali and the Central African Republic.

Russia has consistently advocated the expansion
of international cooperation to curb terrorism in all
its forms and abandoning double standards and the
dividing of terrorists into good and bad terrorists. It is
essential that all States faithfully implement the Security
Council resolutions and decisions that call for ending
the incitement to terrorism, cutting off all channels
of illegal oil trafficking, adopting sanctions against
the Taliban and Al-Qaida and preventing the transfer
of weapons from Libya. We supported resolution 2170
(2014) aimed at ratcheting up the sanctions pressure on
terrorists operating in Syria and Iraq.

Those examples reaffirm the Council's ability to
agree on fundamentally important issues and to take
decisions on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations. After the intervention in Iraq, the bombing of
Libya and the providing of foreign support to extremists
opposed to Al-Assad in Syria, the problem of foreign
terrorist fighters has been seriously exacerbated. They
are also fighting in the ranks of terrorist organizations
of many countries in the Middle East, Africa and the
Afghanistan/ Pakistan boundary area. In that regard, we
need a comprehensive approach that would encompass
the financial, administrative, social and ideological
components of the issue and that would ensure respect
for the sovereignty of all States. We support the initiative

of the United States presidency of the Security Council
in sponsoring resolution 2178 (2014) aimed at stamping
out foreign terrorist fighter activity.

At the same time, we would like to caution against
the temptation to narrow our perception of the problem,
because the Islamic State, with its inhuman ideology
and revolting executions of journalists, is not by any
means the only threat to the region. There is a need to
comprehensively consider the problem of terrorism in
all its dimensions, in the Middle East and North Africa.
We propose the convening, under the auspices of the
United Nations, a forum of representatives of countries
of the region, the African Union, the League of Arab
States, the five permanent members of the Security
Council and other stakeholders. The forum's agenda
should also address long-standing conflicts, the most
important of which is the Arab-Israeli conflict. It is
specifically the failure to resolve the Palestinian issue
for many decades, that is, according to a widely-held
viewpoint, one of the primary reasons terrorists receive
moral support and are able to continuously recruit new
members into their ranks. We call for an analysis of
the deep-rooted causes of the region's problems and for
avoiding responding solely to their symptoms.

We stand ready to cooperate on an equitable basis,
beginning with an honest joint analysis of how this
problem developed and how we can work our way out
of this chaos.

