Ms. Enge (Norway): The Norwegian Government
very much appreciates your initiative, Sir, in convening
this open debate in the Security Council on peace
consolidation in West Africa. We are pleased to see that
West Africa has made considerable progress on peace
and security in recent years.

In Liberia, Africa's first female president and her
Government have taken decisive and courageous steps
towards reconstruction and recovery. We commend
Liberia for requesting that former President Charles
Taylor be turned over to the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. A society ravaged by war cannot be healed
unless those responsible for crimes against humanity
and violations of international humanitarian law are
held responsible. Sierra Leone's request to be included
on the agenda of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission is also important. It can help speed up the
process of reconstruction and recovery in preparation
for the 2007 elections.

Those achievements are commendable, but
fragile. Many West African countries face enormous
challenges, such as in Cote d'Ivoire, where the
precarious situation continues to threaten the stability
of the region. The international community must
continue its support for consolidating peace in West
Africa. Broad, consistent and long-term assistance to
regional organizations is crucial. It is in our common
interest to provide financial support for Governments
that struggle to enhance security, promote national
reconciliation and build peace in their societies.

The Norwegian Government will increase its
support for post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconstruction in West Africa. Norway has provided
post-conflict support to Liberia, Sierra Leone and Cote
d'Ivoire. This year, Norway plans to provide
approximately $27.5 million for humanitarian relief,
peacebuilding and reconstruction activities in Cote
d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone and Liberia.

Norway has over the years given priority to
development assistance to African nations. We also
support efforts by African Governments and work
closely with the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
other regional organizations in Africa. Their leadership
is crucial in building capacity for stronger engagement
in conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peace
operations and peacebuilding on the African continent.
Allow me to highlight a few of the issues raised
in the comprehensive concept paper put forward by the
Government of Ghana.

It is important to support efforts for more
regional cooperation. It is also crucial to address cross-
border issues that could fuel conflicts and increase
tensions. We would welcome the early ratification and
implementation of the ECOWAS Convention on Small
Arms as a key to progress here. The progress achieved
by ECOWAS in developing a regional standby force
for peace operations is impressive. In particular, the
Norwegian Government would like to commend
ECOWAS for taking the lead in developing the civilian
components of the African Standby Force, including
humanitarian capacity.

As part of our long-standing cooperation with
African partners under the Training for Peace
programme, Norway has worked with the Kofi Annan
International Peacekeeping Training Institute to assist
ECOWAS in developing West African civilian capacity
for peacekeeping operations. The use by ECOWAS of
its Peace Fund for programmes of cooperation in
conflict-prone border areas deserves active
international support. Norway is about to enter into an
agreement with ECOWAS to provide financial
assistance to the ECOWAS Peace Fund and to the
ECOWAS Small Arms Control Programme.

The importance of the transparent and
accountable management of natural resources and the
establishment of oversight bodies needs to be
emphasized. Several countries in West Africa have
endorsed the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI) and are on their way to implement the
EITI principles. That is a key contribution to build
lasting peace and stability. We encourage and support
further EITI implementation efforts in West Africa and
look forward to broad West African participation at the
third plenary EITI conference, which is scheduled to
take place in Oslo, Norway, on 16 and 17 October this
yean

