Mr. Sy (spoke in French): I have the honour
today to introduce to the Security Council the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic, contained in document S/2001/35.
This is the second report ofthe Secretary-General since
the establishment of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA), on 15 February 2000, and covers the
period from July 2000 to January 2001. The report
describes the overall situation in the Central African
Republic and gives an account of what the Office has
been doing to support the authorities and all segments
of Central African society in their efforts for national
reconciliation and peace-building.

As members of the Council will see from the
report before them, the political situation in the Central
African Republic is characterized by considerable
tension in relations between the ruling party and the
opposition. There is little communication or dialogue
between the political players. President Patasse' has not
yet organized the meeting with the country's political
players that he promised in June 2000. The opposition,
which seems to favour confrontation, is today calling
for the President's resignation.

The tense relations between the ruling party and
the opposition worsened in December 2000 with the
arrest and trials of over 60 persons - including four
opposition parliamentarians - in connection with their
participation in an unauthorized meeting. Although all
those arrested were released after the trial held on 29
December 2000 and 3 January 2001, the tension is far
from dissipated. Opposition deputies have been
boycotting the work of the National Assembly since
then. The developments in the political situation and,
in particular, the lack of consultation or dialogue
among political players, are obstacles to strengthening
the young democratic institutions of the Central
African Republic.

The second report on the situation in the Central
African Republic stresses the serious nature of social
problems in that country today. The social situation is
still very tense and has worsened since October as a
result of the prolonged civil service strike precipitated
by the accumulation of unpaid salary arrears and
current salaries. Civil servants are calling for the
payment of 12 months' worth of arrears out of the 30
months' worth of salaries due them. The opposition is
siding with the unions and is attempting to exploit the
social situation politically.

I must draw the attention of members of the
Council to the fact that the operation referred to as
"Central Africa: a dead country", which had been
called for by trade unions, has been a complete failure,
as the orders of the unions headquarters were not
heeded. This development could lead to the opposition
showing a degree of flexibility that might make
possible the establishment of a genuine dialogue with a
View to a definitive settlement ofthe social crisis.

The economic situation is very precarious. The
Central African economy has not yet recovered from
the destruction that took place in connection with the
mutinies. The overall crisis in the country has
worsened as a result of the problems in fuel supplies
that began in June 2000. The situation has also
worsened as a result of the war in neighbouring Congo,
the consequent disruptions in shipping on the Ubangui
River and the resulting disruption in the supply of basic
goods to the country.

There has been a drop in tax and customs
revenues, which has made it impossible for the
authorities to improve public finances or to deal with
the country's financial obligations. However, one can
hope that the recent financial support measures taken
by the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) will enable the Government to deal
gradually with the problems facing it, including the
problem of salaries.

With regard to the human rights situation, we
have been happy to see a decrease in the number of
summary and extrajudicial executions. However,
another form of human rights Violations has emerged in
the Central African Republic: the popular justice
referred to as "neighbourhood justice", which is
common in Bangui and in which victims - thieves and
"witches" - are often beaten to death.

The situation in the jails is also a cause for
concern. Conditions for prisoners in police stations and
gendarmerie brigades are not in keeping with
international standards. The United Nations Office has
organized many training courses in cooperation with
the Government to strengthen capacity in this area.
About 300 law enforcement officers have been given
training in human rights and international humanitarian
law. There is an urgent need to strengthen the country's
judicial and prison systems, but that can be done only
with substantial assistance from donors.

With regard to security and military questions,
the report indicates that the overall situation in Bangui
and the interior of the country is calm. However, there
have been acts of urban banditry and major roads have
been blocked for the purpose of highway robbery in the
provinces. The programme to restructure defence and
security forces continues, and several positive steps
have been taken. However, there have been no tangible
results in the demobilization and reintegration
programme due to a lack of adequate resources. The
programme was restructured, but it has been suspended
for technical reasons. It will resume as soon as the
necessary resources are available.

The report before the Council stresses the impact
of the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
the Central African Republic. That war has led in
particular to an influx of refugees into the southern part
of the country, thereby contributing to the worsening of
the economic situation. Needless to say, the recent
death of President Kabila only serves to add to the
uncertainty looming over the subregion, which in turn
makes peace in such a vulnerable country as the
Central African Republic even more fragile.

I would now like to draw the attention of
members of the Council to the observations contained
at the end ofthe report.

The situation in the Central African Republic
today is of great concern. Political and social tension
and the negative impact of the war in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo mean that the Central African
Republic is the soft underbelly of the subregion, a fact
that seriously jeopardizes any chance of strengthening
peace and stability. The Secretary-General urges
political actors in the Central African Republic,
including the Government, to muster the necessary
political will to overcome the current crisis.

Because ofthe economic and financial difficulties
facing it, the Government of the Central African
Republic has enormous expectations of the
international community in general and of the United
Nations in particular. Unfortunately, pledges made at
the special donors' meeting in New York in May 2000
were not followed up on immediately. It would be very
desirable for the partners of the Central African
Republic to honour all their commitments. In this
regard, I should like, on behalf of the Secretary-
General, to thank all those Member States that have
lived up to the promises that they made at the May
2000 meeting.

Finally, the Secretary-General draws the attention
of the Council to the fact that the investment made by
the international community to restore peace in the
Central African Republic is in danger of being
completely wasted if emergency assistance is not
provided to the Central African authorities. In this
regard, I should like to stress the range and gravity of
the challenges facing the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in the Central African
Republic. Such challenges are both political and
institutional, and require sustained attention on the part
ofthe international community.

