Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation would like to express its
gratitude to the Secretary-General for the important report
he has prepared on peace-keeping. This document is quite
rightly considered a great contribution to studying the
peace-keeping practices of the United Nations, an
endeavour begun in 'An Agenda for Peace', in response to
the decision taken by the high-level meeting of the Security
Council on 31 January 1992. The assessments contained in
the report and the recommendations based on the
Organization's various successes and failures also need to
be carefully studied and taken into account in the
Organization's daily activities.

In this period of evolution in international relations,
the time is now ripe for a thorough dialogue on all aspects
of peace-keeping and for reconsidering activities in this
area. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Kozyrev, referred to this when he spoke in
the Security Council on 17 October last year. In our view,
the Secretary-General' s report quite accurately describes the
qualitative changes that have occurred in the nature of the
United Nations peace-keeping activities, most of which now
involve threats to international peace and security caused by
conflicts within States. Resolving such disputes is more
complex, more costly and more dangerous for international
personnel than conducting traditional peace-keeping
operations, though, naturally, they do not follow the same
pattern in all situations.

We agree with the Secretary-General's conclusion that
there should be greater use of preventive diplomacy; this
will require broad support by Member States. In view of
the concern expressed by the Secretary-General, Moscow is
prepared to consider the possibility of having eminent
personalities with considerable political and diplomatic
experience perform various peace-keeping missions on
behalf of the Secretary-General, as his special
representatives.

We also see some rationality in the idea of creating
small field missions for the purposes of preventive
diplomacy, provided of course that the consent of the host
country has been obtained. We also believe it would be
useful for the Secretary-General to define the general
criteria for establishing and making use of such missions.
We consider the determination of the primary conditions
for conducting peace-keeping operations to be of
fundamental importance.

We are particularly anxious about the fact that,
despite decisions taken by the Security Council, it has so
far been impossible to adopt standard criteria and
conditions for involving the United Nations in
extinguishing various hotbeds of tension. Sometimes this
means that certain conflicts whose threat to international
stability is not obvious swallow up considerable funds,
with large contingents of peace-keeping forces being sent
immediately, whereas in other instances we believe the
Security Council is slow to act, sometimes taking months
to study a situation and limiting itself in the final analysis
to sending small groups of observers, despite the direct
request made by the leaders of the States concerned. This
was particularly true in instances connected with conflicts
in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) region.
Such a practice gives us every reason to speak about
double standards. Of course, we appreciate that the United
Nations capacities are limited, but it is precisely for this
reason that they must be properly used in settling
conflicts in various parts of the world, including the CIS
region. There should not be situations in which, to
paraphrase Orwell's aphorism, some conflicts are more
equal than others.

We share the views expressed in the report regarding
the need to observe the principle of unity of command
and to determine three levels of authority in carrying out
operations. We assume in this connection that the
Secretary-General, when taking executive leadership and
command, will be ruled by the political instructions of the
Security Council, will keep the Security Council fully
abreast of developments and will consult it on any steps
that are political rather than technical. At the same time,
the Governments of contributing countries should be kept
informed about all aspects of the operation at all times.

As regards the trend towards the immediate conduct
of operations by the Security Council, referred to by the
Secretary-General in his report, we would like to
emphasize the Council's exclusive authority under the
Charter and the need to more carefully weigh the pros
and cons when elaborating the mandates for such
operations. Of course, we are not talking about the
micro-management of purely practical issues, such as the
deployment of contingents, their establishment in the
field, their field headquarters and so forth.

 

We have noted the disappointment expressed by the
Secretary-General over the recently adopted concept of
stand-by arrangements. We believe, none the less, that it is
important to try to perfect the system of such arrangements,
particularly as many countries, including the Russian
Federation, have shown interest in it. Perhaps it would be
a good idea, to this end, to hold a high-level meeting under
the presidency of the Secretary-General to encourage action
on this very useful idea.

The proposal to create rapid reaction forces involves
a number of fundamental issues which will require very
thorough consideration, both conceptually and practically.
This consideration would obviously require us to take into
account the provisions of Article 43 of the Charter. As
President Yeltsin stated at the forty-ninth session of the
General Assembly, Russia is prepared to conclude an
agreement with the Security Council to provide national
military contingents for United Nations operations. If this
example is followed by a sufficient number of other States,
we could move towards realizing the concept of United
Nations armed forces. In this case it is particularly
important that we should give the Military Staff Committee,
which is intended to advise and assist the Security Council
on all questions relating to the Security Council's military
requirements, not only formal, but substantive work. It
would also be useful to analyse the Committee's potential
to further the work of the Secretariat in developing the
Agenda for Peace.

The Russian delegation would like to express its
support for the proposals in the report on ways to resolve
problems relating to the material and technical supply of
peace-keeping operations, the proper training and
preparation of personnel, and the creation of effective
information capacity when planning future operations. The
influence on public opinion and political decisions of
information disseminated about conflicts is too great for
this problem to be underestimated.

The current definition of security cannot be separated
from the idea of sustainable development. From this point
of view, it seems to us that the Secretary-General is right
to want further to develop the concept of post-conflict
peace-building and to create structures that will make it
possible to consolidate peace after the achievement of a
political settlement. A certain impetus might be given by
drawing up parameters and practical arrangements for post-
conflict peace-building, whose tasks and significance can be
compared in scope to the post-war international Trusteeship
system. We also noted the new variation of this major issue
proposed by the Secretary-General, described in the report
as preventive peace-building. We believe that this is a
very far-sighted and justifiable approach. As the report
indicates, it would be desirable to carefully study the
whole range of possibilities open to the United Nations to
carry out both preventive and post-conflict peace-building,
based on major improvements in coordination and on the
division of labour between all relevant organs and
institutions, taking into account the sphere of competency
of each.

We should also encourage the Secretary-General's
efforts to implement "micro-disarmament". To this end,
we could make use of the machinery of the Register of
Conventional Arms, among others. We are convinced that
in the field of "macro-disarmament", particularly with
respect to non-proliferation, the United Nations and the
Security Council can make a more active contribution.
We hope that it will be possible to study the Secretary-
General's ideas on these matters as well.

The report's analysis of the consequences of resort
to sanctions reflects the concerns expressed by most
members of the United Nations. Other speakers have
already referred to this. On this issue, it is important that
we be clear about the goals of the sanctions imposed, the
need for a timely agreement on precise conditions and
machinery for lifting them once they have fulfilled their
purpose, the inadmissibility of tightening sanctions if that
would hinder the process of a political settlement, and the
vital need to consider humanitarian factors.

The report also indicates the urgent need to consider
the problem of sanctions and to take concrete measures,
particularly in connection with Article 50 of the Charter.
We are prepared to consider the creation of a special
mechanism within the Secretariat, with well-defined
functions and tasks, to address sanctions issues. In such
work, it is also important to call upon both the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs and, at the
intergovernmental level, the Economic and Social
Council, taking into account the possibilities afforded by
Article 65 of the Charter.

The future international security system will be truly
stable only if we can find effective machinery for
resolving problems at all their levels: national, regional
and global. Sharing responsibilities among these levels
will allow the United Nations to retain its flexible,
efficiently operating structure.

In this connection, we support the further
strengthening of cooperation between the United Nations

 

and regional organizations in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter, maintaining the statutory role and
responsibility of the Security Council. We support the
continued practice of the Secretary-General's convening
meetings of the leaders of regional organizations with a
View to broadening their experience of cooperation with the
United Nations and between themselves. We believe that it
is particularly important to establish working relations
between the United Nations and the Commonwealth of
Independent States, which is one such regional organization.
Undoubtedly, in all instances of regional peace-keeping
carried out on the basis of voluntary regional agreements
and arrangements in accordance with Article 52 of the
Charter, United Nations involvement should be on the basis
of voluntary, equitable cooperation without any monitoring
or attempt to interfere in the settlement process, without
having responsibility - political and financial - for the
outcome of that process.
As to financing, we support the report's ideas on a
thorough evaluation of human, material and financial
resources available for pursuing current operations or
establishing new ones. In considering this sensitive issue in
the future we might take an inventory of all United Nations
peace-keeping activities. This would eventually help us to
direct the available limited resources to issues that pose a
real challenge to peace and security and to refrain from
using funds where no such threat exists or where the parties
themselves have for decades been reluctant to seek a
political solution.

The Russian delegation believes that the discussion
begun today on the Secretary-General's report will be
continued, allowing the Security Council to take substantive
and useful decisions on the future role of the United
Nations in these matters.

