Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Peru, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning Counter-Terrorism,
for his briefing on terrorism and critical infrastructure.

Today marks exactly one year since the adoption
of resolution 2341 (2017). Financial networks, energy
facilities and food distribution systems do not only form
the pillars of our countries, they are vital to the welfare
of our societies. Much of those networks and systems
transcend borders. As such, critical infrastructure
serves to underline our vulnerability and the close
linkages between our countries and our national
security. I would like to focus on three important
aspects in my intervention, namely, the protection of
soft targets, public-private partnerships and further
multilateral action.

First, protecting our critical infrastructure is vital
to enhancing our security. In that regard, protecting
soft targets is a specific concern. We have all been
shocked by terrorist attacks on concert halls, markets
and hotels. Those attacks have a huge impact on our
societies. As we will not change our way of life or give
in on our freedoms, we have to enhance our resilience.
Enhancing resilience starts with appropriate risk
assessments based on solid risk analyses. Developing
those assessments requires the involvement of all the
relevant stakeholders. The Government should play a
facilitating role in that, but it is up to the private sector
to assume its responsibility as well.

That brings me to my second point: in many
countries, the majority of critical infrastructure
is privately owned. In the Netherlands that figure
is as much as 90 per cent, making public-private
partnerships essential. We need to involve private
partners in sharing knowledge and shaping our policy.
In the Netherlands, therefore, we have set up so-called
information-sharing and analysis centres across 11
sectors, including finance, energy and cybersecurity.
With regard to the latter, the scale of insecurity caused
by the proliferation of significant cyberincidents will
demand increased action from all stakeholders. To
that end, our national cybersecurity centre facilitates
sharing information between critical infrastructure
partners, including from the private sector, to mitigate
the impact of cyberincidents.

My third, and final, point is on multilateral action.
Even though protecting critical infrastructure is a
national competence, the United Nations and other
multilateral organizations have an important supporting
role to play. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate plays a central role in mapping
countries' capacities to protect critical infrastructure
and identifying possible gaps. The Office of Counter-
Terrorism is key for coordinating subsequent capacity-
building by the United Nations. Other organizations
are equally important. For example, in the context of
the European Union (EU), the Netherlands and the EU,
together with public and private partners, organized a
tabletop exercise to practice a possible disruption of
electricity networks.

Like the representatives of Peru, the United States
and others who spoke before us, I would also like to
highlight the work done by the Global Counterterrorism
Forum (GCTF). Last September, the GCTF launched
the Antalya memorandum on the protection of soft
targets in a counter-terrorism context. That initiative,
led by the United States and Turkey, offers publicly
available and ready-to-use good practices to include
in national policies. As co-Chair of the GCTF, we are
grateful to the various United Nations entities that have
contributed to the development of these good practices.

In conclusion, we welcome the progress made in
implementing resolution 2341 (2017) and encourage
further cooperation between Member States and
between multilateral organizations. Only by working
together can we increase our national and global security.

