Australia commends Indonesia for convening this open debate of the Security Council on linkages between terrorism and organized crime. Australia is proud of its long history of partnering with Indonesia in efforts to combat terrorism and transnational crime and welcomes its leadership on this important issue. The link between terrorist groups and transnational, serious and organized crime continues to present a complex and evolving threat to international security, particularly in environments where such groups can exploit poor governance and a weakened rule of law. We recognize that this linkage manifests itself differently in different countries. While linkages between terrorism and organized crime have fortunately been less pronounced in the Australian context, we have continued to focus our efforts on prevention, disruption and responding to such threats. Underpinning Australia's response is our strong counter-terrorism financing regime. Working collaboratively across law enforcement, intelligence, policy agencies, industry, the community and international counterparts, that regime has enabled Australia to detect and respond to emerging financing threats and to undermine the capacity of violent extremists to fund and carry out acts of terrorism. Within South-East Asia, we have helped to foster multilateral cooperation through the annual regional Counter-Terrorism Financing Summit. This forum harnesses the collective capability of the region's financial intelligence units to develop actionable strategies to combat terrorism financing and serious crime. In November 2019, Australia was pleased to host the No Money for Terror ministerial conference on counter-terrorism financing. The event, attended by 65 delegations, sought to strengthen global responses against terrorism financing, including global responses to kidnap for ransom, identifying risks and opportunities from emerging technologies, enhancing public-private partnerships and preventing the exploitation of not-for-profit organizations for terrorism purposes. Recognizing that terrorist and organized criminal groups are innovative, the utilization of modern technologies, such as encrypted communications, by such groups presents a significant challenge to law enforcement, which will likely be exacerbated during the coronavirus disease pandemic, where resources will be stretched and investigations may be increasingly reliant on the use of data and digital information. Responding to that challenge, Australia has passed legislation to facilitate law enforcement access to communications and data for criminal investigations, introduced computer access warrants for law enforcement, continued to update anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing laws, introduced legislation designed to establish an international production order, or cross-border access to data, regime and enhanced public-private partnerships. Strengthening governance and the rule of law is essential to combating both threats of terrorism and organized crime. Australia has worked closely with regional partners to provide assistance in developing and implementing laws to combat transnational crime and violent extremism. Australia is firmly committed to the robust implementation of international anti-corruption standards, including those set by the United Nations and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. The Australian Government has also committed to establishing a Commonwealth integrity commission to further strengthen integrity arrangements across the federal public sector. Australia also welcomes the development of international good practices in understanding and combating the nexus between transnational organized crime and terrorism by the Global Counterterrorism Forum.
