Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his
briefing on the Darfur peace talks, and also the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, for his
briefing on the United Nations-African Union Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

The picture is overwhelming. However, in the
comments that follow, I will be focusing on only the
political aspects. We share the views expressed - an
equally worrying analysis - in the most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2007/653). The security
conditions in Darfur continue to deteriorate, while the
Government of the Sudan and the rebel movements are
finding it extremely difficult to get peace talks under
way, despite the tireless efforts of both the United
Nations and the African Union.

The cycle of violence on the ground compounds
the humanitarian situation. To overcome this violence,
a political solution to the crisis is necessary. The
success of a political agreement is the underpinning of
a lasting peace in Sudan, in parallel with a correct
implementation of the peace treaty between the North
and South Sudan. In seeking to achieve a stable Sudan,
we are working for regional stability in East Africa.

Belgium notes that the numerous endeavours to
carry forward the peace talks in Darfur. Through the
Sirte process have not yet been reflected in concrete
progress in the quest for a negotiated solution. We are
of the View that there is an essential prior condition for
the success of negotiations, namely, the strict and
immediate cessation of hostilities by all parties.

An effective oversight mechanism must also go
hand in hand with the laying down of arms. It is up to
the parties to commit fully and openly to the quest for
a lasting agreement. That is an obligation laid down by
our Council; it is not just an option.

Belgium calls on the Government of the Sudan
and all the rebel movements to become immediately
involved in the peace negotiations and to draw into
their discussion all components of civil society,
including tribal leaders, representatives of displaced
persons and women's movements. In this way, the talks
will have the broadest possible base and the negotiated
agreement will benefit from solid and lasting support.

Beyond the developments in the political process,
Belgium deplores the major delays that are apparent in
deployment of the heavy support package and
UNAMID. Side by side with the peace negotiations,
this hybrid force is the other dimension in the
stabilization of Darfur.

It is up to the Sudanese authorities to facilitate
unconditional implementation, in keeping with
resolution 1769 (2007) and the successive appeals
made in this respect by the Council. The fact that the
Under-Secretary-General has already been obliged to
raise the difficult issues that the Council will face in
the case of continued non-cooperation by the
Government of the Sudan is a matter of grave concern.
The Council must, however, assume its responsibilities.

Lastly, Belgium would like to restate its
commitment to international justice and to the fight
against impunity. The Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court will be reporting to us in a few days on
the evolution of his activities regarding the situation in
Darfur. We know that his View regarding the
cooperation of the Sudanese authorities is harsh and
reflects a situation that continues to deteriorate to the
point of virtual non-existence, while there have been
two arrest warrants issued - in particular against
Mr. Ahmad Haroun, who has since been promoted to
the post of Minister - and while resolution 1593

(2005) requires that the Sudan fully cooperate with the
Court and the Prosecutor.

We do not and will not tolerate the continued
indifference of the Government of the Sudan to the
appeals of the international community in the face of
grave violations of international humanitarian law.

