Mr. Al-Jafari (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): IfI may, at
the outset I should like to congratulate Ethiopia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and thank it for its work in convening
this meeting. I would also like to thank Egypt for its
work during its presidency of the Council last month.

On 19 September 2016, we held a high-level meeting
(see S/PV.7775) at Headquarters in which Iraq, the United
Kingdom and Belgium, among others, participated.
On that ocassion, we demonstrated the unity of the
international community by condemning the grave
human rights violations committed by Da'esh terrorist
gangs in Iraq and pledged to bring the perpetrators
to justice. Today's historic resolution 2379 (2017)
is the result of constructive cooperation and a clear
understanding between Iraq and the United Kingdom.
Its goal is to establish legal foundations for an
international mechanism that respects Iraq's sovereignty
and its jurisdiction in the area of evidence-collection in
order to prosecute terrorists before international courts
for their grave crimes in Iraq and other countries in
the world.

The Council is well aware of the fact that the Iraqi
judicial system dates back to the Code of Hammurabi,
established between 1792-1742 BC, which became the
world's penal code.

Iraq applauds the efforts of the United Kingdom
to work with Iraq, in Baghdad and New York, over the
past months in order to come up with draft a resolution
that would respond to Iraq's concerns. We would
like to extend our special thanks to the Permanent
Representative and his team at the British Mission
in New York, as well as the team working at the
British Embassy in Baghdad. Both worked tirelessly
and with great professionalism with the Permanent
Representative and his team at our Mission to the United
Nations to reach a consensus-based and balanced text.

Iraq appreciates the valuable contributions made
by Member States of the Security Council during the
negotiations on the resolution 2379, which no doubt
enhanced the language of the resolution in both
substance and form. We would also like to thank them
for their understanding and response to Iraq's request
for international assistance in the area of evidence
collection concerning the crimes committed by Da'esh.

The Council is aware of the magnitude of the
sacrifices, the human losses and the destruction as
a result of the war against terrorism in Iraq. That
destruction did not occur in Iraq alone, however.
Wherever Da'esh enters, destruction and chaos follow.
We cannot afford to relinquish what we have achieved
together in this war. We cannot afford to renounce
the huge sacrifices made by our people. We have
lived a bitter experience in Iraq, with the suffering
and atrocities endured by civilians, in particular
minorities - including Christians, Yazidis, Sabians,
Turkmen and Shabak - as well as the oppression
of women and children in areas under the control of
Da'esh. The international community must consider the
gravity of this experience for humankind. We must do
all we can to prevent it from happening again anywhere
else in the world.
Resolution 2379 (2017), intended to hold Da'esh
accountable, is a victory for humanjustice as well as for
the victims. It is a concrete manifestation of rejection
of the brutality of Da'esh and effective condemnation
of its deviant behavior. Prosecuting Da'esh criminals
and bringing them to justice will send a message of
deterrance to those criminals, while also sending one
of reassurance to all our peoples.

When we called for a Security Council resolution
to prosecute Da'esh, we were well aware that it would
be a very effective form of deterrence. This serves as
a firm warning to the financiers of this gang and its
ideological, financial and media supporters.

Resolution 2379 (2017) is based on solid foundations
and a clear framework of full respect for Iraq's
sovereignty and its jurisdiction in the field of criminal
evidence-collection about crimes committed by
Da'esh, including the international mechanism for a
joint investigative team, to include Iraqi judges and
international experts. Those foundations consist of the
following pillars.

The first entails international assistance for Iraq
in the area of evidence collection, in line with robust
international legal standards concerning international
crimes that do not fall under the purview of the Iraqi
penal law.

Secondly, the resolution calls for the team to ensure
that international legal expertise is shared with Iraqi
experts and judges, who better understand the Iraqi
legal system duly applicable to such investigations.

Thirdly, Iraq would like to assist other countries
whose nationals might be members of Da'esh by sharing
evidence with them, in accordance with the measures
stipulated in the terms of reference of the agreement
between Iraq and the Secretariat, with a view to holding
Da'esh gangs accountable globally, in line with the
global campaign to bring Da'esh to justice.

Fourthly, the success of the global campaign to
bring the leaders of Da'esh to justice requires serious
cooperation among all States Members of the United
Nations, including sharing information they have about
Da'esh criminals in accordance with the mechanism
for mutual legal assistance between the investigative
team and the State concerned. Iraq made sure that this
provision was included in the wording of resolution
2379 (2017) so as to highlight the importance of
respecting State sovereignty in line with the Charter of
the United Nations.
Fifthly, we call on Member States and international
and regional organizations to provide all possible
assistance to the team so as to strengthen Iraq's legal
and judicial system and promote the rule of law and
end impunity.

Sixthly, during the negotiations on resolution 2379
(2017), Iraq underlined that the terms of reference for
the work of the investigation team in Iraq must be
acceptable to the Iraqi Government. That total consent
illustrates respect for national sovereignty and Iraq's
jurisdiction over crimes committed in Iraq against Iraqi
nationals. We will work with the Secretariat to ensure
that those terms are suitable for the team to carry out
its work effectively in accordance with the resolution.

The Iraqi Government will work with the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General, who will lead the
investigative team in a constructive manner. We will
do that in way that facilitates his work in Iraq pursuant
to the mandate conferred upon him. We will provide
him with the necessary assistance to ensure his success
in implementing his mission.

In that regard, the Government of Iraq calls on
the international community to provide the Special
Adviser with as much assistance as possible to socially
reintegrate and rehabilitate survivors of terrorism and
violence, including through training programmes, so
that they can overcome the devastating impact of the
psychological and physical suffering that they had
to endure.

Finally, I would like to state that victory in Iraq
is the result of the unity of Iraq and all its constituent
people - Muslims and Christians, Shias and Sunnis,
Arabs and Kurds and Turkmen, and Yazidis and
Sabians - an unprecedented illustration of a united
Iraq. At the same time, that victory was a reflection
of the unity among the States represented om the
international coalition.

For the first time, the countries of the world are
standing together to fight a common enemy: Da'esh. In
this very Chamber in September 2014, I delivered my
first speech after Da'esh entered Mosul. And here we are
now. We have come a long way, with milestones marked
by bloodshed, sacrifice, economic destruction and

devastated towns. Yet the result is still the same, andthe displaced can return home. The road ahead will require
facts are unchanged. The Will Oflfflq and ofthe world's serious, genuine cooperation to prevent the return of
peoples prevailed against Da'esh, our common enemy.
We strive to achieve normalcy in our communities so
that citizens can be reassured and refugees and the The meeting ruse at 11.20 am.

extremism, terrorism and terrorist crimes.
