Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks Mr. Farid Zarif for his briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (S/2014/305). We
also welcome His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolie,
President of the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Atifete
Jahjaga. We begin with a message of support to the
countries of the Balkans that have been affected by
the recent floods and welcome the solidarity among
countries that were parties to the conflict that devastated
the former-Yugoslavia 20 years ago.

Today, the Security Council is meeting for the
fourth time since the signing of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of
19 April 2013. We value the important progress achieved
in its implementation. In particular, we highlight
the agreement among the parties on the outstanding
technical issues regarding the integration of Serbian
parallel judicial institutions into the legal framework of
Kosovo. Moreover, the active participation of Belgrade
and Pristina in the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union is essential to achieving their common objective
of improving their cooperation with the Union's
institutions. In that context, we commend Serbia's
official launch of talks in Brussels on 21 January with a
view to acceding to the European Union.

My country stresses the role of regional organizations
in peacebuilding efforts and in re-establishing the rule
of law. In that context, we call special attention to the
efforts on the ground of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission and to their contribution in restoring
the rule of law and maintaining security in Kosovo.
We recognize the role played by the European Union in
bringing the parties closer together, which culminated
in the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations of 19 April 2013.

We remain concerned about the complex situation
of displaced persons in Kosovo. Chile highlights the
assistance of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in resolving the problem.
While local authorities have shown tolerance in
allowing returns, efforts should be redoubled to avoid
any hint of discrimination, particularly against minority
populations. We also reiterate the importance of the
ongoing implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at
all levels so as to guarantee the participation of women
in decision-making and the due consideration of their
needs.

We stress the central role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in promoting peace and security in the area of human
rights, which is a priority in fostering reconciliation
among the communities. Only in an atmosphere of
respect and adequate protection for fundamental
human rights will it be possible to hope for national
reconciliation and a future life in peace.

Despite the progress made in the political dialogue,
we are concerned about certain cases in which the
interim administration of Kosovo has acted contrary to
the conditions agreed and defined under resolution 1244
(1999) for the status of Kosovo. That is why we express
reservations with respect to the plan to transform the
Kosovo Security Force into the Kosovo armed forces.
We also call upon the provisional authorities of Kosovo
to refrain from preventing Serbian authorities from
entering the territory, in order to avoid any additional
conflict.

Experience in other conflict situations has shown
that reconciliation processes must be based on truth
and justice. In that respect, we highlight the progress
made by the parties in identifying missing persons.
Especially relevant in that respect is the work carried
out by the authorities of Serbia and Kosovo through the
Working Group on Missing Persons, with the help of
UNMIK. We must move forward in the search for truth
and the whereabouts of every one of the missing.

We have amply demonstrated the importance
of justice in peacebuilding efforts and the process
of national reconciliation. We underscore the work
carried out by EULEX in transitional matters and
in strengthening the rule of law. In conclusion, we
reaffirm the importance of resolution 1244 (1999) as a
guiding document for Kosovo to promote reconciliation,
stability and prosperous communities.

