Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over the Council this
month. We greatly appreciate the efforts of the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia during his
presidency of the Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting today in the light
of the extremely difficult conditions prevailing in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem.
Children, youth and women are being killed daily.
Grave violations of human rights are being committed.
Occupied Palestinian cities are being subjected to a
stifling blockade in order to starve their populations
and to deny them basic sustenance. Israel is flouting
the simplest and most basic international norms and
laws.
Current events in the occupied Palestinian
territories remind us of episodes from the First and
Second World Wars, particularly those involving
civilians and cities. When we consider the incredible
advances in human and natural sciences and in
technology since those days, we can barely
comprehend what is happening to Palestinian civilians
at the hands of the Israelis, similar as it is to the
treatment received by the vanquished at the hands of
the victors in those earlier conflicts. The basic
difference is that today it is a case of occupied and
occupier.

This Council has been called upon more than
once since the current series of grave Israeli violations
of Palestinian human rights began. The international
community has given Israel more than one opportunity
to change its policies of oppression, but to no avail. We
must therefore redouble our efforts to halt this grave
deterioration and its serious implications for
international peace and security in the region. We call
on the Security Council to assume its role and
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security and to bring pressure to bear on Israel, the
occupying Power, to end its aggressive practices
against the Palestinian people.

The Palestinian people are in dire need of support
and protection from Israeli brutality, which does not
differentiate between children, young men, women and
elderly people. In this regard, my delegation would like
to express its support for the proposal to deploy an
international protection force in the occupied
territories, pursuant to the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Israel must cooperate with such a force.

The Palestinian question cannot be resolved if we
do not pay sufficient attention to its root causes and
their effects. We are not here simply to take note of
Israeli violations of human rights, the suffocating
blockade of Palestinian cities and other practices
carried out by the Israeli occupying forces. We are here
to deal with Israel's occupation of Palestine. The
Security Council cannot stand idly by in the light of
what is happening to Palestinian civilians and
innocents.

Since the Security Council continues to hold
special sessions aimed at protecting civilians and
children in armed conflicts, and since it continues to
send international observers to provide protection to
such people, why then should it exclude the
Palestinians from such international protection? What
happens to the Palestinian people will be on the
conscience of the international community - a
conscience that is represented by the Council, which
must assume its responsibilities and play its rightful
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Therefore a vote should be held on the
proposal made to the Council to provide international
protection to the Palestinians.

