Mr. Arnault (spoke in French): Allow me to
begin by expressing my personal condolences to
the Government and the Permanent Mission of Cote
d'Ivoire on the passing of Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-
Boutchoue. His resolute support for our work has been
a great source of encouragement for the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia.

(spoke in English)

It is a privilege to share once again the floor with
Vice-President Oscar Naranjo Trujillo in the presence
of Foreign Minister Maria Angela Holguin. Both have
been firm pillars of the peace process during both the
negotiation and the implementation phase, and we are
grateful for the close and supportive relation they have
maintained with the Mission.

On 11 March, millions of Colombians turned out
to vote in congressional elections that were a clear
step forward in the country's transition from conflict
to peace. The elections were also a milestone in the
transition of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Coml'in (FARC) from weapons to politics. The
presidential election is now five weeks away, and
against a background of polarization, the campaign
so far has continued the trend towards a reduction of
electoral violence.

Among legislative developments since the
publication of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/279), let us also note that a couple of weeks
ago the Constitutional Court endorsed the Law on
the Status of the Opposition - a piece of legislation
derived from the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace that
had previously been on the agenda of Congress since
the adoption of the current Constitution in 1991. In
particular, it provides opposition parties with access
to media, additional funding and representation in the
Senate and the Chamber of Representatives for runners-
ups in the presidential and vice-presidential elections.
In addition, last night, the same Court unanimously
declared constitutional the political participation of
FARC, including the 10 seats in Congress provided for
in the Peace Agreement. This is a particularly important
ruling at this juncture.

With regard to the socioeconomic reintegration of
FARC members, the Superintendent of Banks issued
the expected decree to facilitate the opening of bank
accounts for FARC cooperatives. It confirms that
entities under the supervision of the Superintendent
can provide banking services to former members of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in the process of
reintegration on an equal footing with the rest of the
population, and that, with the exception of individuals
on international sanctions lists, the entities cannot deny
those services to persons on account of their being
former combatants.

With respect to security guarantees, a significant
development was the approval two days ago, after many
months of consultations with a large array of civil
society organizations, of a programme for the security
and protection of communities, organizations, social
leaders and human rights defenders. The programme
was one of the main commitments in the Peace
Agreement. It supplements the current focus of the
National Protection Unit on the protection of individual
leaders with a more collective approach to the security
of communities, which is in line with challenges
that have been identified in the countryside by State
institutions, social organizations and the Mission
itself. The programme also provides for a ground-up
approach to security on the appropriate premise that
local authorities and communities are best placed
to identify threats and protection measures. We will
provide maximum support for its implementation.

The last couple of weeks have also brought new
challenges to the peace process. The arrest of one ofthe
leaders of FARC on drug trafficking chargesreverberated
in a country that remains divided around the peace
process. From the FARC leadership, and particularly
from the party's President Timoleon Jimenez, calls for
calm and statements of resolve to continue to pursue the
path of the Peace Agreement have been very important
in addressing misgivings and mistrust among former
combatants in the reintegration areas. In addition, the
Government has stated its commitment to accelerating
the implementation of the Peace Agreement, particularly
with regard to reintegration. We welcome the fact that
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace is able to take on its
responsibilities in relation to this case, in accordance
with the Peace Agreement.

We also agree wholeheartedly that there is a
need for a sustained drive to put the reintegration of
former combatants on a more solid basis before the
end of the Government's mandate. Weakness in this
effort can only increase the risk of the drift of some
ex-combatants to criminal groups, such as those
responsible for the tragic killings and kidnappings of
Ecuadorian nationals operating in the border area with
Ecuador. As mentioned by the Secretary-General in
his report, the ingredients for a such a breakthrough
in reintegration are well-known - viable productive
projects, functional cooperatives and the availability of
land - and much of the legal and technical preparation
has already been done. We look forward to the prompt
approval ofthe decree allowing access to land to former
combatants.

I mentioned earlier the new programme on the
protection of communities. I should note that with
its adoption, implementation of the most important
commitments of the Peace Agreement with regard to
security matters is under way: the National Commission
on Security Guarantees, the Special Investigation Unit
of the Office of the Attorney General, the Police Elite
Corps, the strengthened early warning system of the
Office of the Ombudsman, and the National Protection
Unit's special protection measures for FARC are in
place. Furthermore, the decree on the Comprehensive
Security System for the Exercise of Politics was passed
and endorsed by the Constitutional Court.

The Secretary-General reported on the activation
of the National Commission on Security Guarantees,
on whose leadership we continue to count to focus
the attention of institutions on bringing much-needed
security to the countryside and address the threats and
attacks against community leaders and human rights
defenders. In this respect, the Special Investigation Unit
of the Office of the Attorney General has now expanded
its investigations to cover killings of those leaders
after initially focusing primarily on the assassination
of FARC members. As of this month, it has assumed
58 such cases of community leaders and human rights
defenders. It is currently giving priority to those with a
view to achieving results as soon as possible.

While it is obviously too early to take stock of a
peace process that has set ambitious and long-term
goals, we have already observed that it has achieved
a notable reduction of violence in the context of the
congressional elections. Similarly, it has created a
series of institutions dedicated to overcoming patterns
of social, economic and political violence in the
conflict areas. That is a substantial change, and the next
few months provide an opportunity to bring together
Government institutions, local authorities and social
organizations to press forward with that agenda.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's report,
negotiations between the Government of Colombia and
the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional have resumed. The
Catholic Church and the Mission, which supported the
implementation of the temporary ceasefire at the end of
last year, have presented their recommendations to both
parties to support their effort to reach a more reliable
ceasefire. The two parties have reiterated their interest
in United Nations support in the implementation of a
future ceasefire. The Security Council will obviously
make the appropriate decisions in due time. Meanwhile,
we will do our best to ensure that the design of the
ceasefire is as robust as possible.

Throughout the implementation phase of the
Peace Agreement, circumstances have occasionally
tested the commitment of the two parties to stay the
course. They have stayed the course. The unanimous
support consistently voiced by the Council has helped
sustain that resolve. It will continue to be a source of
confidence and strength.

