Mr. Uziimcii: It is a great honour for me to address
the Security Council. I welcome the adoption today
of resolution 2325 (2016), concerning the mechanism
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). I thank
you, Sir, for the kind invitation to me to attend this
important meeting.

As an all-encompassing treaty, the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC) seeks to achieve
its goals not only through core disarmament and
non-proliferation measures, but also by engendering
international cooperation and offering assistance and
protection against chemical weapons. These pillars of
the Convention translate in turn into several programme
areas. I will confine my remarks to the parts of our
mandate that most directly support the objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Today, 94 per cent of the world's declared chemical
weapons have been destroyed under international
verification. That amounts to more than 65,000 tons ofthe
deadliest poisons ever produced, including Syrian and
Libyan chemical weapons. An entire class of weapons
of mass destruction is now at the threshold of being
completely eradicated. That would be an unprecedented
achievement in the history of disarmament. Apart from
clearly contributing to global security, the possibilities
for non-State actors gaining access to military-grade
stockpiles have been virtually eliminated.

The objective of banishing a category of weapons
will remain elusive, however, without related measures
to prevent their re-emergence. The Convention therefore
creates obligations in the context of non-proliferation
that broadly translate into two main areas: industrial
verification and data reporting, on the one hand,
and the promulgation and enforcement of national
legislation, on the other. Industrial inspections are an
essential part of our mandate. Since 1997, 3,400 such
inspections have been carried out in over 80 States
parties. More specifically, in the context of resolution
1540 (2004), many of the measures contained in its
operative paragraphs that deal with chemical weapons
correspond to the obligations that States parties have
already assumed under the Convention.

The effectiveness of legislative and other
regulatory measures and of the internal structures that
administer them is critical to preventing non-State
actors from gaining access to materials that could aid
the development of chemical weapons. Full compliance
at the national level with the obligations arising from
the Convention provides a good measure of protection
against proliferation. In that regard, through a range
of programmes that are regularly conducted by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), we have assisted our States parties in fulfilling
their obligations. In particular, the OPCW secretariat
reviews drafts of implementing legislation and provides
comments thereon in order to ensure that the drafts meet
the requirements of the Convention. Our internship
programme for legal drafters is aimed at enhancing the
technical skills of participants so as to enable them to
complete a draft of national implementing legislation.

The OPCW secretariat has actively focused on
offering practical, on-site assistance tailored to the need
of States parties that have requested it. A mentorship
programme facilitates the transfer of best practices
between States. These activities have produced
concrete results. Some 118 States parties have adopted
legislative and administrative measures to implement
the provisions of the Convention that are the most
pertinent to its object and purpose. Thirty-two States
parties have adopted implementing measures that cover
some of the initial measures. Forty-two States parties
have yet to adopt implementing legislation. For States
parties that possess declarable industrial facilities,
additional measures are required under the Convention.
Criminalizing activities that the Convention prohibits
and establishing measures that would enforce those
rules accords entirely with the objectives of resolution
1540 (2004).

Controls on transfers of scheduled chemicals are an
important aspect of the Convention's non-proliferation
regime. Such activities are regulated under article VI
of the Convention and are mentioned in paragraphs
3 (c) and (d) of resolution 1540 (2004). Hundreds of
thousands of tons of scheduled chemicals are traded
internationally every year for purposes not prohibited
under the Convention. it is evident that this perfectly
legitimate trade needs to be monitored and controlled.
OPCW works closely with customs authorities and
the chemical industry, and that cooperation is making
further progress through certain new arrangements.

We also count on the invaluable support of
the chemical industry worldwide, which has fully
understood the importance of preventing any misuse
of chemicals. The Scientific Advisory Board of the
OPCW, composed of 25 eminent experts, provides its
recommendations for mitigating the proliferation risks
emanating from scientific and technological advances.

The threat posed by terrorists represents an ever-
present danger. We know from recent investigations that
Da'esh has in fact used chemical weapons in Syria and
Iraq. The international legal framework offers several
avenues for enhanced cooperation and coordination by
international organizations in the context of counter-
terrorism. The OPCW Open-ended Working Group on
Terrorism regularly regularly reviews the opportunities
for enhanced interaction and coordination between the
concerned international entities, including the 1540
(2004) mechanism.

We also have an active partnership with the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. Together with the International Atomic Energy
Agency, OPCW co-chairs the Working Group on
Preventing and Responding to WMD Terrorist Attacks.
Early next year, OPCW will host a tabletop exercise,
with the participation of various organizations, to test
an inter-agency mechanism to respond to a chemical
terrorist attack. The mechanism will enhance the
interoperability of relevant organizations for an effective
response. We believe that the newly established OPCW
Rapid Response Assistance Mission will provide an
important capability to the mechanism.

We must continue to strengthen our cooperation
in order to fully implement our legal obligations,
whether they originate in international treaties, such
as the CWC, or instruments such as resolution 1540
(2004). OPCW remains ready to further strengthen its
cooperation with relevant international institutions,
relevant communities and civil society in order to
ensure that non- State actors do not reach out to weapons
of mass destruction.

