Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): I wish to start by thanking you,
Sir, for organizing this open meeting of the Security
Council on this very important and difficult subject. I also
wish to thank Mr. Vieira de Mello for his extremely
interesting and thought-provoking briefing.

Mr. Vieira de Mello ended his statement with a
quotation of Vaclav Havel. Let me repeat it, because I think
it is very relevant to our work:

"We must not be afraid of dreaming the seemingly
impossible if we want the impossible to become a
reality."

Now, let me reflect upon the implications of this important
thought.

Let me first ask myself what can be defined as the
"seemingly impossible". There are many illustrations which
can be given and many examples from the current work of
the Security Council can help us in discussing this. But I
would like to dwell for a short while on an example
provided by Mr. Vieira de Mello, who placed, at the
beginning of his statement, an important emphasis on
international humanitarian law. He explained that the
problem of respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law in contemporary conflicts has become
dramatic. The body of applicable international humanitarian
law is impressive and a great achievement of civilization,
but - as we learn and as we know from too many
situations - much too often the norms of international
humanitarian law are unknown, ignored or deliberately
violated.

I believe that the Security Council must always insist
on the responsibility of all the parties to all conflicts for
respect for international humanitarian law and on the
punishment of all violations of humanitarian law. In that
regard, the Security Council must be consistent and must
show the ability to persist. Consistency means that it has to
pay due attention to humanitarian law in all situations and
that it must be aware - and here comes the persistency
element - of the non-applicability of statutory limitations
for war crimes and crimes against humanity. Even in those
cases in which crimes have been committed years earlier,
there is still very good reason to insist on full investigation
of crimes and on punishment, because this is the only way
to prevent the culture of impunity from prevailing and the
only way in which a meaningful and systematic combating
of violations of humanitarian law can be pursued.

I believe that this is an important challenge for the
Security Council and one which we should dream of as
something which is seemingly impossible but which, in
time, may become a reality.

Many speakers have referred to specific tasks of the
Security Council in contemporary situations, and I do not
propose to deal with these in any detail. I would like to
mention, however, that the nature of contemporary
conflicts is such that most often they produce very serious
humanitarian consequences. There are very good reasons
to insist, in all situations, on humanitarian access to
populations in need, such as, for example, the present
situation in Angola. It is necessary to include assistance
through humanitarian action in the mandates of the United
Nations military forces. One could quote several examples
from previous years.

It is very important that the Council pay special
attention to the problem of child soldiers - another
problem to which several speakers have referred this
morning - especially in the context of the eventual
demobilization and reintegration of children after the
conflict. One would hope that the situation in Sierra
Leone would be one in which one could start
meaningfully to dream about the demobilization and
reintegration of children.

Finally, as many have said, the protection of
humanitarian personnel should be a very important
priority for the Security Council.

All these tasks belong to the important work of the
Security Council, but, in addition to these, I believe that
it is worth keeping in mind what Mr. Vieira de Mello told
us today: humanitarian action can never resolve conflicts
that, in essence, have political origins. I am mentioning
this because all too often in the past few years, the
Council has ended up with humanitarian action being seen
as a substitute for political action. It may be recalled that
Secretary-General Kofi Annan has often referred to this
problem and explained that humanitarian action can be
only a palliative and no substitute for action aimed at
tackling the root causes of different crises.

A commentator in today's issue of the International
Herald Tribune emphasizes that humanitarian action must
not be the only response of the political bodies to the
tragedies resulting from armed conflicts. Certainly, the
Security Council is primarily a political body, so therefore
it has to think seriously and hard about its basic
approaches to various armed conflicts and crisis

 

situations. This does not in any way diminish the
importance of the humanitarian dimension; at the same
time, when contemplating humanitarian action, the Council
has to be aware of the need to address the political issues.

In this context, two thoughts come to mind. First, the
Council should, in my opinion, put into focus preventive
action in all situations, when possible. The Council should
more often engage itself at an early stage of a conflict or an
emerging conflict and, perhaps, more often invite or
encourage the Secretary-General to exercise his role as an
actor of preventive diplomacy to prevent conflicts.

Prevention, of course, is not always possible and
sometimes far-reaching decisions have to be taken by the
Security Council. Here again, I think, the basic political
requirement is that these decisions be taken on time. A
threat to the peace must be addressed at an early stage. I
firmly believe that the Security Council should not allow
itself to be paralysed, should not allow national interests to
paralyse its action in an early effort to address an emerging
threat to the peace.

Sometimes, the paralysing effect of national interests
is hidden behind the rhetoric of protection of the national
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. The principles
of protection of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States are important principles, but they are not absolute.
The Security Council must be able to distinguish between
the genuine protection of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and the use or abuse of these principles
as quasi-justification for the commission of crimes against
humanity and other atrocities which, in addition to being an
evil in themselves, threaten the international peace.

In such situations, the Security Council must be able
to determine when and where the threat to international
peace actually starts. Action should be early and that action,
in our opinion, should even include the possibility of
authorizing the use of force in order to prevent the threat to
peace from developing further into an open and broad
conflict and from producing a humanitarian catastrophe.
This is, in my opinion, one of the basic political challenges
to the Security Council these days and something which
should not be overlooked, even when we talk primarily
about the humanitarian aspects of our work.

Let me conclude once again by quoting Vaclav Havel:

"We must not be afraid of dreaming the seemingly
impossible if we want the impossible to become a
reality."
The Security Council must not allow paralysis. It must
show the ability to act in a meaningful way at the
political level.

