Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation, for
having organized this important debate. We are grateful
also to Under-Secretary-Generai Abe for his briefing. I
would particularly like to welcome Ms. Kawaguchi and
to thank her for her thoughtful and detailed remarks.

The United Kingdom supports the views to be
expressed later in this debate by the representative of
Luxembourg, which holds the presidency of the
European Union. I will therefore cover only a few
points.

The United Kingdom supports the full
implementation at national, regional and international
levels of the United Nations Programme of Action. We
welcome the Secretary-General's report (S/2005/69)
and this debate as an opportunity to discuss and make
progress on these important issues.

In particular, we welcome the support that we
hope and expect will be expressed in the presidential
statement to be adopted later today on the need for
more responsibility in the management of small arms
and light weapons transfers. I would like to thank the
Japanese delegation for leading our work on the
presidential statement. The availability of small arms
and light weapons is so widespread that restraint by
traditional suppliers, although absolutely necessary, is
not sufficient. We think that a broader international
approach is needed. The United Nations Programme of
Action contains important guidance on controlling
transfers, and we need to build on that. For example,
we need to identify common factors for consideration
before issuing a licence for an international transfer of
small arms and light weapons. We also need to support
regions and countries concerned with their capacity-
building.

Our objective is to introduce minimum common
international controls on small arms and light weapons
transfers within the United Nations Programme of
Action at the United Nations review meeting on small
arms in 2006. We think that there are signs that an
increasing number of countries support the need for
improved transfer controls. Certainly, an agreement on
reducing illicit transfers would be a major
achievement. In the longer term, we are also working
with partner Governments in support of an
international arms trade treaty. That would be a vital
tool, extending the international rule of law on
conventional arms.

The United Kingdom supports efforts in the
Open-ended Working Group to negotiate an
international instrument to enable States to identify and
trace illicit small arms and light weapons in a timely
and reliable manner. The European Union as a whole
supports the idea of a legally binding instrument that
also includes small arms and light weapons
ammunition. We share Under-Secretary-General Abe's
hope that the Group's work will conclude positively at
its third and final session, this June. The United
Kingdom supports the establishment of a group of
governmental experts to consider further steps to
enhance international cooperation in preventing,
combating and eradicating illicit brokering.

The United Kingdom also supports the expanded
scope of the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms as a global transparency measure. We welcome
the inclusion of man-portable air defence systems
(MANPADs) and light artillery within the scope of the
Register, as well as the voluntary reporting of small
arms and light weapons transfers.

The significant threat posed by MANPADs has
been acknowledged globally; measures to prevent their
diversion must be strengthened. The United Kingdom
therefore regrets that the 2003 Group of Governmental
Experts was unable to reach consensus on the inclusion
of small arms and light weapons within the scope of
the Register. We hope that that will be possible in the
next review.

We encourage all Member States to include
transfers of small arms and light weapons as part of the
additional background information in their reports.
Only through full transparency in the global trade in
small arms and light weapons can we really fully
address the problem of their diversion into the illicit
market. The United Nations Register is a unique
confidence-building measure in the field of
conventional arms, and the United Kingdom would like
to use this debate to encourage participation by all
Member States.

The United Nations Programme of Action
commits Member States to national, regional and
international measures to control small arms and light
weapons. The 2003 Biennial Meeting showed that much
remains to be done to implement those commitments. The
United Kingdom calls on States to help those countries
affected by armed violence to build their capacity to
control small-arms transfers. That can be done through
the transfers control initiative that we are proposing
and funding. As Japan has already underlined in this
debate, such assistance is most effective when
conducted within development partnerships aligned
with broader development goals. Our common aim for
the 2005 Biennial Meeting must be significant progress
in international efforts to tackle this problem, which is
at the heart of so many conflicts today.

