Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea thanks the Russian
Federation for convening this meeting of the Security
Council and hopes to contribute to the adoption of a
decision aimed at alleviating the enormous suffering
and regrettable loss of human life in eastern Ghouta
and other parts of Syria. We thank the representative
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his
informative briefing.

For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, the
changing humanitarian situation in eastern Ghouta
requires urgent action to alleviate the critical state of
affairs of the most vulnerable members of the civilian
population. In recent days, the number of victims
and amount of material damage to infrastructure
have increased considerably, and the international
community is obliged to take some urgent action so
as to halt the ongoing loss of lives, mostly of children
and women.

We reiterate the appeal made by the delegation of
Equatorial Guinea on 14 February for the parties to the
conflict to allow humanitarian aid to reach those most
in need (see S/PV. 8181). The cessation of hostilities
is imperative in order to ensure safe access for relief
teams, the distribution of humanitarian aid and the
evacuation of the wounded and sick. Equatorial Guinea
calls on all parties to the conflict to take the necessary
steps to cease hostilities.

Frank, direct and inclusive dialogue is the only
viable way out of the Syrian crisis. The Council must
redouble its efforts and persuade the opponents to return
to the negotiating table. In that sense, resolution 2254
(2015) remains a valid instrument. The recent history of
this conflict has taught us the devastating implications
that it can have for the entire region. A definitive and
sustainable solution to the conflict is in the interests of
all the countries of the world.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea urgently calls on
all parties to the conflict, be they directly or indirectly
involved, to declare a ceasefire with immediate effect
that will be respected and guaranteed by all parties so as
to allow for the evacuation of civilians and the delivery
of medical care, drinking water and food that will save
hundreds of human lives. Even as we debate this issue
here in the Chamber, the people of eastern Ghouta
and elsewhere in Syria are on the verge of perishing.
We must consider any proposal to be submitted from
the humanitarian perspective, taking into account the
suffering of the population of eastern Ghouta and Syria.

