Mr. Skoog (Sweden): At the outset, I thank Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing and, more importantly, for
the work that he and his team do on the ground, which
is extremely important.

Sweden aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
I want to first reiterate our long-standing and
firm commitment to the two-State solution. There is
simply no alternative. Only a two-State solution, based
on known parameters, international law and relevant
resolutions of the Council, can fulfil the legitimate
aspirations ofIsraelis and Palestinians alike and achieve
the security and just peace that both peoples deserve.

Yet, developments on the ground continue to
deteriorate. Rapid settlement expansion, challenges to
the international consensus on the status of Jerusalem
and the shrinking space for civil society in both Israel
and Palestine continue to undermine the prospects
for peace. The continued and rapid Israeli settlement
expansion, including in East Jerusalem, and the gradual
fragmentation of the West Bank seriously undermine
efforts to relaunch the peace process and the viability of
the two-State solution. Settlements constitute a flagrant
violation under international law and of the Council's
resolutions, including its latest resolution 2334 (2016).

We are also deeply concerned by Israeli legislative
initiatives and policies that risk prejudging future
negotiations and undermining the prospects for a two-
State solution. This is particularly true when it comes
to legislation and policies that would undermine the
status of Jerusalem, including the continued policy
of revoking the residency rights of Palestinians, in
violation of international humanitarian law.

The position of the European Union and Sweden
on Jerusalem was stated clearly last month. Jerusalem
is the future capital of both States. We call upon all
Member States to continue to respect the international
consensus on Jerusalem embodied in, inter alia,
resolution 478 (1980), including on the location of
diplomatic representations, until the final status of
Jerusalem is resolved.

Furthermore, the shrinking space for civil society
and the possibility to promote human rights, both on
the Palestinian and Israeli sides, is a cause for great
concern. On the Palestinian side, we note that laws
are sometimes used to curtail freedom of expression,
and on the Israeli side we note laws blacklisting
representatives of civil society organizations, thereby
preventing them from carrying out their important
work. A vibrant civil society, particularly the inclusion
of women and young people, is critical to democratic
development and sustainable peace.

This bleak picture leads me to the conclusion
that we must increase our efforts to help relaunch
a meaningful peace process that would enable the
State of Israel and the State of Palestine to live side
by side in peace and security, with Jerusalem as the
future capital of both States. To that end, we need an
appropriate and effective international framework for
negotiations. That framework needs to be multilateral
and all relevant actors, particularly countries of the
region, need to be engaged. The Council also has a
responsibility, not least to uphold international law and
its own resolutions. The return to a meaningful process
towards a negotiated two-State solution needs to be in
line with known parameters. Final-status issues such as
Jerusalem and refugees can be taken off the table only
as part of negotiations between the parties.

In 1949, the General Assembly established the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and mandated
it to provide assistance and protection to what are
today some 5 million registered Palestine refugees in
Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
UNRWA was mandated to carry out this task until a
negotiated, lasting and just solution to the Palestine
refugee situation was reached. Sadly, we still await
that day. It is for this reason that we all must continue
to shoulder our responsibility for Palestinian refugees
through a functioning UNRWA.

UNRWA delivers critical services for the human
development of Palestinian refugees and plays a crucial
role in ensuring stability in a region seriously affected
by conflict, terrorism and turmoil. Given the extreme
conditions facing many refugees, UNRWA's stabilizing
role in providing basic services is imperative.
Furthermore, the work of UNRWA is essential to
preserving the possibility of a two-State solution, as
refugees are one of the final-status issues. With a current
shortfall of $243 million, UNRWA is facing its most
acute financial crisis since its inception. Vital UNRWA
operations and programmes will be immediately at risk
unless extraordinary measures are taken. A reduction
or termination of UNRWA operations would have
serious and immediate negative consequences on the
ground, causing instability.

UNRWA has undertaken key reforms at
unprecedented speed, and as a result has achieved
a high level of cost efficiency in its operations and
programmes. Through reforms in 2015 and 2016, last
year it saved $81 million. We therefore call upon all
Member States to consider enhancing their support to
UNRWA. Our own contributions last year amounted to
some $65 million, making us its fourth-largest donor.
In light of the acute financial crisis, and at the request
of UNRWA, we have advanced our initial payment for
2018 to the Agency, and we urge others to do that same.

