I would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo, Lacroix and Lowcock for their briefings. We welcome routine updates to the Security Council on progress on the implementation of resolution 2532 (2020) in conflict-affected and fragile States. As time goes by, it is becoming increasingly evident that coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is a threat to international peace and security. It is multidimensional, with multifaceted, intertwined consequences and challenges to peacebuilding. It also threatens hard-won development and peacebuilding gains and risks exacerbating or creating conflicts, while weakening the social fabric. Only a coordinated, global and people-centred response, with a renewed sense of solidarity and common humanity, and with particular emphasis on the most vulnerable, can yield the solutions we are seeking. In that respect, we commend the Secretary-General, the World Health Organization and many humanitarian organizations for their efforts in coordinating a global approach to the pandemic. However, the unhindered, full implementation of resolution 2532 (2020), which is needed to advance these efforts, is far from being a reality. In Yemen, the Saudi-led coalition has resumed air raids, killing civilians. In Colombia, the National Liberation Army has intensified attacks against the Government. In Libya, violent clashes continued soon after combatants had supported the ceasefire appeal. Sadly, the list goes on. It is the duty of the Council to build unity and back up resolution 2532 (2020) with concrete actions. Accountability channels through existing mechanisms are urgently needed to ensure compliance and monitor ceasefire implementation. Parties to conflict must take this seriously and should be aware of what contravening the Security Council on this issue entails. They also need to understand that the common enemy is the COVID-19 pandemic. In that regard, the resolution could be an excellent deterrence tool for mediators to build synergies with regional and local initiatives. It should increase connections and coordination with local peacebuilders and strengthen their efforts to achieve and expand ceasefire agreements at the local level. We would like to stress that all decision-making related to COVID-19 must include the participation of women, youth and civil society. Young people build trust and trigger community action. We must prioritize partnership with young people in order to shape our response. As reaffirmed in resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2535 (2535), young people play a vital role in peacebuilding and sustaining peace. In that respect, we would like to know - from the briefers - how the full, equal and meaningful participation of youth is being ensured in the development and implementation of an adequate and sustainable response to the pandemic, including on ceasefire efforts, as mandated by resolution 2532 (2020). Moreover, has there been a real humanitarian pause? Resolution 2532 (2020) seeks to provide new openings for critically needed humanitarian assistance to address deteriorating conditions in conflict-affected countries. Hence, as COVID-19 cases rise in many of those countries, running into other humanitarian situations, such as malnutrition, creates an even greater nightmare for the most vulnerable, such as children. In addition, conflict-induced hunger is growing at unprecedented levels. The spread of violence in places such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Yemen, Somalia and north-east Nigeria has led to an increased risk of famine for millions of civilians. That is a direct, undeniable result of non-compliance with much-needed ceasefires and peace arrangements, exacerbated by the pandemic. This requires our urgent attention. Moreover, sustaining peace requires an integrated and coherent approach across humanitarian, development and peace actors and pillars, including the Security Council. Going forward, we must not exclude intercommunal violence and other forms of insecurity from our attention. To do so is to deny core factors that necessitate a ceasefire. The situation in South Sudan is a clear example of that. As we have said in the past, for the Dominican Republic, COVID-19 provides a window of opportunity for peacebuilding, sustaining peace and identifying pathways to reinforce and ways to contribute to strengthening peace and building trust and social cohesion at all levels. We call for all parties to conflict to put an end to all hostilities and facilitate the much-needed humanitarian operations that serve the needs of affected people.
