Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): I wish to recognize the
presence of General Carneiro, the Vice-Minister of Angola,
in our meeting this evening and express my delegation's
appreciation for the efforts his Government has undertaken
in fulfilment of the peace agreements.

The Security Council is holding this meeting at a
critical moment in the peace process in Angola. The
meeting is taking place at a time when one of the parties is
increasingly showing signs of a lack of commitment to
implementing its obligations under the Lusaka peace
process. At the same time, it is a moment when the peace
process is about to come to an end. We are therefore
gravely concerned at this critical situation in the peace
process.

Kenya believes that the international community has
invested heavily in the peace process in Angola. In spite of
these efforts, UNITA has continued to delay and frustrate
the process. The many promises and deadlines that have not
been honoured by UNITA in the past have left the Council
in a weak position. While agreeing to the position that our
eyes should remain set on the completion of the peace
process by the end of June, we feel that the time has
come now for the Council to act decisively on this matter,
as it did in August 1997, when it adopted resolution 1127
(1997). We believe that the imposition of additional
measures will force UNITA to proceed with the peace
process and will further re-establish the authority of the
Security Council. There is therefore a need for the
Security Council to take additional measures, and in our
opinion the draft resolution before us contains such
measures. It is for these reasons that my delegation will
vote in favour of the present draft resolution.

For the process to move forward, it is important that
UNITA fully comply with its obligations. In particular,
UNITA should hand over areas under its control for the
extension of State administration, including Andulo,
Bailundo, Mungo, and Nharea. We also expect that
UNITA will stop further attacks on international
personnel, including organized acts of banditry.

Kenya commends the Government of Angola for the
commitment it has shown so far in fulfilling its
obligations. We hope that it will continue to play its part
and to cooperate with the international community in this
regard. In particular, we expect that it will continue to
refrain from any action that could negate the peace
process, including the excessive use of force by its
National Police.

Finally, we wish to thank those that have been
closely involved in the peace process in Angola, including
the troika of observer States, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye,
and the men and women of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA). We encourage them to
continue with their efforts, and we assure them of our
continued support.

