Mr. Meek (United Kingdom): Thank you, Sir, for
convening this briefing this morning. Let me also begin
by thanking the current and previous Chairs of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for their briefings.

In March this year, the Council adopted resolution
2097 (2013) on Sierra Leone, paving the way for the
transition of the UnitedNations Integrated Peac ebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone. That is a real success story. As a
Council, we paid tribute to the work of the United Nations
system and the international partners. That work was
instrumental in supporting the Government of Sierra
Leone in its efforts to build a secure peace following
the brutality of war. Sierra Leone is an example of why
the United Kingdom believes that the United Nations
plays a vital role in helping national Governments and
communities recover from the scourge of war. That is
why we are the largest contributor to the Peacebuilding
Fund, providing almost $20 million a year, and we will
shortly fulfil our promise to spend 0.7 per cent of gross
national income on official development assistance. We
have committed to spending one third of that rising aid
budget in fragile and conflict-affected States.

The United Kingdom welcomes the recent report
of the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2013/63). The
report shows that the United Nations is moving forward
on key peacebuilding issues and that the Commission
is adding value in a number of areas. The Burundi
donor conference, held in October last year, raised
$2.6 billion for that country's peacebuilding priorities.
The Peacebuilding Commission visits to Monrovia and
Freetown provided political counsel and support as the
Missions there started to draw down, and in countries
across its agenda, the Peacebuilding Fund is providing
much-needed financing. But much work remains.

The United Kingdom remains a friend of United
Nations peacebuilding, and as friends, it is important
that we are honest. We believe the PBC has not
fully realized the potential that was envisaged for it
when it was established in 2006. We must all share
responsibility for that gap and work together to
develop the Commission into the effective, efficient
organization that it could and should be. The United
Kingdom sees three key areas for action.

First, the Commission must focus more on activities
that add value and have a real impact on the ground in
the countries on its agenda. The recent achievements
of the country-specific configurations should act as an
example for the Commission as a whole, and we would
like to see a much greater emphasis on country-specific
work. That should align with and take forward the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States, putting into
practice the Deal's principles for engagement.

Secondly, in order to free up time and resources
to focus on countries on the PBC agenda, we must
significantly reduce the level of process and procedure
here in New York. More meetings on organizational
issues, processes and procedure means less time
available for country-focused work. The Commission
should meet less frequently and with substantive
agendas containing clear and necessary decisions to
take.

Thirdly, the Commission must continue to
strengthen relationships with United Nations missions
in those countries on its agenda. As we have seen from
some of the successes of the past year, the Commission
is most effective when it works through the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and augments
their work. The configuration Chairs should use their
convening power in New York to bring the international
system together around the work of the in-country
mission and the Government of that country.

We believe that improvement in those areas will
build the foundation for a stronger relationship between
the PBC and the main United Nations organs. With
greater focus and drive to achieve results, the PBC can
provide valuable advice to the Security Council and the
General Assembly. We look forward to the next review
ofthe PBC, in 2015, which will be an opportunity to look
critically at where the Commission has been successful
and where it has not. The United Kingdom stands ready
to engage constructively in those discussions over the
coming months and years. We should be ambitious in
our drive to reform the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture to ensure that it reaches its full potential
and has tangible and positive effects for the countries
on its agenda.

