The President: On the occasion of the first
anniversary of the tragedy that befell Rwanda and shocked
the world, I should like, on behalf of the members of the
Council, to convey our deepest sympathy and condolences
to the survivors of the Rwanda genocide. It is the hope of
the members of the Council that, with the help of the
international community, Rwanda and its people will attain
lasting peace and stability.

I invite the members of the Council to stand and
observe a minute of silence in memory of those who lost
their lives during the genocide.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of April, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Li Zhaoxing, Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the month
of March. I am sure that I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Li for the great diplomatic skill and unfailing
courtesy with which he conducted the Council's business
last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia submitted in pursuance of paragraph 13 of
Security Council resolution 954 (1994) (S/1995/231)


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached during its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia
submitted in pursuance of paragraph 13 of Security
Council resolution 954 (1994), document 5/1995/231.
Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council has considered carefully
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Somalia dated 28 March 1995 (S/l995/23l) and
notes the successful conclusion of the withdrawal of
UNOSOM. II forces from Somalia. It expresses its
appreciation to those Governments and agencies that
have provided the personnel, humanitarian assistance
and other support to the peace-keeping operation in
Somalia, including those Governments which
participated in the multinational operation for
UNOSOM's withdrawal. It pays tribute in particular
to all personnel who sacrificed their lives in this
service.

"The Security Council underlines that the
timely intervention of UNOSOM. II and the
humanitarian assistance given to Somalia helped to
save many lives and much property, mitigate general
suffering and contributed to the search for peace in
Somalia. The Council notes that, over the past three
years, the United Nations and the international
community have made significant efforts to restore
peace and stability and facilitate the re-emergence of
a civil society. However, the continuing lack of
progress in the peace process and in national
reconciliation, in particular the lack of sufficient
cooperation from the Somali parties over security
issues, undermined the United Nations objectives in
Somalia and prevented the continuation of
UNOSOM. ll mandate beyond 31 March 1995.

"The Security Council believes that the Somalia
operation provides important lessons for the theory
and practice of peace-making, peace-keeping and
peace-building.

"The Security Council remains convinced that
only a genuinely representative and broad-based
approach to reconciliation will bring about a lasting
political settlement and allow for the re-emergence
of a civil society in Somalia. The Council reaffirms,
based on its experience in UNOSOM. II, that the
people of Somalia bear the ultimate responsibility
for achieving national reconciliation and restoring
peace to Somalia. The international community can

 

only facilitate, encourage and assist the process, but
not try to impose any particular solution on it. The
Council, therefore, calls upon the Somali parties to
pursue national reconciliation, rehabilitation and
reconstruction in the interest of peace, security and
development.

"The Security Council notes the recent
agreements reached between the factions in
Mogadishu, especially on the control of sea and
airport facilities. It expresses the hope that this
encouraging development is indicative of a new spirit
of cooperation among the factions and that it will lead
to further progress in the search for a lasting peace in
Somalia.

"The Security Council supports the view of the
Secretary-General that Somalia should not be
abandoned by the United Nations, which will continue
to assist the Somali people to achieve a political
settlement and to provide humanitarian and other
support services provided that the Somalis themselves
demonstrate a disposition to peaceful resolution of the
conflict and to cooperation with the international
community. It welcomes the Secretary-General's
intention to continue a small political mission, should
the Somali parties so wish, to assist them in coming
together in national reconciliation and looks forward
to the report which the Secretary-General has
indicated he will forward on this matter. The Council
urges close cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, in particular the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the League of
Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OlC), as well as the Governments of
neighbouring countries in these efforts. The Council
considers it essential that the Somali parties clearly
express their acceptance of such assistance and their
willingness to cooperate with the United Nations.

"The Security Council recognizes that
humanitarian assistance in Somalia is an important
element in the effort to restore peace and security in
the country. It is therefore important to sustain
United Nations humanitarian activities in Somalia
and to encourage non-governmental organizations to
do likewise. However, their ability to do so will
depend on the degree of cooperation and security
offered by the Somali parties. The Council
welcomes the willingness expressed by the
international humanitarian agencies and NGOs to
continue to provide rehabilitation and reconstruction
assistance in areas where security is guaranteed by
the Somalis. The Council stresses that the creation
of a long-lasting, stable and secure environment
throughout the country is vital for the resumption of
large-scale activity in these fields.

"The Security Council reaffirms the obligations
of States to implement fully the embargo on all
deliveries of weapons and military equipment to
Somalia imposed by paragraph 5 of resolution 733
(1992), and calls on States, especially neighbouring
States, to refrain from actions capable of
exacerbating the conflict in Somalia.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to monitor the
situation in Somalia and to keep it informed about
further developments. The Council will remain
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/ 15.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

