Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): At the outset, the
delegation of Indonesia congratulates you, Madam
President, on your presidency for the month of August.
We are grateful to you for convening this important
open debate, and for your helpful and well-structured
concept paper (S/2013/446, annex).

Indonesia associates itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
We would also like to express our appreciation to the
various regional and subregional organizations that
have spoken today, and commends them on their work
to advance peace in their respective regions.

The subject of this debate is particularly important
to Indonesia. Indeed, during our last presidency of
the Security Council in November 2007, we also held
an open debate on it (S/PV.5776), after which the
Council issued presidential statement S/PRST/2007/42.
Among other points in that presidential statement,
the Council recognized the important role of regional
and subregional organizations in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
and how such organizations are strongly positioned to
understand the root causes of many conflicts and other
security challenges close to home and to influence their
prevention and resolution.

On 13 January 2010, at the instigation of China,
the Council held another debate (S/PV.6257) that
focused on the relationship between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, stressing
the importance of developing effective partnerships.
Following that debate, the Council expressed its
intention to promote closer and more operational
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the fields of conflict
early-warning, prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, and to ensure the coherence,
synergy and collective effectiveness of their efforts
(see S/PRST/2010/1). With that background in mind,
my delegation welcomes the adoption of today's
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/l2, which reflects and reaffirms many of the important elements from
previous presidential statements on the subject.

The greater complexity of current conflicts requires
regional and subregional organizations to play a more
significant and multidimensional role. In order to carry
out the task of maintaining international peace and
security more effectively, however, we must continue to
expand and deepen cooperation and dialogue between
the United Nations system and those organizations.
Is it possible to more clearly define the comparative
advantages of the United Nations and each regional
organization in problem-solving and their contribution
to international peace and security?

Our response to that question is that it is not
only possible to do so, but it is also important. In our
View, the challenge before the United Nations is not
to be everywhere or to attempt to do everything. On
the contrary, the emerging reality is that the United
Nations can be more effective simply by developing and
strengthening its partnerships, especially with regional
and subregional organizations, so that the stronger
those partnerships are, the stronger and more effective
the United Nations becomes.

If that goal is to be achieved, Indonesia reiterates
that one size does not and cannot fit all. Owing to
cultural and other factors, an approach that may
be a winner in one part of the world may not be as
successful in another. To that end, it is important to
maintain continuing consultations between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
so as to develop an understanding of the lessons and
mechanisms that are transferable and those that may
not be. Some regional frameworks should receive the
right assistance from the United Nations and other
actors, and strong efforts should be made to strengthen
strategic trust between the United Nations and various
organizations. In our view, it is those efforts that will
help to develop and strengthen cooperation in such
areas as early warning, conflict prevention, mediation
and post-conflict peacebuilding.

Let me turn to my own region, South-East
Asia. Indonesia is a staunch supporter of regional
cooperation, and ASEAN forms an integral part of
our foreign policy. A stable, peaceful and prosperous
South-East Asia, indeed, the Asia-Pacific, as once
underlined by Indonesia's Minister for Foreign Affairs
Marty Natalegawa, must necessarily entail an ASEAN
that is at the heart of the region's dynamics, positively
shaping and moulding developments.

Being an ardent proponent of closer United Nations-
ASEAN cooperation, we are proud of the fact that
among the key outcomes of Indonesia's chairmanship
of ASEAN in 2011 was the ASEAN-United Nations
Comprehensive Partnership and Bali Concord III. Both
are seminal documents reflecting a greater ASEAN
role on the global stage.

In that connection, allow me to share the following
thoughts. ASEAN, as a vibrant and dynamic regional
organization, can and should be part of the solution to
many global security issues by being effective, capable
and peaceful. It must continue to strengthen its role as
a net contributor to international peace and security.
Stronger and effective regional and subregional
organizations, able to promote and wage peace in their
respective regions, will not only contribute to global
peace but, as has been proved in the case of ASEAN,
also enable the countries in the region to channel their
resources to development.

What the United Nations can do is to assist
regional and subregional organizations such as ASEAN
in continuing to build their capacity. The United
Nations and ASEAN already have at their disposal
such a partnership platform under the Comprehensive
Partnership, which can benefit from broadened
cooperation in various pertinent areas, including
peacebuilding, peacekeeping, mediation and civilian
capacity.

I would like to conclude by underscoring the
significance ofa comprehensive and integrated approach
to the maintenance of regional and international peace
and security. In order to effectively address conflicts and
achieve sustainable results, it is critical that mediation,
peacemaking and peacebuilding be deployed from the
onset of instability, and nurtured and sustained through

an inclusive and credible political process that includes
paying attention to the root causes.
Such an endeavour, when undertaken in a spirit of
partnership between the United Nations and regional as
well as subregional organizations, will inevitably yield
greater peace around the world.

