Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Iwant to express my sorrow over the passing away
of the former President of the Republic of Sudan, Field
Marshal Abdulrahman Suwar Al-Dahab, on 19 October.
I would also like to thank you, Madam President, the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for the report they jointly presented
to the Security Council (S/2018/530). I thank, as well,
His Excellency Ambassador Mamabolo, Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the African
Union, for his briefing via video-teleconference and for
his tireless efforts. Finally, I thank all Council members
who have spoken in this meeting. We will definitely
take their comments into account.
Since the adoption of resolution 2429 (2018), in
July, the situation in Darfur has been stable to a great
extent, as reflected in the report (S/2018/912) before
the Council. The Sudanese Government has made
considerable efforts to achieve and sustain security and
stability, in conjunction with the reduction of the forces
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and its reconfiguration through
the deployment of additional Sudanese police and
security troops, as well as through the establishment of
additional courts in districts, states and administrative
units in Darfur, where 13 additional courts were
established. The Government has also set up courts in
Zalingei, Amri Saleh and Gulu. Courts that specialize
in family and children, public funds, consumer
protection, counter-terrorism, cybercrime and drug
crime have also been set up in Darfur. Those efforts
have reassured the people of Darfur and made them feel
more secure. The establishment of additional courts
strengthens justice, policing and the rule of law. We
hope that the Council and its members will take note of
those positive measures.

To prevent impunity, the Office of the Public
Prosecutor examined 184 cases of violations from
1 January to 30 September. Of those, 102 were referred
to court and many have already been adjudicated, while
work is still ongoing regarding the remaining cases.
Those efforts led to an increase in the rates ofvoluntary
return. More than 385,000 previously displaced people
were able to return. The Government and peace partners
are working on ensuring the necessary conditions for
voluntary return.

In the two resolutions adopted in June 2017 and
July 2018 (resolutions 2363 (2017) and 2429 (2018)),
the Council acknowledged that the situation has gone
back to normal. It decided that it was time to move
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and that the
transitional phase should be the responsibility of three
parties, first, the Sudanese Government; secondly, the
United Nations and the African Union, to complete the
administrative and logistical process related to the exit
of the mission; and, thirdly, the United Nations country
team specifically and the international community
generally. In adopting both resolutions, the Council has
practically attained the main benchmark in paragraph
24 of resolution 1769 (2007), which established
UNAMID, namely, to achieve significant improvement
in the situation in Darfur.

The Council may recall that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations decided that until the adoption
of resolution 2363 (2017), in June, the benchmarks
that were consistently highlighted and included in the
report of the Secretary-General specified significant
improvement. That is the correct approach, which led
to the adoption of resolution 2363 (2017), followed
by resolution 2429 (2018). That is why we call for the
adoption of the same approach for the 2018-2020 time
period. The implementation of the exit strategy must not
therefore be subjected to the details of the benchmarks,
but rather the benchmarks should be subjected to
significant improvement.

At this juncture, we would like to thank all Council
members who positively engaged with our proposals in
the paper that we circulated to them two weeks ago. We
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for giving the
Sudanese Mission more than one opportunity to clarify
its view.

We refer to the statements made by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Head of the Sudanese Mission
for the current session of the General Assembly in
his meetings with the Secretary-General and the
Under-Secretary-Generals at the high-level event on
28 September. He focused on the importance of the
ongoing peacebuilding process, which is a responsibility
shared by the three parties I mentioned, to achieve full
and lasting peace. We underscore that the Sudan will
continue its initiatives, which were commended by the
Security Council in its consecutive resolutions since
2014, and which were also commended by the Human
Rights Council in its latest resolution on the Sudan,
adopted in September.

The Council might also agree with us that the latest
report of the Secretary-General on UNAMID and the
peace process in Darfur relies primarily on the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. It also relies on the
implementation of that Document to measure progress
achieved in Darfur. We strongly support that approach,
and have said so repeatedly to the Council, especially
during a period that can be described as somewhat
uncertain. Since we have agreed on the centrality and
the importance of the Doha Document, we call upon the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
to attach equal importance to the Implementation
Follow-up Commission, which is composed of the
permanent members of the Council, neighbouring
countries of the Sudan, donor countries and partners
in peace, in addition to the State of Qatar and signatory
parties. The reports of that Commission issued since its
establishment, in 2011, should be a point of reference
for the Under-Secretary-General and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in their reports to the Security
Council and the Secretary-General. In the upcoming
period we will be consulting with Council members,
the Secretariat and the Under-Secretary-General to
present concrete proposals in order to operationalize
the Doha Document and its mechanisms.

The great, continuous improvement we have seen in
the security and humanitarian situation in all states of
Darfur since 2015 made it incumbent upon the Sudanese
Government, with the support of the international
community, to move Darfur from the phase of conflict
to the phase of building, reconstruction and achieving
the desired developmental renaissance to solidify
stability. That is why the Sudanese Government
participated actively in the high-level meeting that was
held on the margins ofthe General Assembly to discuss
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
in Darfur.

We look forward to the implementation of the
recommendation that was adopted at that meeting,
namely, holding a donor conference to fund the
transitional phase and support development projects
that are the basis for sustainable peace and stability in
Darfur. In that regard, we support what the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia said as well as the statements
made by the Representative of Kuwait and others:
filling the gaps in Darfur will only be achieved if the
pledges are fulfilled.

Council members raised an important point, that
is, Abdul Wahid is ignoring and disregarding all
Security Council resolutions. Abdul Wahid's disregard
of Council resolutions and Council members shows
contempt for the international legitimacy embodied
by the Council. No concrete and decisive measures
have been taken against him. If they had been, he and
his brother - who killed five from the rebel forces
recently - would not have been able to commit such
heinous crimes. We commend the statement made
by Joint Special Representative Mamabolo and the
statements made by the representatives of Ethiopia,
Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait and Kazakhstan. We cannot
forget that this pressure would be exercised on a person
that controls enclaves in the mountainous area, that is a
tiny piece of land - just 5 per cent of the Jebel Marra
area, which constitutes 5 per cent to 6 per cent of the
area of Darfur.

In conclusion, the prosperity, safety and security of
the Sudanese people are a sacred duty for the Sudanese
Government. That duty is complemented by the efforts of
the Sudanese Government to achieve sustainable peace
in the region, starting with neighbouring countries.
That is precisely what the Sudanese Government is
currently doing, and what the Council is witnessing.
We will spare no effort to achieve those goals.

