Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I apologize
to colleagues for missing much of the earlier debate. I
was attending the commemoration of the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade in an adjacent room.

I would like to begin by expressing my gratitude
for the briefing that the Council received earlier. I will
study it and the speeches we have heard closely.

At the end of 2007, we all spoke of a window of
hope in our common efforts to achieve a two-State
solution in the Middle East. Some cautioned against
allowing this window to close since it might be the last
opportunity. We need to get back to a level of
optimism. With political will, we can stop the window
from closing. All of us need to encourage an early
resumption of negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians and to secure visible progress from these
negotiations in order to bring the focus back to the
political process. It is the political process that offers
the only prospect for a solution and peace in the
region. We look to Prime Minister Olmert and
President Abbas to continue to demonstrate strong
leadership in search of peace at a difficult time. We
look to them to resume negotiations at the earliest
opportunity.

As part of the Quartet, the United Nations has a
responsibility to influence the peace process, to
encourage both sides to take difficult but necessary
steps. That can only be done through a balanced
approach, as far as possible achieving consensus here
in the Security Council.

Broader support for the peace process, in
particular in the region, is also invaluable. We welcome
the international community's continued efforts,
including the recent visit by United States Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice and the Yemeni initiative to
support intra-Palestinian dialogue.

The situation on the ground, and in particular in
Gaza and southern Israel, is of great concern to my
Government. We have been deeply saddened by the
civilian casualties on both sides. The United Kingdom
unequivocally condemns the incessant rocket attacks
against Israel and the appalling attack on the seminary
in Mercaz Harav. Measures in response must be in
accordance with international law and not cause
suffering to innocent civilians. We look to the Israeli
authorities to achieve that objective.

Both sides have obligations under the Road Map.
It is important that each side takes steps to meet these
obligations without waiting for the other to make the
first move. The Palestinians must address Israeli
security concerns, making visible efforts on the ground
to arrest, disrupt and restrain those who conduct and
plan violent attacks on Israelis.

Israel should freeze all settlement activity,
including the natural growth of existing settlements.
The United Kingdom considers that Israeli settlement
building anywhere in the Occupied Palestinian
Territories is illegal under international law. That
includes settlements in both East Jerusalem and the
West Bank.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains of
grave concern. Essential services, including water and
sanitation, are close to breakdown, and a number of
essential medical items and drugs are out of stock.

The United Nations should support efforts to
open Gaza crossings. We in the European Union are
ready to redeploy our border assistance mission at
Rafah at the earliest opportunity.

A long-term solution to the situation in Gaza
must address both Israeli security and Palestinian
hardship. That can only come from a political process.
The efforts of the international community must be in
support of the Annapolis process in order to achieve
this objective.

In addition to our ongoing humanitarian support,
the United Kingdom continues to address the economic
and development needs that are vital to political
progress. The Bethlehem investors' conference will
take place with our support in mid-May, and it is our
hope that that will lead to real improvements on the
ground. The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee will meet in
London at the beginning of May in order to coordinate
donor activity and provide a clear demonstration of
international support for the Annapolis process.

I would also like to make a couple of points on
Lebanon. The Government of Lebanon needs the
support of the international community. The continued
political impasse and insecurity in Lebanon are a major
concern. The United Kingdom continues to support the
efforts of Amre Moussa, the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, to promote a solution.

All countries with influence in Lebanon, in
particular Syria, must play a constructive role. The
Arab League summit in Damascus this week marks an
opportunity to make progress. We urge Syria, as hosts,
to take the steps necessary for a resolution in Lebanon
to be reached, and we urge all actors in the region to
work in the interests of stability and democracy in
Lebanon.

Sustained United Nations engagement is crucial.
That includes the implementation of all Security
Council resolutions on Lebanon and the Secretary-
General's continued leadership. The United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon continues to play a vital role
in providing security in the south. Once again, the
United Kingdom is grateful to the troop-contributing
countries for the work they are doing alongside the
Lebanese armed forces.

