Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Security Council today. I also wish to thank Foreign
Minister Rassoul and Special Representative
De Mistura, for both their presence and their
leadership. Australia continues to strongly support the
work of the United Nations in Afghanistan and
reaffirms its commitment to international efforts in
support of Afghanistan.

A sustainable transition beyond 2014 requires
genuine long-term engagement by the global
community. As our Prime Minister has said on a
number of occasions, we will remain engaged in
Afghanistan through this decade at least. We see that
continuing beyond. Following the conclusion of the
transition in 2014, we will continue to provide civilian
and development assistance, training and other defence
cooperation.

Since the Council's debate on Afghanistan in
March (see S/PV.6497), we have seen some worrying
security developments, especially the increased
momentum of the campaign of intimidation and
targeted assassinations. Despite these serious concerns,
our own assessment is that the fundamental trajectory
on the security front is in the right direction, which is
why we think that the insurgents are resorting to the
sort of dramatic attacks we are seeing.
We have seen the successful beginning of the
security transition in the first tranche of provinces and
districts announced by President Karzai in July. Afghan
forces themselves are performing increasingly well and
effectively. We admire that.

The current campaign of terror is very worrying,
but we must not allow it to derail the transition. We
condemn the shocking murder Mr. Burhanuddin
Rabbani, former Afghan President and Chair of the
High Peace Council. We extend our deepest
condolences to the people and Government of
Afghanistan for his loss. But the process he embodied
must continue. We reiterate our support to the
Government of Afghanistan in its efforts to advance an
inclusive peace and reconciliation process, as well as
for the successful reintegration of former fighters into
Afghan society.

It is encouraging to hear President Karzai's
statement that the people and Government of
Afghanistan remain undeterred. It is essential that the
international community stand forthrightly with the
Government and people of Afghanistan at this time.

A sustainable transition to Afghan security
leadership will obviously depend on continued
improvements in governance and development. In
Uruzgan, where an Australian leads the provincial
reconstruction team and where Australian security
forces are concentrated, we are seeing progress; but
that progress is fragile. We need to remain serious
about protecting the gains that we have been made.
More important, we need to focus much more
intensively on building the capacity of the Afghan
institutions in Uruzgan so that they can deliver
concrete and consistent results on the ground.

We were pleased to participate in the ministerial
meeting on Afghanistan held here in New York on
22 September, which provided a clear message of
support for the New Silk Road concept. The vision
behind that concept will be a critical element in
accomplishing the security transition and to advancing
regional economic development, which would underpin
long-term security. A lot of work needs to be done to
give that vision real substance, but we have to make
the effort. It is encouraging to note that some
infrastructure projects under the initiative have already
begun. That work is absolutely essential to creating a
strong network of trade and economic linkages across
the region and to providing the Afghan people with a
long-term vision of economic prosperity.

Constructive engagement by Afghanistan's
neighbours is critical to the prospect of a secure and
prosperous Afghanistan and, in turn, for the Central
Asian region itself. Australia welcomes the Istanbul
conference to be hosted under Turkey's very
constructive leadership and supported by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
A successful meeting in Istanbul will provide important
and essential support for the Bonn meeting to be held
in December. In Bonn, the international community
and the Government of Afghanistan will need to
demonstrate a robust and coordinated approach to
building a stable, secure and prosperous country. Much
more work is needed over coming months to ensure
that we can achieve that result.

The role of United Nations agencies in
coordinating development and humanitarian assistance
is obviously becoming increasingly prominent as
transition proceeds. Australia supports UNAMA's
efforts to improve aid coherence and to encourage
longer-term commitment to development. We ourselves
are committed to working closely with donors and the
Afghan Government. That includes support for
capacity building in the mining and agriculture sectors,
which we think will become a firm basis for much of
the economy of Afghanistan in the near term.

Our own development assistance increased by
35 per cent in the past year. Afghanistan is now the
fourth largest recipient of Australian aid. Our overall
aid budget will increase to $10 billion in the next
couple of years. That support to Afghanistan will
continue to increase.

Before I conclude, I would like to take a moment
to remember those civilians who have been killed or
wounded in Afghanistan since 2001. As the Secretary-
General's report (S/2011/590) notes, we have seen an
increase in civilian deaths and casualties, largely due to
the continued use of improvised explosive devices and
suicide attacks. Australia urges all parties involved in
the armed conflict in Afghanistan to strengthen efforts
to protect Afghan civilians.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation for the strong leadership demonstrated by
the Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Afghanistan, Staffan de Mistura, and the dedication
and sacrifice of UNAMA personnel working in

Afghanistan. We strongly supports all efforts to ensure
that those who work in support of Afghanistan's future
are able to do so with the necessary security to
complete their difficult but indispensable tasks. We
will continue to work with the Secretary-General and
the General Assembly, through the Fifth Committee, to
ensure that the necessary finances are made available
for that.

