Mr. Fedotov: Like my friend and colleague,
Mr. Yamomoto, I addressed the Council on Afghanistan
a year ago (see S/PV.7844). At that debate, I reported
that the Afghanistan Opium Survey 2016 of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) showed
a worrying reversal in efforts to counter the problem
of illicit drugs and highlighted the need to address that
destructive threat.

Today, one year later, the situation has become
much worse. Our Afghanistan Opium Survey 2017
shows unprecedented highs in opium poppy cultivation
and production. Estimated production is up by almost
90 per cent to 9,000 metric tons. The area under poppy
cultivation has risen to 328,000 hectares. Those are
absolute records in the entire history of Afghanistan.
Let us make no mistake - we are facing a genuine crisis
and our response must be urgent, swift and decisive.

The expected surge in high-quality, low-cost
heroin may have a number of negative consequences
for Afghanistan, its neighbours and many other transit
or destination countries. Increased opiate consumption
and related harms may be expected in many parts ofthe
world. Afghanistan and the international community
have struggled for many years to address the formidable
challenges posed by drugs and the related threats of
organized crime, terrorism and corruption. Recent
analysis confirms the interregional links between
organized crime and terrorist groups that exploit
drug trafficking.

At the 2016 Brussels Conference on Afghanistan,
partners of Afghanistan endorsed the ambitious reform
agenda presented by the Afghan Government and
pledged continued political and financial funding to
support the country on its path towards stability and
development. Nevertheless, we must recognize that in
recent years attention has progressively shifted away
from the threats posed by drugs. We must reverse that
trend or risk the further expansion and destabilizing
influence of non-State actors, organized criminal
groups and violent terrorists. What priority steps need
to be taken?

First and foremost, comprehensive counter-
narcotics programmes that mainstream drugs in
national development agendas are essential. That
includes promoting alternative development in order to
create newjobs, as well as access to education, financial
services and markets for farmers and their families.

Secondly, in order to ensure effective operational
responses to reduce supply, we must focus on all aspects
of counter-narcotics capacity-building in Afghanistan,
including support for intelligence-led investigations,
controlled delivery, eradication programmes, the
dismantling of opium processing labs, integrated
border management, financial intelligence units and
law enforcement, as well as prosecutorial capacities, in
order to disrupt criminal networks.

Thirdly, we need to further strengthen regional and
international cooperation in order to stop precursor
chemicals from being diverted and trafficked into
Afghanistan for the purpose of manufacturing heroin.

Fourthly, we must continue to build the interdiction
capacities of key countries along trafficking routes with
an eye to enhancing long-term effectivenessm, rather
than focusing on immediate seizures.

Fifthly, we need to intercept illicit financial flows
and support effective prosecution, as well as asset
confiscation and asset recovery.

Finally, prevention and treatment responses must
be urgently scaled up, most of all in Afghanistan,
which continues to struggle with the severe health
consequences of opiate misuse.

UNODC is working with Afghanistan, neighbouring
countries and the wider region to promote the integrated
responses needed, in line with the Sustainable
Development Goals and the recommendations of
the special session of the General Assembly on the
world drug problem. We are currently seeking to step
up regional and interregional action to counter the
increases in opium cultivation and production and
respond to related threats of crime, terrorism and
corruption. That includes comprehensive and inclusive
support to implement the Afghan National Drug Action
Plan 2015-2019, with Afghanistan in the lead.

But we cannot succeed without the engagement
and renewed commitment, including financial
commitments, of Member States. The international
community cannot afford to do less. I thank the Council
for the attention that it has given to this urgent problem.
As always, UNODC stands ready to support the Council.

