Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): I should like to thank
Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for his briefing and his leadership.

The Chair's statement and the final report of the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (see S/2017/672/Rev.1) depict the grim reality
on the ground. Illicit trade in natural resources,
arms smuggling, the fragmentation of illegal armed
groups, human rights abuses, ethnic clashes and
atrocities committed by foreign and local armed
groups remain widespread in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Moreover, a drastic
destabilization in the Kasai provinces demonstrates that
no part of the country is immune from such outrages.

At the same time, one cannot deny that the
existing sanctions regime has played an important role
in mitigating some threats. For instance, it reduced
opportunities for armed groups to benefit from illegal
involvement in the exploitation of natural resources,
particularly for tin, tantalaum and tungsten. However,
the gold sector lags behind and the lack of traceability
systems leaves an opportunity for smugglers to profit
from that gap.

Despite some positive trends, the overall situation
does not show signs of significant improvement. We are
therefore deeply concerned about further deterioration
of the security environment in the country on the
whole, which is evidently interconnected with the
political stagnation.

The international community and the Council must
spare no effort in assisting the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to move towards the stability, peace and
security that its people deserve. The holding of elections
in 2017 remains an important element in that endeavour.

The same applies to accountability. The killings
of two members of the Group of Experts must not
remain unanswered. We want to express our deepest
condolences to the families of the victims present here.
Those who committed these crimes have to be brought
to justice. In that regard, following the Secretary-
General's recent letter on the executive summary of
the Board of Inquiry report, we would like to call upon
the Secretary-General to act in a swift manner and to
establish a respective follow-up mechanism under his
own authority, as his predecessor did in response to the
Terrain Hotel tragedy in South Sudan.

Finally, in terms of the Committee's modus
operandi, we do not understand the situation when
recommendations addressed to the Council by the
Group of Experts that this very Council has established
are prevented from reaching it. We call on all Committee
members to work constructively in full cooperation
with the Chair and each other to ensure the effective
functioning of the body.

