I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin for his briefing, and welcome the presence of the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daei¢, and his statement. I also listened to the statement by Ms. Meliza Haradinaj-Stublla. In July and September, Serbia and Kosovo held several rounds of dialogue, facilitated by the European Union (EU), focusing on the issues of missing persons and economic cooperation, marking the official resumption of the dialogue between the two parties after two years. On 4 September, the two sides signed an agreement on the normalization of economic relations and agreed to build roads and railways connecting the two sides. It is an important step forward. China welcomes these positive developments and hopes that the two sides will maintain political good faith, consolidate the positive momentum and achieve substantive results in the dialogue at an early date. China's position on the Kosovo issue has been consistent. We respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia, understand the legitimate concerns of the Serbian side on the Kosovo issue and appreciate the positive efforts made by Serbia to seek a political solution to the Kosovo issue. China supports the efforts of both sides to seek a mutually acceptable solution through sincere dialogue and consultation on the legal basis of resolution 1244 (1999). The reconciliation and a harmonious coexistence of all ethnic groups in Kosovo is in the common interests of all ethnicities. The Kosovo Government should create a favourable environment to this end and enhance amity and mutual trust among different communities. We hope Kosovo will continue to implement the Brussels agreement and effectively promote the formation of the community of Serbian municipalities. China notes that, according to the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/964), the municipality of Degan/Deeani has recently resumed rail construction in the special protective zone of the Visoki Deeani monastery, giving rise to tensions and sparking wide international concern. We hope that the Government of Kosovo will abide by the relevant laws and the decision of the Constitutional Court to protect the property rights around the monastery. Lastly, we reiterate our appreciation for the positive efforts of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin and the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) to push for a political solution to the Kosovo issue. China supports UNMIK in continuing to implement its mandate and play an important role, and calls on all parties to implement resolution 2518 (2020) in good faith to ensure the safety and security of United Nations personnel to create favourable conditions for UNMIK's mandate implementation.
