Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting on the current situation
in Ukraine. I thank Mr. Feltman, Under-Secretary-
General, for his briefing. I thank all Council members
for supporting the elections held by Ukraine on 25 May
and for the kind recommendations and encouragement
to the new Government and President-elect regarding
their plans in consolidating Ukraine.

I thank the Council for sharing assessments of the
elections, which coincide with the assessments of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), one of the largest observer commissions. The
OSCE stated that the presidential elections in Ukraine
on 25 May were free, democratic and held in full
conformity with national legislation and international
standards. It has become an historic success of the
Ukrainian people and their democratic State.

On 25 May, the people confirmed their readiness to
protect their native land from existing external threats
and their desire for peace and a European future, as well
as an absolute rejection of Russian aggression. The vast
majority of Ukrainian citizens - from all regions of the
country, including occupied Crimea - participated in
the vote at more than 90 per cent ofthe country's polling

stations, thereby confirming the full representativeness
and legitimacy of their will.

It is important that the election results crushed
all anti-Ukraine propaganda cliches. Were all the
Ukrainian fascists or Nazis, when the so-called
"ultra-nationalist" candidates gained minimum support
in the elections? Where are all the phantom supporters
of succession or of the federalization of Ukraine, when
almost 90 per cent of the voters from all regions of the
country, including occupied Crimea, cast their ballots
for the candidates that stand for a unified Ukraine
and its European integration? All participants in the
presidential campaign acknowledged that it had been
democratic and legitimate.

Mr. Petro Poroshenko received major support in all
regions of Ukraine, including the eastern and southern
regions, which confirms the strong will of the whole
population of Ukraine for unity of the nation. The
President-elect secured full legitimacy to fulfil his
mandate on behalf of the entire Ukrainian nation.

Among his top priorities is to achieve stabilization
and reconciliation of the eastern regions of Ukraine,
which suffered from Russian propaganda and illegal
activities of Russian insurgents and mercenaries. The
President-elect has already announced that he plans
to visit the Donbass region immediately after his
inauguration, a clear signal to all in eastern Ukraine that
their voices will be heard as long as they are peaceful.
The 2014 presidential campaign was conducted at a
time of social and political tensions, security challenges
that Ukraine is facing for the first time in its modern
history. Unfortunately, owing to the occupation of the
territory of the autonomous republic of Crimea, it was
impossible to set up electoral commissions and conduct
the presidential election there. At the same time,
citizens of Ukraine living in the occupied peninsula
were given the opportunity to vote at polling stations
in Kherson, which is close to Crimea, or at any other
polling station in Ukraine.

The complex security situation in Donetsk and
Luhansk significantly undermined the election process
in those cities. According to the statement of preliminary
findings and conclusions by the special monitoring
mission, which can be found on the web page of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), serious problems were found in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions, including intrusions into district
electoral commissions and their eviction and closure by
armed groups, and intimidation of election officials,
which included abductions, death threats, forced entry
into private homes, seizure of equipment and election
materials, and the shooting of a candidate proxy.

"These illegal actions constituted an attempt
to prevent the election [and] deny citizens the
fundamental right to freely participate and elect
their chosen representatives."

After the election, Kremlin officials promised to
respect the choice of the Ukrainian people. In the light
of what is happening now on the Russian-Ukrainian
border and in the region, we are taking that with a grain
of salt. On 21, 24 and 26 May, dozens of armed people
attacked Ukraine's borders from the Russian side. Forty
vehicles carrying armed personnel attempted to break
through the Ukrainian frontier. We have still not had a
reasonable answer from the Russian side to the question
of what hundreds of men from the Chechen battalion
are doing in Ukraine. They are not concealing their
identity; they speak freely with reporters and admit that
they have come from Russia to protect interests. What
interests are Chechens going to protect in Ukraine?
Those of the Greek Orthodox or of Slav ethnicity? We
have also raised the question about what hundreds of
heavily armed Russian Cossacks are doing in Ukraine,
particularly those from the Wolves Centurion, a group
with a notorious Second World War past. They are
not concealing their identity either; they have been
operating in Sloviansk and Kramatorsk, and before that
they were in Crimea.

Another question is why most of the leaders of
the illegal, self-proclaimed authorities in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions are Russian citizens. Aleksandr
Borodai, the self-proclaimed prine minister of the
so-called Donetsk People's Republic, is a Russian
citizen from Moscow. Igor Strelkov Girkin, a military
commander of terrorists in Sloviansk, is a Russian
citizen and a Russian military intelligence special
forces officer. Igor Bezler, a military commander of
a terrorist group based in Horlivka, is also a Russian
citizen and a colonel in the Russian army, as he has
publicly admitted. Who authorized those Russian
citizens to represent the people of Donbass, to speak
on their behalf and call on them to sacrifice their lives
and kill their compatriots? On election day, 25 May, a
pro-Russian insurgent group attacked a polling station
in Novoaidar. As a result, one was killed and Ukrainian
law enforcement detained a group of 13 people whose
leader appeared to be a Russian citizen.

Despite some hints of conciliatory rhetoric on
the part of our Russian neighbour, which happens
to be one of the permanent members of the Security
Council, its aggression against a sovereign United
Nations Member State has continued. In the wake of
the election, we witnessed another brutal violation of
Ukrainian territory by armed insurgent groups from the
Russian side. Despite warnings passed on by Ukraine
through diplomatic channels regarding a concentration
on Russia's border with Ukraine of up to 40 trucks
containing armed personnel, the Russian side took
no steps to prevent their breakthrough into Ukrainian
territory. On 27 May, around 4 a.m., a convoy consisting
of several trucks and passenger cars made an attempt to
cross the State border. After an exchange of fire with
Ukrainian border guard servicemen, part of the Russian
motorcade managed to break through and proceeded in
the direction of the town of Antratsyt. This happened
while Russian border guards did absolutely nothing.
Moreover, there is every reason to believe that the
armed groups' penetration into Ukrainian territory is
organized, financed and encouraged from the Russian
side.

Furthermore, the Russian Federation has failed to
condemn Russian citizens' participation in mercenary
activities in Ukraine and has done nothing to prevent
armed groups' illegal penetration into the eastern part of
Ukraine, thus conniving in such actions. We are in fact
dealing with blatant aggression against Ukraine from
the Russian side in the form of exporting instability into
the territory of another country. Our law enforcement
officers in the eastern regions of Ukraine are currently
dealing with skilled, armed mercenaries who are ready
to plunder, intimidate, torture and murder Ukrainian
citizens. Today, armed pro-Russian groups began to
attack peaceful citizens. They fired on a school and
a residential area of Sloviansk. We have had no sign
of any Russian condemnation of such acts. Instead,
Russia has offered its humanitarian assistance to the
population of eastern Ukraine, citing alleged appeals
from local citizens and organizations. We would like to
say to the Russian side that the only thing Russia can
do for the people of Ukraine is to stop supporting the
illegal military groups.

We appreciate the mediation role the Secretary-
General has taken on with his recent statement on
the peaceful settlement of the situation in the eastern
region of Ukraine. The Ukrainian Government stands
for a peaceful solution to the current situation. Peace
can be achieved if the Russian side stops pouring
professional mercenaries into Ukraine with the aim
of destabilizing the situation in eastern Ukraine and
stops encouraging separatism. We call on the Security
Council and the international community to demand
categorically that the Russian Federation cease its
practice of provoking instability, withdraw all Russian
armed forces, paramilitary organizations and groups,
and citizens from Ukraine and fulfil their obligations
undertaken under the Geneva agreement on Ukraine.

