Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I am
pleased to see you, Mr. Minister, presiding over the
Council today. I am also pleased at the presence and
the very valuable contributions of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ghana and the Executive Secretary
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) at this meeting.

My delegation believes that the report of the
Secretary-General on ways to combat subregional and
cross-border problems in West Africa (S/2004/200) is
both timely and important. It signals a qualitative
change in the approach to peace and security issues.
Rigorously applied, that approach can lend greater
consistency and effectiveness to the international
community's efforts to establish lasting peace and
stability in the region and beyond.

The Secretary-General has identified cross-border
problems that feed and exacerbate the chronic
instability afflicting the West African region, and he
proposes elements of a strategy to address them. We
agree with him that the proliferation of and illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons, the use of
mercenaries and the recruitment of child soldiers
represent reprehensible and dangerous scourges that
feed and are fed by war and instability.

It would have been wise - and we wonder why
this was not the case - to include on this list the
illegal exploitation of natural resources, since it seems
obvious that that activity plays a role in the outbreak
and perpetuation of the cyclical and tumultuous
conflicts that ravage the Mano River region. Moreover,
on the basis of that observation, Canada is preparing to
propose to the General Assembly, on behalf of the
members of the Kimberley Process, a draft resolution
on the role of diamonds in the perpetuation of conflicts.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
33-point action plan to organize the international
community's response to these scourges. The
recommendations reflect a concern for operational
effectiveness. The need to act with a sense of
urgency - which we totally support - seems to have
guided the report's authors in their choices as well as in
the formulation of recommendations and of the
practical plan to implement them.

Nevertheless, we believe the fight against these
phenomena is somewhat limited to an equation
dominated by the security dimension, although that
remains extremely important. The report does not
overlook related matters, however. It emphasizes -
although without sufficiently establishing a
relationship among them - all the factors that could
influence the international community's efforts to
eliminate these problems. I shall mention only a few:
youth unemployment, social exclusion, governance
problems, the treatment of victims of human rights
violations and the long-term reintegration of
demobilized combatants, particularly women and
children.

It is because this fight challenges the entire
international community that it must be carried out in a
resolute, concerted and united way. Algeria also fully
supports the partnership formula for implementation of
the action plan. Only partnership will enable us to
mobilize energies and to combine the efforts of
everyone - the United Nations system, States,
regional and subregional organizations and civil
society representatives - to give this fight every
chance of success.

However, with respect to the partnership's mode
of operation, we would have preferred an approach
based on an order of priorities, identifying what
requires immediate action and what is longer-term,
because - as with the fight against terrorism and
organized crime - the response must be based on
enforcement as well as on a prevention strategy. Such
an approach, furthermore, would make possible an
unambiguous division of responsibilities. It is
absolutely necessary to reconcile immediate
requirements with the international community's long-
term action in this area.

First of all, this fight should be undertaken
mainly by the United Nations. The Organization can
and must take advantage of the unprecedented
deployment in the subregion, first of all to curb this
trafficking and then to create the conditions for its
eradication. It is certain that the return of peace and
stability to Liberia, Sierra Leone and C6te d'Ivoire will
considerably reduce the risk of the proliferation of
these phenomena. In that regard, the operational
coordination among the United Nations missions in
Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone is vital and
should be strengthened and expanded. On another
level, the successful implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes in
those three countries - supported, if necessary, by a
regional DDR plan - will be decisive for the success
of this fight.

States, for their part, must support this
undertaking by fully respecting the obligations they
have assumed under international legal instruments,
whether pertaining to mercenaries, to the illicit
weapons trade, to the protection of children or, more
generally, to the rules of international humanitarian
law. It is clear that an effective struggle against those
problems cannot be limited to selective efforts. A
reliable and lasting prevention strategy, borne by the
organizations of the subregion, its States and its
populations, is more necessary than ever. The
achievement of that objective requires support from the
international community to assist organizations and
States of the region.

The report advocates relevant measures - the
strengthening of the ECOWAS Secretariat, the
reactivation of the Mano River Union, support for
national commissions in charge of implementing the
Moratorium on small arms and support for the security
sector reform - to mention just a few, are, in fact,
conducive to preparing the subregion to take up where
the United Nations leaves off, in conflict prevention
and peacekeeping at the level of the subregion. To use
a concept that is popular in the United Nations, it is a
matter of allowing the subregion to appropriate that
long and difficult process.

Algeria believes that the report of the Secretary-
General is the starting point of a long process. United
Nations action must be long-term in nature. The
partnership that we would like to see set up among all
of the players concerned with cross-border problems
should have a level of ambition and commitment which
is commensurate with the challenges and threats that
the problems raise with regard to international peace
and security.

Decisive combat against those scourges would
benefit from being supported and accompanied by a
comprehensive approach which would integrate matters
of peace and development, a strategy designed and
implemented by the organizations and countries of the
subregion with the support of the United Nations
system and its development partners. In other words,
the contribution of the international community must
be part of the establishment of a regional security
system which would guarantee security in all of the
countries of the subregion, as well as the legitimate
aspirations of its peoples for economic development
and social progress.

The United Nations must acquire the proper
means of analysis and monitoring. The establishment
within the United Nations Office for West Africa of a
monitoring unit made up of multidisciplinary experts
working hand in hand with the ECOWAS Secretariat
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, seems to us to be useful and necessary. That
unit would advise the Secretary-General and the
Security Council on the ways to make the international
community's combat against the scourges more
effective. Special attention should be given to the
proven links between arms trafficking networks and
terrorist groups and must ensure that such a
relationship, which is based upon mercantile
considerations, does not become a dangerous
collaboration against peace and security in the world.
In that context, coordination with the future observer
office of the African Union for terrorism, which will be
based in Algiers, seems necessary and desirable.

The Security Council must, for its part, take
further action and indicate its willingness to adopt a
long-term view when it comes to fighting the problem.
Cross-border problems must be considered as threats to
international peace and security under the meaning of
Chapter VII of the Charter, and treated as such. It goes
without saying that in order to succeed in that combat,
the international community must marshal all of the
resources at its disposal and show political willingness,
determination, boldness and solidarity.

