The United States of America today voted against the draft resolution authored by the Russian Federation (S/2020/658). We are disappointed, but not surprised, by Russia's disingenuous attempt to put forward a resolution designed to protect the murderous Al-Assad regime and divide the Council. Yesterday, 13 members of the Council - an overwhelming majority - voted to take a principled and humanitarian stand in support of the Organization's impartial, apolitical and needs-based recommendation to reauthorize the existing cross-border mechanism, that is two crossings in the north-west, for 12 months. That was, quite literally, the bare minimum the Council should have done to help the Syrian people. What Russia has put forward today is a text that spreads lies about the effectiveness of Al-Assad-controlled cross-line assistance, while promoting the false narrative that sanctions are to blame for the humanitarian crisis rather than Al-Assad's vile behaviour. Moscow's immoral proposal cuts the number of border crossings down to just one for only six months. Their draft resolution has no correlation to the situation on the ground and blatantly defies the explicit and fact-based recommendations of the Secretary- General, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and countless international non-governmental organizations operating in Syria. It is filled with baseless propaganda aimed at bolstering Al-Assad regime's control over United Nations humanitarian assistance, even though we all know Al-Assad uses it as a weapon of war and political retribution. The text is a repeat performance from six months ago, straight from Moscow's extortion playbook. Russia wanted to play politics and make a mockery of the Council, and they have done it, once again, at the expense of millions of Syrian lives. For the People's Republic of China to join them in this farce is indefensible. The citizens of both countries should be ashamed by the actions of their Governments and should speak out and hold them accountable. While we are disgusted by the utterly irresponsible and heartless action of Russia and China, it is important that we point out that they are isolated in their despicable position. Yesterday, every other member of the Council put the Syrian people first and voted in favour of a compromise text that accurately reflected the situation on the ground and authorized the remaining two border crossings for 12 months. Every other member of the Council - 13 of us - negotiated in good faith to find a principled way forward to get the Syrian people life-saving humanitarian aid. We thank our colleagues for their moral stand and conviction. Today, the United States was again joined by a majority of the Council in denying Russia and China the votes necessary to score political points with the Al-Assad regime. Since December, we have spoken out against Russia and China's support of Al-Assad's siege-and-starve campaign. We will not tolerate that. The United States will always advocate for the Syrian people.
