Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France welcomes the fact that the Benin presidency
decided to convene this open debate today on the
problems of West Africa, and we thank you for this,
Mr. Minister. We would like also to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and for his
presence, which attests to the importance of the issue.
We welcome also the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould-
Abdallah, and of the representative of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). We
thank them for their contributions to our debate, and I
will come back to some of the points they made.

Last year the Council met at a time when hope
was emerging in West Africa. Now, unfortunately, we
must acknowledge that the situation is still very fragile
and that there are potential crises undermining its
stability and development. The Secretary-General
earlier painted a gloomy picture of the situation, and I
certainly support what he said in that regard.

I wish to address two situations that are of great
concern to us.
First, the situation in Cote d'Ivoire is very
disquieting, as the electoral deadline is approaching.
France, like the Security Council, unreservedly
supports President Mbeki's mediation efforts through
the African Union. Cote d'Ivoire is a great country in
the heart of West Africa. It must absolutely return to
the path of peace and reconciliation. It is in its interest
and in the interest of the whole region, and hence of all
Africa.

I am thinking also of the situation in Togo. There
the assistance and efforts of ECOWAS and of the
African Union will be decisive in bringing about - as
my country has consistently strongly emphasized -
the restoration of constitutional order and the holding
of free and transparent elections.

It is clear that the courageous determination of
the African organizations is the main factor in ensuring
stability in the subregion and in the continent as a
whole. We must continue to support the activities of
African countries themselves as they work for peace,
development and prosperity on their continent.

The African Union's Peace and Security Council
is now a full partner of the Security Council, which
itself devotes a great part of its work to Africa, and in
particular West Africa. Each, of course, has its own
role and functions, but our activities must be
complementary.

Nor can I overlook the fact that, in the context of
the New Partnership for Africa's Development, the
African States have chosen further to develop their
collective action in favour of peace and security and,
towards that end, to enhance their institutional and
operational capacities.

All these initiatives attest to the fact that the
African countries have taken stock of the challenges
facing their continent and that they are resolved to
tackle those challenges themselves. It is, of course,
incumbent on the international community to support
those efforts and France, for its part, will continue to
lend them its full support.

In order to be fully effective, the mobilization of
the international community must not be confined to
sporadic assistance to individual countries facing
crisis. In the long term, it must benefit the entire
subregion. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2005/86) is a useful contribution in terms of that
approach. Here, the work done by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa, Mr. Ould-Abdallah should also be commended.
The report contains a large number of specific
recommendations. Without going into detail I would
like to highlight a few points. First, we see a pressing
need to end the trafficking in small arms and light
weapons and the recruitment of mercenaries and child
soldiers, which destabilize entire countries and destroy
the futures of many individuals. It is incumbent upon
all States of the region to tackle those issues.
Responsibility lies also with all other States concerned
with the export, brokering or financing of such
trafficking.

The resolve of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) to replace the 1998
moratorium on small arms and light weapons with a
truly binding instrument is, we believe, a promising
step. ECOWAS knows it may rely on the support of the
European Union in achieving that objective, as the
representative of Luxembourg will state on behalf of
the European Union presidency.

France also supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations be given the means to guarantee respect for
arms embargoes. We are convinced that that would be a
useful investment. Ensuring respect for arms
embargoes today means avoiding the outbreak of
hostilities tomorrow.

Security sector reform, also addressed in the
Secretary-General's recommendations, will be a key
element for the stability of the countries of the region.
It will ensure that the rule of law prevails, prevent the
recruitment of child soldiers and promote respect for
human rights.

With the assistance of the international
community, the countries of the region should pool
their efforts in order to better control their borders,
dismantle illegal roadblocks which hinder the free
movement of people and goods, combat the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, ensure security in
refugee camps and combat trafficking in narcotics.

We believe that there are a number of other points
which could be used to support the recommendations
of the Secretary-General, and we propose two. Why
not consider a regional embargo on arms intended for
the use of non-State actors? In addition, could we not
assist the countries of the region to strengthen their
control over their national resources, with support from
United Nations peace operations or other specific
mechanisms?

My country attaches particular importance to
settlement of the crises in West Africa. But, as the
report of the Secretary-General makes clear, the future
of the subregion lies in the hands of African leaders
themselves. We can only encourage the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa, ECOWAS and the African Union to continue
their remarkable efforts to work together with the
region's stakeholders to combat the scourges that have,
for so long, been besetting West Africa.

Before I conclude, I would like to note that my
delegation has just learned of the death of nine Blue
Helmets in Ituri. We are shocked by their deaths and by
the fate of the injured - I think that some 11 people
were injured in the attack. This reminds us of the
danger faced by peacekeepers as they carry out their
mission. We pay tribute to them and await a report
from the Secretariat on the circumstances of this
tragedy.

I would like to convey our condolences to the
authorities and the people of Bangladesh. Bangladesh
has been making a very significant contribution to the
Organization's peacekeeping forces, and my delegation
is particularly affected by this tradgedy.

