Mr. Lacroix: It is my pleasure to open the
Security Council meeting ahead of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations Force Commanders
and Heads of Military Components Conference in
New York. I will be very brief because this meeting
is essentially about hearing the voices of the Force
Commanders who are deployed in the field. They are
the ones who head the military components of our
peacekeeping missions, and they are really best placed
to tell us how the mandates negotiated and adopted by
the Council are implemented on the ground and about
the challenges they face in doing so.

(spoke in French)

I would just like to say that the programme that
we have organized for the Force Commanders this
week will allow them to keep abreast of the important
decisions being taken here at Headquarters on
peacekeeping in the context of the Security Council,
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
the Fifth Committee and in our various interactions
with Member States. We will also keep them informed
of the way in which we perceive progress in the efforts
we are making to be more effective and improve the
performance of our missions.

The Force Commanders this week will participate
in working sessions on the major current priorities,
including the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and our initiatives to improve
protection for our colleagues on the ground - our
peacekeeping troops - which are initiatives that relate
more broadly to issues of performance, as well as the
carrying out of the strategic review and other topics
linkedtotheimprovementofpeacekeepingeffectiveness.

(spoke in English)

Before I conclude, I would like to thank the Force
Commanders for their dedication. On behalf of all
our colleagues at the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, I would like to express my high
appreciation not only for the way in which the Force
Commanders are contributing to the implementation
of their mandates, but also, more specifically, for
their very strong engagement in helping us implement
our action plan in the field, which is aimed not only
at reducing the number of fatalities in peacekeeping,
but, more broadly, at improving the performance of
peacekeeping. Since we started the action plan, there
have been some encouraging developments in the field
over the past couple of months. I am very grateful for
that. There is still a long way to go, but I am confident
that, with the strong support of the Council and the
strong engagement of our Force Commanders, we
will be able to make a difference in terms of how
peacekeeping performs and protects. I look forward to
hearing from the Force Commanders.

