Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the delegation of Venezuela for its initiative
to convene this meeting. I also wish to thank the
Permanent Representative of Sweden and the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Chile for their briefings.

The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Council should continuously improve
its procedures, increase its efficiency, enhance its
relevance and transparency and better implement the
mandate entrusted to it. That has a bearing on the role
of the United Nations and on the common interests of
the broader membership of the Organization.

With the joint effort of the membership of the
Security Council, there has recently been progress in
improving the Council's working methods. The Council
has attached importance to improving transparency,
while there has also been a marked increase in the
number of open debates, as well as in the number
of timely briefings to non-members on the work of
the Council. In addition, under various formats, the
Council has increased its interaction with the broader
membership, regional organizations, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other
bodies. China supports continued improvement in the
Council's working methods and bringing its central role
in the maintenance of international peace and security
into full play. I wish to highlight the following points.

First, in the light of the mandate conferred on it by
the Charter of the United Nations, the Council should
focus its resources and energy on the major urgent items
concerning international peace and security. While
addressing thematic issues, the Council should abide by
its responsibilities, increase its communication with the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission in order to bring
their respective vantage perspectives and expertise into
full play, and strengthen coordination and the division
of labour to avoid redundancy.

Secondly, the Council should pay more attention
to preventive diplomacy and mediation. The Council
should advocate and promote the culture of peace;
increase the use of such means as mediation, good
offices and political processes to settle differences
and disputes and resolve crises; and refrain from the
threat or use of sanctions. The Council should pay
more attention to the views of the affected countries
in order to rationalize its own decision-making. In
the light of requirements under Chapter VIII of the
Charter, the Council shall strengthen its coordination
and cooperation with regional organizations.

Thirdly, the Security Council should hold full
consultations and strive to secure broad consensus.
In decision-making, Council members should hold
full and thorough consultations and strive to secure
consensus. There is a need to refrain from forcing
through a draft text against the backdrop of serious
differences among parties, so that the unity of the
Council can be maintained and the authority of its
resolutions enhanced.

Fourthly, the Council's subsidiary bodies need
to comprehensively implement their mandates. The
Council's sanctions committees need to strengthen
their work on designation, delisting and review; conduct
regular reviews of the sanctions list; and implement
Council resolutions in a comprehensive and accurate
manner. The relevant panels of experts need to carry out
their work in an objective, fair and reciprocal manner

in order to improve the impartiality and transparency
of the sanctions regime and maintain the authority and
efficacy of United Nations sanctions.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and other
subsidiary bodies need to provide technical guidance
and support in the light of their specific needs and
help Member States to enhance their capacity-building
efforts.

