Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I join
my colleagues in thanking the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2010/463) and Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing, including the
detailed update on the parliamentary elections. I offer a
warm welcome to Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and thank him for his
encouraging remarks. I would also like to acknowledge
the presence of Mark Sedwill, NATO's Senior Civilian
Representative in Afghanistan, in the Council Chamber
this morning.

Much has happened since the Council debated
Afghanistan three months ago (see S/PV.6351). Many
challenges remain, but progress is being made.
Crucially, this progress is increasingly directed and
driven by the Government of Afghanistan and other
Afghan authorities. The United Kingdom is committed
to working with them and with the United Nations and
the wider international community towards the goal of
a secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan.

The Secretary-General's report and the briefing
we just heard highlight in particular the scale of
political progress. The recent parliamentary elections,
the first run by Afghans since the 19605, are welcome
evidence of the growing capacity of the Afghan
authorities. They successfully overcame major security
and logistical obstacles with impressive levels of
support from the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations
Development Programme. I am sure that my Security
Council colleagues would agree that those Afghans
who acted as officials, who stood as candidates and
who exercised their right to vote showed great courage
and fortitude. Their participation sent a strong message
to those who wanted to deny the Afghan people a vote.
10-55499
We must now wait patiently for the completion of
the counting and adjudication processes. It is for the
Afghan authorities to investigate any reports of
irregularities in accordance with Afghan law, through
the Independent Electoral Commission and the
Electoral Complaints Commission.

Looking ahead, the United Kingdom welcomes
the focus of the Afghan authorities and UNAMA on
longer-term electoral reform, as set out in the London
and Kabul communiques. We agree with the Secretary-
General's report that this reform process should start
without delay.

The United Kingdom supported the findings of
the Consultative Peace Jirga in June, as well as
President Karzai's endorsement of the Afghan peace
and reintegration programme. Both were important
steps in promoting wider reconciliation. Yesterday's
establishment of the High Peace Council was a further
positive development. The appointment of a head of
the Council and confirmation of its membership are
priorities.

The Kabul Conference in July was further
important evidence of increased Afghan leadership and
commitment. The United Kingdom echoes the
Secretary-General's congratulations to the Government
of Afghanistan on holding such a successful high-level
event in difficult circumstances. The Kabul process
now provides a detailed road map for the future. We
must all focus on implementing the commitments and
supporting the Afghan Government to maintain
momentum for progress and reform, including in the
important battle against corruption.

As the Secretary-General reports, the security
situation remains serious. The increase in insurgent
activity and the complexity of their attacks continue to
be of concern. The rise in the number of incidents
involving improvised explosive devices and the near
doubling of assassinations, executions and kidnappings
by insurgents threaten Afghans civilians as well as
international and Afghan officials and forces. As a
result, there continue to be many civilian casualties,
although it is important to note that the Secretary-
General indicates in his report that just 12 per cent of
civilian deaths are due to action by pro-Government
forces - a fall of some 64 per cent as compared to the
same period in 2009, which is an encouraging trend.
Against that background, building the capacity of
Afghan National Security Forces is essential to

improving security across Afghanistan, not least now
that a broad timetable for security transition has been
set. The recruitment and training of the Afghan
National Army and National Police is ahead of
schedule. There are now portions of the country that
experience relatively few security incidents. The
International Security Assistance Force will continue to
work with Afghan forces to improve their capability
across the country.

I welcome the Government of Afghanistan's
continued dialogue and exchange with its neighbours
and the wider region. As the Secretary-General notes,
bilateral talks between Afghanistan and Pakistan have
delivered concrete plans for cooperation. The
ratification of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade
Agreement is the next important step for both countries
to benefit from the increased links.

Finally, the United Kingdom continues to support
the work of UNAMA and of Special Representative De
Mistura. Over the coming months, we look forward,
first, to UNAMA continuing to promote greater aid
coherence and effectiveness. For our part, the United
Kingdom is intensifying and reinvigorating our
development efforts in line with the Afghan
Government's own priorities. This includes a
commitment of a 40 per cent increase in development
aid.

Secondly, we look forward to UNAMA taking on
board the lessons learned from the recent and past
elections and to working earnestly with the
Government of Afghanistan on longer-term electoral
reform in line with the commitments made in London
and Kabul.

Finally, we look forward to UNAMA supporting
political outreach, within Afghanistan and regionally,
in support of the Kabul process.

