Mr. Owada (Japan): In its resolution 1127 (1997) of
28 August, the Security Council made it clear that the
serious difficulties in the peace process are mainly the
result of delays by UNITA in the implementation of its
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. Despite repeated
calls by the Security Council, UNITA had been failing to
fulfil its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. Therefore,
the Council decided in that resolution that all States
should take the necessary measures specified therein,
unless UNITA took concrete and irreversible steps to
comply with all its obligations within a one-month period.

The measures which UNITA did take or promised to
take towards the end of September, belated and
insufficient though they were, nevertheless provided
reason to hope that it would at last live up to its
obligations in the peace process. In the light of these
developments, the Council thus decided by resolution
1130 (1997) that the coming into force of the measures
specified in resolution 1127 (1997) should be postponed
for another month.

Now it appears, however, that that hope has not been
realized. UNITA has not responded to the call of the
international community, offering only at the eleventh
hour to take limited measures. This time, the Council has
no choice but to apply the sanctions.

Japan attaches great importance to ensuring that
these sanctions be effective. The cooperation of
neighbouring States is essential in this regard. UNITA
should be reminded that the Security Council is ready to
review the measures it is now imposing or to consider
additional measures, depending on the steps UNITA takes
in the coming days to meet its obligations.

While UNITA has been the main focus of criticism
for reneging on its commitments, it should also be noted
that the Government of Angola is likewise called upon to
meet its obligations in order to advance the peace process
and to cooperate with MONUA. In addition, Japan joins
others in urging both Angolan parties to agree on the date
and venue of the long-awaited meeting in Angola between
President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi. This would
contribute greatly to the achievement of lasting stability.

 

Also on this occasion, Japan wishes to express its
grave concern regarding the presence of Angolan armed
elements in the Republic of the Congo, as reported by the
Secretariat. Japan joins in the call to be made by the
President of the Security Council on all foreign forces to
withdraw immediately from the Republic of the Congo.

My delegation is in agreement with the Secretary-
General's assessment that the presence of MONUA
continues to be essential at this critical stage in the peace
process and that the security situation in Angola calls for
the continued deployment of United Nations troops there.
Japan therefore supports his recommendation to extend the
mandate of MONUA for three months, until 31 January
1998, and to postpone the withdrawal of United Nations
military armed units until the end of November.

For all these reasons, Japan will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us.

The international community will continue to monitor
closely the actions of the Government of Angola and
UNITA and to assist them in their efforts to fulfil their
commitments to the peace process. Japan, for its part, will
explore ways to offer possible support and assistance in
these efforts, carefully weighing the developments in the
country.
In closing, Sir, I should like once again, on behalf of
my Government, to pay tribute to the Secretary-General, to
his Special Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye,
to the personnel of MONUA and to the three observer
States for their untiring efforts to promote peace and
stability in Angola.

