Mr. Nesho (Albania): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your excellent work during this
month's deliberations of the Security Council. Today's
Council debate is being held against the backdrop of a
new and optimistic situation that better reflects the
excellent achievements of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission In Kosovo (UNMIK) and other
international institutions in Kosovo.

The free and democratic municipal elections held
in Kosovo in October of this year have clearly shown
that the overall commitment of the international
community, the resolutions of the Security Council and
the valuable efforts of the United Nations have yielded
the expected results in connection with the
establishment of democratic institutions, the
reconstruction of the country and instilling confidence
in the people with regard to the action of the
international community. At the same time, the
elections proved that Kosovars are capable of building
their future and their democracy.

Let me express our gratitude and warm thanks to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bernard Kouchner for his excellent, far-sighted work in
the service of the people of Kosovo and in defence of
the international community's desire for peace and
stability in the Balkans. Mr. Kouchner, together with
the representatives of other international organizations
in Kosovo and with the Kosovo Force (KFOR) have
justified with their admirable results the great
confidence of the international community that it could
contribute to solving one of Europe's most difficult
conflicts, which for years has generated tension and
conflict.

We believe that the creation of municipal bodies
representing all communities in Kosovo will contribute
to increasing the responsibilities of Kosovo's
representatives for institutional and democratic
administration, under the supervision of UNMIK. The
optimistic results of these elections, and the better
understanding by all political forces in Kosovo of the
need to institutionalize an inclusive, multi-ethnic and
multicultural society will logically lead to the holding
of general elections in Kosovo in the near fixture. By
respecting the right of people to self-government and
accepting the natural process of consolidating the new
democracy, the general elections in Kosovo will be a
far-sighted action by the international community that
will fulfil the objective of finding a long-term solution
to the problem and contribute to overall stability in the
Balkans.

Recent developments in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the victory of the democratic forces in
Serbia give hope that a new era of understanding and
cooperation will begin in South-East Europe. Albania
is ready to cooperate with all democratic institutions
that aim at Balkan integration, the creation of peace
and stability in the region and the achievement of a free
and democratic society that is looking forward to
joining the member States of the European Union.

It is essential for the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and its new democratic leadership, as the
latest country to join the community of democratic
Balkan countries, to openly express its will to embrace,
as soon as possible, the new principle of democracy by
dismantling the tragic nationalistic policy of the
criminal Milosevic regime, and by respecting human
rights and the basic rights of the people to self-
governance and self-determination.

By cooperating with international institutions,
such as the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, by releasing all Albanian political
prisoners that are being held in Serbian jails and by
punishing the perpetrators of human genocide in
Kosovo and elsewhere in the former Yugoslavia, the
new Yugoslav State will clearly demonstrate its will for
cooperation with other Balkan countries and create
confidence among the peoples of the region in a new
opportunity for strong and valuable cooperation on a
new level.

For some time now, many political circles and
world diplomacy have been talking about the future
status of Kosovo. Albania is of the view that this status
will rationally be decided at a later time, when the
democratic institutions in Kosovo have been
consolidated. The effort to find a partial solution,
influenced by the enthusiasm for quick changes, will
not result in a long-term solution and will not justify all
the efforts the international community has been
making for such a long time in the Balkans.

Knowing that in the Balkans it is difficult to find
a democratic leader like President Havel, one who
perceives democracy as a system beneficial to
everyone, it is in the interest of peace in the region that
comprehensive solutions for the final status of Kosovo
be mature and lasting and take into account the
legitimate right of the Kosovar Albanians to self-
determination and independence.

To sum up, we live in a new time, with new
leadership and new realities, but what we all need
today is to find the political will, responsibility and
courage to accept the irreversible reality of the
Balkans.

