Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda) (spoke in French): I
would like to associate myself with earlier speakers in
performing two very pleasant tasks. First, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the way you
have conducted the affairs of this Council throughout
this month. My congratulations also go to your
predecessor, Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani of
Singapore. The second pleasant task is to welcome
Minister Miranda of Angola to New York. At the same
time, I wish to assure the Council that the Government
and the people of Rwanda have sympathized with the
Government and the people of Angola throughout the
war it has been waging against Savimbi and UNITA,
the disastrous effects of which on daily life are still
being felt to this day.

We welcome the report introduced by
Ambassador Richard Ryan. We commend and
congratulate him. We hope the expected results will be
achieved: that the war machine that continues to ravage
Angola, a friendly and brotherly country, will be
stopped.

Rwanda is mentioned in paragraph 58, paragraph
186, paragraph 191, paragraph 192, paragraph 193 and
paragraph 213 of the report. In paragraph 213, there is
a tangible and verifiable fact. The other paragraphs,
however, are partially or fully speculative. This is a
pity, but, nonetheless, we will not withdraw our
support for the report because it is correct. We accept
and support its conclusions and recommendations, and
we endorse it with a view to assisting the Committee
and the Monitoring Mechanism to continue their work.

However, I believe it is important to make a few
points to justify what I have said. In paragraph 58, for
example, there is a reference to "contradictory
explanations". It is not clear as to whom or what the
contradictions are between. The paragraph goes on to
say that the Mechanism "is of the opinion". It may be
"of the opinion", but opinion is not fact. There are
many things that need to be corrected in the drafting of
this report.

Rwanda reiterates what it said to the Council last
year. Because of the need to withdraw our troops -
here I refer again to paragraph 58 - it is true that we
used Angolan territory, with the permission of the
Angolan authorities, and the mission was a short-term
one and very successful. At no stage in that operation
was there any question of contacts with Savimbi or
with UNITA, and Rwanda does not envisage any such
contact in the future.

We hope - and this also applies to paragraph
191 - that corrections can be made to these
paragraphs so that Rwanda can be satisfied that these
are factual. If there is an initiative under way or
planned concerning the provenance of diamonds, I
must say immediately that this project is not on the list
of projects of our country - and we have many. This
project does not exist yet, but even if it did, Rwandan
law does not defend the creation ofthat type of project.

Another fact that is important is that the reference
to Mr. Victor Bout as having an operational base in
Kigali is absolutely wrong. Mr. Bout never resided in
Rwanda. We have passed on the information we have
received to the effect that Mr. Bout is established
somewhere in the Middle East. Rwandan immigration
authorities are instructed to look out for any passage of
Mr. Bout through Rwanda, and should he come to
Rwanda at any stage, he will be arrested, like any
UNITA member. This is very clear and is known.

We are here to implement the Security Council
resolutions related to sanctions against UNITA, and we
reaffirm our commitment to this. Rwanda will ensure
that these war diamonds, wherever they come from,
will not be dealt with or processed in Rwanda or by
Rwandans. Paragraphs 191, 192 and 193 have nothing
to do with any Rwandan traffickers. We know who
these traffickers are. I wish to confirm that Rwanda has
taken the decision not to cooperate with anyone
believed or found to be friends of UNITA.

On this note, we would like to wish every success
to the monitoring exercise and the sanctions Committee
in their work. If they wish to improve the report, we
would be very happy to assist them. Rwanda is ready to
work together with the Monitoring Mechanism to
ensure that the Angolan people finally find peace.

