Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Joint Special Representative for
Darfur and Head of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, for his briefing.

I shall focus my comments on the security,
humanitarian and political aspects in Darfur and the
reconfiguration of UNAMID.

First of all, with regard to the security situation,
we welcome the positive developments mentioned in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/389), in
particular the return to stability in Darfur, the notable
decrease in intercommunal clashes, the ongoing
ceasefire, the weapons-collection campaign and
the drop in crime. We took part in the field visit last
April, which the President organized in her capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005). We were able to
see for ourselves what is described in the report of the
Secretary-General, namely, the security situation and
the positive impact ofthe weapons-collection campaign.

The improvements in the security situation and the
weapons-collection campaign have also contributed to
improving the humanitarian situation. The Secretary-
General mentions that development in his report,
particularly with respect to an improvement in the
freedom of movement for civilians, a reduction in
the number of attacks against civilians, a decrease in
incidents of human rights violations and an improvement
in the delivery ofhumanitarian aid, as well as increased
voluntary returns of internally displaced persons and
a reduction in the number of attacks against civilians.

Last Monday, the Security Council, in an Arria
Formula meeting, was briefed on the successes in
Darfur regarding the action plan for the protection
of children from violations in armed conflict in
Darfur. We welcome the positive role of UNAMID
in strengthening local capacities in the stabilization
of Darfur, in particular strengthening local judicial
institutions as well as training local civilian partners
and security forces in the area of protecting children
and fighting sexual abuse and exploitation. We welcome
the role of the joint mechanism between the Sudan and
the League of Arab States to implement development
projects in Darfur. We also welcome the briefing by
Lieutenant General Leonard Ngondi, Force Commander
of UNAMID, yesterday (see S/PV.8251).

With respect to political developments, we would
like to reaffirm the primacy of a political solution in
Darfur. We would also like to reaffirm the key role of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We welcome
the return of certain factions to the peace process, as
we were able to see in Berlin last month. However, we
regret that they have tried to negotiate outside of the
framework of the Doha Document.

With regard to the reconfiguration of UNAMID
and the future, we welcome the cooperation between
the Government of the Sudan and UNAMID. A joint
United Nations-African Union mission to the Sudan,
which is mentioned in the report, was carried out to visit
the eight areas from which UNAMID has withdrawn,
as a result of which no negative impact has been noted,
During our visit, we were able to observe one of the
camps - the Abu Shuk camp, in North Darfur. We
hope to see more cooperation between the Sudan, the
authorities of Darfur and UNAMID.

With regard to UNAMID's exit strategy, I support
the request General Ngondi made yesterday that there
should be a clear transition plan that facilitates a
withdrawal of the operation.

In conclusion, we await the report of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations on the second phase and
a discussion of the Council on the extension of the
mandate in the light of the facts on the ground and in
manner that maintains peace.

