The President: I would now like to make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of
Croatia.

I would like to welcome the presence of the
Presidents of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge
Byron and Judge Robinson - who has addressed the
Council for the first time today - as well as
Prosecutors Mr. J allow and Mr. Brammertz.

I thank them for their respective reports and
would like to make a few remarks, primarily regarding
the ICTY, given the importance my country attaches to
its work. Croatia welcomes the commitment with
which both Tribunals continue to advance their
respective exit strategies, as reflected in today's
reports.

We understand that the Tribunals are expected to
fulfil their mandates as early as possible without
compromising their standards or the integrity of the
judicial process. We also understand that the failure to
locate and arrest the remaining fugitives constitutes a
major obstacle to that goal.

The arrests this year of the fugitives Radovan
Karadzic and Stojan Zupljanin, while long overdue,
mark an important benchmark in completing the
ICTY's mandate. We hope to see an early beginning of
their trials. We are pleased to hear that the arrest and
trials of the remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladic' and
Goran Hadzic, who have been indicted for some of the
most atrocious crimes committed in post-Second World

War Europe - namely the massacres committed in
Srebrenica and Vukovar - remain a priority for the
ICTY.

We should not forget that the Tribunals continue
to operate in societies that still struggle to overcome
the legacies of the past and are still trying to heal from
within. For instance, in Bosnia and Herzegovina only
last week another mass grave was unearthed in the
vicinity of Srebrenica, containing the remains of close
to 1,000 victims who were killed under the command
of General Ratko Mladic 13 years ago.

An early advocate of the establishment of the ad
hoc Tribunals, Croatia cannot emphasize strongly
enough the vital importance of the judicial process in
individualizing criminal responsibility for the crimes
committed in both the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
To quote my Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, who
addressed the General Assembly this fall regarding
these issues: "Just punishment must also serve truth
and open the way to lasting peace, security and
reconciliation". That is why it is crucial that the
remaining fugitives also face justice. Their impunity
must not outlive the existence of the Tribunals.

We know that, without the unreserved support of
the entire international community, the international
tribunals remain powerless.

For its part, Croatia remains committed, as
always, to full and unequivocal cooperation with the
Tribunal. Over the years, the Croatian Government has
demonstrated the seriousness of its commitment by
developing a close working relationship and extending
its assistance to the Tribunal on a host of different
issues, including by granting access to a staggering
amount of sensitive documentation emanating from the
highest military and police authorities. It is in our
shared interest to continue cooperating in good faith
and in a responsible and professional manner.

I would like to stress that, in Gotovina's case
alone, the Croatian Government has delivered close to
2,000 specific and sensitive police and military

documents, as requested by the Office of the
Prosecutor. This clearly indicates that extensive and
intense cooperation does exist and will continue in the
future, because the search for additional documents is
still ongoing.

Croatia is determined to do all in its power to
meet the Prosecutor's remaining request. This is the
message that has been unequivocally conveyed to the
Prosecutor from the highest State authorities, and to
that end the Government has, over the reporting period,
undertaken a number of operational measures -
administrative, as well as investigative and judicial
steps - against certain individuals. Croatia continues
to conduct administrative and criminal investigations
with the aim of determining whether those documents
exist and if they were unlawfully taken and, if so, of
identifying the persons responsible and bringing them
to justice. We note that the Prosecutor has taken into
account the additional steps that Croatia has taken
since the submission of his written report.

As the Tribunals enter the last phase of their
existence, Croatia is pleased to be in a position to take
part in the ongoing discussions and to share its insight
and experience on their residual functions, which will
have to continue even after the completion of the trials.
Allow me to use this occasion to thank the delegation
of Belgium, which facilitated this process, for its
efforts and dedication. My Government, which has
developed a close working relationship with the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and is
determined to continue its domestic efforts to prosecute
war crimes committed in its territory since 1991, has a
special interest in finding a sustainable, just and
practical solution for discharging the Tribunals'
residual functions, notably those related to the future of
the Tribunals' archives and the modalities of the
serving of sentences.

The Tribunals continue to have our full support as
they carry out the remainder of their mandate. In this,
we are guided by the goal for which they were
established: closing the impunity gap. This will be their
most important heritage. That is why the international
community cannot afford to declare their mandates
complete before every effort has been made to bring
those most responsible to justice, however long it
takes.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister of Justice and
Attorney General of Rwanda.

