Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes and
supports the initiative of the Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Western Sahara, Mr. Horst
Kohler, to convene negotiations in Geneva in December
between the parties to the Western Sahara settlement,
with the participation of neighbouring countries. We
urge all those invited to join the dialogue without
preconditions and with the aim of achieving a mutually
acceptable solution. It is in that spirit that we are
working with all parties concerned, with whom we
enjoy relationships of trust.

The international community, including the
Security Council, must contribute to the success of
the process initiated by Mr. Kohler, which creates a
unique chance to make progress on the Western Sahara
settlement. Our collective efforts should be based on the
parameters previously agreed by the Security Council,
which, in accordance with relevant Council resolutions,
identify the parties to the Western Sahara conflict;
are based on the fundamental principle of a mutually
acceptable definitive solution; and stipulate the self-
determination of the people of Western Sahara in the
framework of procedures consistent with the principles
and the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.

To that end, a mutually acceptable formula is the
main precondition for the sustainable nature of any
settlement. There has always been a firm consensus
in the Security Council on this issue. Unfortunately,
in the adoption of resolution 2440 (2018) today, we
see yet another attempt to amplify the ambiguity of
the aforementioned parameters. We believe that this
approach is unacceptable.

Attempts to revise the agreed bases of the Western
Saharan settlement have become the main reason that
we were unable to support the American text. We did
not block the resolution because it extends the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO), which is important for
regional stability. We support and assist MINURSO,
including by deploying Russian military observers to
its contingent, but a vote in favour of the resolution
would have meant sacrificing our principled position in
support of the existing bases of the settlement.

Furthermore, we have to note that, as was the case
for resolution 2414 (2018), the process of preparing
and agreeing today's decision was once again neither
transparent nor consultative. The principled and well-
founded comments of a number of Council members
were not taken into account. That shortcoming must be
remedied. We once again conclude that the institution
of informal penholdership on specific subjects in the
Security Council leaves serious room for improvement.

We encourage all to unite in supporting the mission
of the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara, Mr. Horst Kohler, and help launch
a comprehensive negotiation process under his
auspices. Such a constructive approach would be of
key significance, not only for the settlement in Western
Sahara, but in order to improve the situation in the
region as a whole and enhance the efforts of all players
with the aim of overcoming the challenges to stability
and security.

