Mr. Assaker (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is once again meeting to follow up on
issues pertaining to Lebanon. This time the question
pertains to the investigation into the assassination of
martyred Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and his
companions, which is a matter of bringing justice to a
people and a country. On behalf of my Government,
Madam President, I would like to reiterate our thanks
to you, your friendly country, the other members of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General for all your
continued efforts and your desire to follow up on this
matter. The efforts to identify and punish those
involved in this crime enjoy the complete support and
the consensus approval of the Lebanese people as a
whole.

We have just heard the briefing of Commissioner
Serge Brammertz on the fourth report of the United
Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission (S/2006/375, annex). We express our
gratitude for that report, which we have read carefully
and about which we would like to make the following
positive remarks.

First, we commend the high professionalism and
seriousness that characterize Mr. Brammertz and his
team. We welcome the progress referred to in the
report as regards enhancing the human and technical
capacity of the Commission. We also welcome the
progress made in the investigation, which we hope will
continue until the whole truth behind this grave
terrorist crime is uncovered. We further hope that the
support of the Commission for Lebanese judicial
authorities will lead to the identification of those
responsible for other terrorist crimes that Lebanon has
suffered.

Secondly, we look forward to the Council's
favourable consideration of the 4 May 2006 request by
the Lebanese Government addressed to the Secretary-
General to extend the Commission's mandate for an
additional year, as well to its approval of the repeated
requests that Mr. Brammertz continue to lead the
Commission. That latter request is in recognition of the
renowned competence and professionalism of
Mr. Brammertz. It also reflects a desire to ensure the
effectiveness and continuity of the investigation, which
could be disrupted owing to the time needed to appoint
a new Commissioner.

Thirdly, we underscore with satisfaction the
report's reference to the robust ongoing cooperation
between the Commission and Lebanese judicial
authorities, whose work and productivity are
continuously improving. That improvement reflects the
desire of the Lebanese Government to develop the
capacity of its judicial and security agencies. It also
reflects the competence of those agencies and their will
to develop their performance and preparedness despite
difficult working conditions, which we continue to
work hard to improve. In that regard, we reiterate the
importance of continuing that cooperation between the
Commission and the Lebanese authorities in
accordance with the memorandum of understanding
signed between the two parties and the suggested
amendments that are being discussed to ensure optimal
working conditions and productivity in the service of
the serious task that the Commission has undertaken.

Fourthly, the Lebanese Government notes with
interest the reference in the report to the cooperation of
the relevant parties named therein. The Lebanese
Government hopes for and encourages such full,
ongoing cooperation in the service of truth, justice and
stability in Lebanon and throughout the region.

The assassination of Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
was an unusual crime that reverberated and continues
to reverberate throughout Lebanon, the region and the
world. Lebanon and its people have therefore
participated with exceptional determination and
persistence in the investigation into the crime,
alongside the international community. They have also
established optimal conditions for ensuring legality and
justice by uncovering the complete truth, putting those
involved on trial, and punishing them in a manner
commensurate with the gravity of their crime.

In that regard, we note the current consultations
between the Lebanese authorities and the United
Nations Secretariat, in accordance with the resolution
adopted by this Council, on drafting the basic statute of
an international court, which all Lebanese await with
concern and anticipation. The establishment of such a
court will assure the Lebanese people that justice will
be served in the interests of strengthening peace and
setting a precedent that will prevent the recurrence of
such heinous terrorist crimes in Lebanon and the
region, which have long suffered from similar acts of
terrorism.

The Lebanese Government appreciates the Security
Council's close follow-up of the just causes that concern
Lebanon and commends its efforts in that regard. The
Lebanese Government affirms that it is moving forward
with confidence and persistence, in respect for
international legitimacy and in cooperation with the
brotherly and friendly countries of the international
community, towards developing its capacity to build a
State that is capable, just and responsive to the aspirations
of all the Lebanese people - a State that embodies the
Lebanese heritage of freedom, openness and democracy.

