Mr. Granguillhome Morfin (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the Government of Mexico, I
would like to express our gratitude for the invitation to
participate in this debate convened by the Government
of Colombia. The moment could not be more
opportune, given the conclusion of the second phase of
the current electoral process in Haiti. Mexico hopes
that it will be concluded successfully, with full
observance of the law and respect for institutions. We
hope this will be a new stage in the democratic life of
the country.

The earthquake in Haiti and the devastation that
ensued was an unprecedented challenge for the
international community, given the scope of the
destruction and the subsequent epidemic. The
earthquake also revealed the weaknesses of
international development assistance. In reply to one of
the questions raised by the presidency, the international
response to the earthquake and the epidemic could
have been more efficient and effective.

As soon as the tragedy occurred, we in Mexico
set up an emergency air bridge to deploy rescue
personnel and approximately 15,000 tons of
humanitarian assistance. In both the emergency
response and reconstruction stages, Mexico became
involved in the greatest effort at international
cooperation in the history of its foreign policy.

We carried out innovations in modalities for
cooperation and established the public-private Mexican
Alliance for Haiti, to which the Mexican Government
provided $8 million for projects to strengthen
institutions and carry out health and education
initiatives. In addition, six Mexican private foundations
provided an additional $3 million for those purposes.
Moreover, in coordination with the Haitian Ministry of
Health, the Government of Mexico is building six
multi-purpose clinics in various camps for displaced
persons.

In providing assistance to Haiti, Mexico has
observed the increasingly accepted principles of
harmonization, complementarity, ownership and, of
course, sustainability. Mexico's assistance programmes
and projects in Haiti attach special attention to creating
capacities and strengthening institutions, which are
necessary conditions for achieving lasting and effective
5
solutions, as pointed out by Colombia's presidency in
its concept paper (S/2011/218, annex).

During its recent membership of the Security
Council, Mexico advocated for the Council to act
immediately and decisively to address the emergency
caused by the earthquake and strengthen the activities
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Also in the Council, Mexico
emphasized the close link that exists between
development and security in putting in place measures
to address the conflicts on the Council's agenda,
including the case of Haiti.

The Government of Mexico is pleased, therefore,
to welcome the Colombian proposal aimed at
strengthening MINUSTAH's mandate by adding a
development component to the security component.
The recent presidential and legislative elections in
Haiti represent a new opportunity to create a political
framework that would include the economic and social
instruments necessary to promote development in
Haiti. This is an opportunity to move forward in the
area of political and democratic stability, which would
lead to greater international support in terms of
cooperation as well as greater trade and investment
flows to support the reconstruction process and the
long-term development of that country.

The long-term reconstruction and development of
Haiti remain a tremendous challenge for the country
and for the international community as a whole. The
international community must continue in this great
undertaking on the basis of the interests and priorities
of the Government and the people of Haiti. It is also
crucial to enhance the coordination of international
cooperation and related processes so as to make them
more effective and efficient. Mexico will continue to
be committed to this task.

