Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you, Sir, for
coming to New York to preside over this meeting. I
would also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Radhika Coomaraswamy and
UNICEF Executive Director Ann Veneman for their
briefings.

China is deeply concerned about violations
committed against children in armed conflicts in some

countries. China opposes the recruitment and use of
child soldiers and other violations of the rights and
interests of children in armed conflict. We support the
various efforts of the United Nations, including those
of the Security Council, to promote the protection of
children in armed conflict. I should like to take this
opportunity to emphasize the following.

First, the Security Council should stay focused on
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Armed conflict
inevitably hurts and affects children and other
vulnerable groups. By working to prevent, reduce or
resolve conflicts at the grassroots level, the Security
Council will be able to provide children with the best
protection it can. That is far more meaningful and
effective than remedial measures taken in the aftermath
of conflict. A look at reality this year shows that, while
many children in Afghanistan and other regions have
become the victims of armed conflict as a result of the
deterioration of the security situation, positive progress
in the peace processes in Cote d'Ivoire and other
regions has brought hope to children there. That is yet
further proof of the need for the Security Council to
pay more attention to the issue of armed conflict per
se.

Secondly, in addressing the issue of children and
armed conflict, the role of the Government concerned
should always be respected and supported. Resolution
1612 (2005) stresses the primary responsibility of the
Government concerned for the protection of children
and the need for other parties to cooperate with the
Government in its efforts. The Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict should increase
communication with the Governments concerned,
acknowledge and support its positive measures and
continue to enhance mutual confidence so as to avoid
politicizing the question of children and interfering in
the internal affairs of the countries concerned under the
pretext of protecting children. The Secretariat should
also strengthen communication and cooperation with
the Governments concerned to ensure the accuracy and
objectivity of its information and to improve the
quality of its reports.

Thirdly, continued efforts are needed to improve
the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
proceedings of the Working Group on the basis of
resolution 1612 (2005). Progress has been made with
regard to collecting information since the monitoring
and reporting mechanism went into operation.
However, in many countries and regions the
mechanism is still in its initial stage and need to be
constantly improved in practice. Impatience and haste
should therefore be avoided. Under the coordination of
France as its chair, the Working Group has considered
the question of children in a number of countries. The
Chinese delegation hopes that the Working Group, with
continued professionalism and objectivity, will be able
to find solutions to the relevant issues through
cooperation with the Governments concerned and
constructive consultations, and put forward useful
proposals to the Security Council. The Chinese
delegation supports the Working Group in its continued
efforts to consider its working methods in order to
improve its efficiency and transparency.

China is always opposed to the wilful use or
threat of sanctions by the Security Council and
believes that the issue of sanctions should be
approached with even greater caution when it comes to
the question of children and armed conflict. Situations
vary from conflict to conflict and cannot all be treated
alike or addressed with a one-size-fits-all approach.
The Chinese delegation once again calls upon all
parties to armed conflict to truly honour their
obligations, comply with international humanitarian
law and respect and protect the rights of children. In
promoting post-conflict reconstruction, the
international community should give priority to the
reintegration of children into their families, schools
and communities and provide sufficient resources to
guarantee the achievement of that goal.

Efforts by the Security Council alone are not
enough to resolve the question of children and armed
conflict. We encourage UNICEF, the World Bank and
other international agencies to play a greater role in
helping the countries concerned to prevent the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We also
welcome the positive role played by non-governmental
organizations in that regard.

Having ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, China is
now a party to the Protocol. We call for the ratification
of and accession to the Protocol by more countries. It
is our hope that all parties will make efforts to truly
improve the situation of children in armed conflict and
give them the beautiful future that they deserve.

