Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): The Netherlands
welcomes the People's Consultative Assembly's decision to
revoke its earlier decree incorporating East Timor into
Indonesia. We join other delegations in expressing our
admiration for the sense of responsibility and realism that
the People's Consultative Assembly of Indonesia has
displayed in this matter. We cannot praise Indonesia,
however, without at the same time reminding it of its
continuing responsibility for the fate of the East Timorese
refugees in West Timor and elsewhere in Indonesia. As is
stated in the draft resolution, we welcome the commitment
of the Indonesian Government to allow the refugees and
displaced persons in West Timor and elsewhere in
Indonesia who wish to do so to return to East Timor, but
we also attach the greatest importance to the following
paragraph, which was already mentioned by the previous
speaker, and we would like to emphasize the importance of
that paragraph in full. It is the responsibility of the
Indonesian authorities to ensure the safety and security of
all refugees and the civilian and humanitarian character of
the refugee camps and settlements, in particular by curbing
the violent and intimidatory activities of the militias there.

When we speak of the responsibility and tasks of the
United Nations in East Timor to be exercised through the
Transitional Administration, we should not forget that it is
vitally important to involve the East Timorese themselves.
The Netherlands is pleased to note that the draft resolution
stresses the need for close consultation and cooperation
with the East Timorese people. It is also important and
logical that the civil United Nations Administration in East
Timor focus on building the local capacity of the East
Timorese to assume responsibility for their own democratic
self-government.

The United Nations, which in the current stage is the
indispensable Organization, should, of course, endeavour to
make itself superfluous. However, the United Nations
should make sure that the process of handing over
responsibilities to the East Timorese is carefully calibrated
to correspond with the actual emergence of local capacity.
Prematurely dumping responsibilities in the lap of the East
Timorese people would be tantamount to abandoning them.

At the same time, we must ensure that the military
resources on the ground are commensurate with the
developing security challenges in East Timor. A possible
downsizing of the military force in East Timor, provided
for in the current draft resolution, should take place only
if and when security conditions permit.

Along with the United Kingdom, we fully endorse
the statement made by the representative of Finland on
behalf of the European Union.

