Mrs. Kazragiene (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Special Representative Sandra Honore' for her briefing
and for her efforts. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2014/162). We reaffirm our continuing
support for the Mission.

Lithuania associates itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

We are pleased with the advancement of the political
process in Haiti. We commend the decision to conduct
local and national elections no later than 26 October and
presidential elections in 2015. The elections should be
inclusive and transparent. The United Nations presence
in Haiti should be ready to provide its support to the
electoral processes. The consolidation of democracy
and institutions remains an important pillar of the
United Nations support to Haiti. We welcome President
Martelly's call for national unity and dialogue and a
more collaborative relationship between Parliament
and the executive branch, as demonstrated in the
inter-Haitian dialogue that was launched in January.

We commend the progress made during the
reporting period in implementing the conditions-based
consolidation plan of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). The plan has shown
tangible results in meeting the professionalization target
of the Haitian National Police as the national authorities
assume greater responsibility in establishing the rule
of law. Local authorities should assume even greater
ownership of security and safety in Haiti. An effective
National Police is essential to the long-term peace and
security solutions for the country. The misconduct
and human rights violations of police officers should
therefore be immediately addressed. Further progress
is needed to improve pre-trial detention conditions so
as to resolve cases of illegal detention. The rule of law
is absolutely critical to good governance and stability.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report, we
note with satisfaction that Haiti's commitment to
international cooperation, in particular on human rights
issues, has strengthened, We commend Haitian efforts
to enhance gender equality and to set the conditions for
greater opportunities for women. We note, for example,
that gender considerations have been taken into
account in the recruitment of new student magistrates.
However, gender-based violence and increased violence
against women in Haiti remain deeply troubling. That
is a security concern for the nation, whose women are
an intrinsic part of the process towards reconstructing
Haiti. In that regard, Lithuania recalls resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), which reaffirm the
important role of women in peacekeeping. We call for
the incorporation of gender perspectives in all United
Nations peace and security efforts, including within
MINUSTAH.

We remain concerned about the cholera situation
in Haiti. There were fewer cholera cases during the
reporting period, with the Pan-American Health
Organization forecasting 45,000 infections in 2014,
down from nearly 700,000 cases from October
2010 to 31 January 2013. At the same time, the number
of cholera cases in Haiti is the highest in the world.
Additional efforts should be taken in line with the
United Nations system's commitment to supporting the
10-year National Plan for the Elimination of Cholera in
Haiti 2013-2022.

We are pleased that the MINUSTAH presence
is continuously adjusted in line with the progress
achieved in the country. With regard to the future of
MINUSTAH, we are analysing the five options put
forward by the Secretary-General for the new United
Nations configuration following the completion of the
consolidation process in 2016. We look forward to the
results of the planned full-scale United Nations-wide
strategic assessment in order to form our informed
position. At this stage, we are of the view that any
decision should reflect the balance between the scope
of the mandates of all peacekeeping missions and the
resources allocated to them. We note that MINUSTAH
has progressively disengaged from operational support
activities and that further progress is needed in the areas
of the rule of law, such as justice and accountability.
At the same time, we underline the importance of
consolidating the achievements in Haiti and of ensuring
their sustainability by both the Government of Haiti
and the United Nations community.

In conclusion, Lithuania wishes once again to
express its gratitude to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the MINUSTAH troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as the United
Nations country office in Haiti. We remain committed
to continuing our support to the Haitian Government
in its efforts to promote a national dialogue, peace and
security and to build a stable future for its people.

