Poland commends Russia for convening today's important debate. We welcome the focus of the debate on the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda and on making our shared commitment a reality. We would like to express our appreciation to Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing and for his valuable report (S/2020/946). We also thank all the briefers for their insightful and thought- provoking remarks. We align ourselves with the statements of the European Union (annex 38) and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27). In 2000, courageous women peacebuilders, mediators and human rights defenders were the inspiration behind resolution 1325 (2000), which, for the first time in history, called for the inclusion of women in matters of peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Today, 20 years after the unanimous adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we recognize more than ever the urgent need to deliver on our commitments. We fully subscribe to the words of the Secretary-General that "women's full, equal and meaningful participation [in peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts] is a non-negotiable political priority". The women and peace and security agenda has been greatly enriched over the last 20 years, including by highlighting the disproportionate impact of armed conflict on women and girls, the great benefits of enhancing the involvement of women in peace processes and the absolute necessity of tackling the scourge of sexual violence as a tactic of war. It is also widely understood that women and men have different experiences both during and after conflict, and that women face a particular set of challenges related to peacebuilding and security. We admit that while certain progress has been made there remains a stark inconsistency between declarations and actual actions. What is more, the consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic pose a real threat to the advancements achieved. Evidence shows that women's inclusion increases the quality and sustainability of peace processes. However, they are still overwhelmingly absent from negotiations. Since 1992, women only account for 3 per cent of mediators on peace agreements. The United Nations must remain resolute in its efforts aimed at promoting women's meaningful participation at all stages of peacemaking. Acknowledging the existence, skills, influence, values and approaches of women peacebuilders is a necessary preliminary step in ensuring their rightful and systematic place at the tables of negotiations and in decision-making and in fostering future peace around the world. We also need to recognize that women are not a homogenous group and that the women who tend be most marginalized, such as women with disabilities or women belonging to religious and ethnic minorities, need to be engaged in peace processes. We need to make sure that everyone's voice is heard. In this context, it is worth keeping in mind that resolution 2475 (2019), initiated by Poland and unanimously adopted by the Security Council last year, calls on all States Members of the United Nations to enable the meaningful participation and representation of persons with disabilities in humanitarian action, conflict prevention, resolution, reconciliation, reconstruction and peacebuilding. Moreover, the meaningful participation of women in peace processes as well as broader political processes is not about number of women at the table; rather, it is about women's leadership. We need to identify and support policies that strengthen not only women's voices but also women's access to leadership positions in decision-making in peacebuilding. We must also ensure that women have a strong voice in decision-making from initial peacemaking processes to the establishment and development of local and national Governmental institutions. We know that women are adequately trained for these roles and that they are ready for high-level appointments. We also know that qualified women are everywhere. We fully support initiatives and programmes that contribute to increasing the role of women in building lasting peace and security. To this end, Poland is implementing its first-ever Polish National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security. The National Action Plan has been adopted for the term 2018-2021, and its primarily focus has been put on the participation of women in conflict prevention and peacekeeping, women and peace and security agenda implementation via Polish humanitarian and development aid, protection and support of the victims of conflict- related sexual and gender-based violence, and promotion and development of the women and peace and security agenda both nationally and internationally. We do recognize that the national action plans are useful only if the outlined commitments are being actually translated into practice. That is why Poland has committed itself at international forums to introducing measures that will ensure that perpetrators are held accountable for acts of conflict-related sexual violence and to strengthening prevention efforts and the fight against impunity of peacekeepers who commit sexual exploitation and abuse. As a non-permanent member of the Security Council in the 2018-2019 term, Poland was a strong advocate of the women and peace and security agenda. Consequently, the protection of the most vulnerable groups, such as women and children, remains one of the priorities of Poland's from 2020-2022 term as a member of the Human Rights Council. The participation of female soldiers in United Nations peacekeeping missions is our priority. Poland actively promotes policies that address potential barriers to women soldiers in recruitment, participation and scope of engagement in peace operations. After re-engagement in peacekeeping operations in 2019, Poland paid special attention to the meaningful and appropriate assignment of women soldiers in our contingent in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). In 2020, the level of participation of Polish women in UNIFIL reached approximately 10 per cent, which is far above the 5 per cent average. The women and peace and security agenda is one of the priorities of Polish humanitarian aid and development assistance. In this area, Poland focuses mainly on protecting women from conflict-related sexual violence. We are targeting these objectives with the support of UN Women, the United Nations Population Fund and UNICEF, and through bilateral cooperation that aims, inter alia, at providing protection and health care and at creating an environment conducive to the empowerment of women. In order to effectively operationalize the women and peace and security agenda, we need to identify and consistently address persisting barriers to women's engagement. This requires making precise recommendations, systematic and regular assessments, and setting clear and measurable targets and concrete road maps. For this reason, Poland supports all initiatives aimed at providing practical guidance for the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. In this vein, we welcome the Women Peacebuilders Protection Framework, created by the International Civil Society Action Network with the support of the United Kingdom and whose report provides valuable insight into protecting needs of female peacebuilders and is followed by operational guidance that provides precise recommendations. We hope that this initiative will contribute to further operationalization of the women and peace and security agenda. We acknowledge and value the great impact resolution 1325 (2000) has had on peace processes. It has changed the understanding of peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The agenda that at first blush may stem from the need to ensure greater equality in practice ends up delivering better, longer lasting and more effective solutions in complicated peace and security circumstances. We do hope that the anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) will give a real impetus to better implementation of the resolution's provisions. We know what to do; what we need now is political will and an actual long-lasting commitment.
