Mrs. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank
Ambassador Jones Parry for his briefing. I would also
like to thank the Security Council mission to the Sudan
for its comprehensive report on a very complex
situation. I commend the Council and the Secretary-
General for their active roles in the peace process for
Sudan, as this is the second time that the Council has
visited the region to push the Sudan peace process
forward.

My Government welcomes and supports the
analysis and recommendations emerging from the
mission. The international community must face up to
the coming tasks and challenges. The continued
leadership of the Council will be crucial. It can count
on Norway's support.

The complexity of the situation in the Sudan is
best illustrated by the fact that three different peace
processes are going on at the same time. Each has its
unique character, but they are still interconnected. We
must press ahead with implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the north
and the south. We must get all parties on board on the
Darfur Peace Agreement and get the complicated
process under way. Initial talks for eastern Sudan have
been successful, and we hope that negotiations will
soon start in Asmara.

The Darfur conflict is at a crossroads. I want to
pay tribute to the African Union for a tremendous job
done both in establishing and maintaining an important
peacekeeping mission under adverse conditions, and in
bringing the Abuja peace process to a successful
conclusion.

The situation in Darfur is still very difficult.
There is still broad scepticism regarding the Darfur
Peace Agreement among the population. The people
are looking for guidance from the leaders who
negotiated in Abuja. We must continue to push for the
broad acceptance of the Agreement. The door must still
be open for the rest of the Darfur leaders to sign, but
after a process in which they can discuss and agree
with the Government the various concerns raised. Such
a process must not, however, undermine the position of
those who have already signed the Agreement. Possible
sanctions must not impede that political process, which
should be an integrated part of the implementation of
the Darfur dialogue.

The Government and the leaders who have
already signed, headed by Minni Minawi, should under
all circumstances start to implement the Agreement.
That will show the commitment of the two parties and
also show the benefits of the Agreement to the other
movements. Several elements are important here:
starting the process of disarming the militias,
especially the Janjaweed; bringing forward the Darfur-
Darfur dialogue; delivering humanitarian assistance;
and actively disseminating the content of the Darfur
Peace Agreement to the population of Darfur.

The United Nations, the African Union and the
international community must help the parties to
implement the Agreement and should support all of the
processes as a matter of urgency. Norway will
participate in those efforts. Security and protection for
the population must be given a very high priority. The
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) must be
strengthened, especially with increased responsibility
for the AMIS police.

Only the United Nations, however, will be able to
sustain an operation of this magnitude over the
necessary period of time. Norway therefore supports
the United Nations re-hatting of AMIS in order to
protect the population of Darfur and to guide and
support the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
Norway is ready to participate in the expanded United
Nations mission for Darfur, hopefully within a Nordic
framework. Our preparations for that are continuing,
with the possible starting point of 1 January next year.

Lastly, I would like to comment on the north-
south issues and the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Despite all the difficulties, that Agreement and the
emerging political cooperation between former
combatants show that it is, after all, possible to sustain
the peace process for Sudan. The Comprehensive Peace
Agreement is the main pillar of that process, and it
must now be supported and strengthened by the
agreement for Darfur and the east.
The implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement is moving forward. We can now see
progress on security and the withdrawal of troops from
the south and the east. But the process is too slow, and
there are a number of difficult issues that need urgent
resolution, such as Abyei, the Border Commission and
the Petroleum Commission.

The humanitarian situation is critical not only in
Darfur, but also in the south and the east. The return of
internally displaced persons is very difficult and needs
further support; the lack of administration in the Abyei
region makes the situation particularly difficult.
Norway will push for full implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, especially through
our chairmanship of the Assessment and Evaluation
Commission. The international community must
12

remain engaged on the north-south issues and the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement by, inter alia, fulfilling the pledges made in
Oslo last year. The Norwegian Government's support

for Sudan over the past two years amounts to a total of
$200 million.

