Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina would like to thank the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for presenting her fifth report pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).

The problematic and much-discussed question
of peace and justice is one that the international
community has faced many times - sometimes jointly
and sometimes in opposition to one another. We find
it most encouraging that it has now been recognized
that we cannot maintain the old justice-versus-peace
paradigm, and that we must embrace a new paradigm in
which peace andjustice are complementary objectives.
We have come to see that, de jure or de facto, amnesties
do not contribute to peace, and that in some cases they
have actually sent the dangerous message that serious
crimes may be tolerated.

Furthermore, where criminal justice processes
have been launched, we have not seen the anticipated
negative consequences for peace efforts. In 2003,
the Congress of Argentina adopted a declaration of
invalidity - the so-called laws of due obedience or final
point, which might just as well have been called laws
of amnesty, oblivion or pardon. In 2005, the Argentine
Supreme Court unanimously ruled that these laws of
oblivion, as they are known to human rights activists,
were unconstitutional and null and void. Since then,
through due process and respect for all constitutional
guarantees and national justice, 378 members of the
former regime have been found guilty of crimes against
humanity, 232 have been accused with oral proceedings
under way, and 1,013 military, civilian and religious
figures have been indicted.

These legal proceedings have allowed us as a
society- for instance, through the work of the Abuelas
de Plaza de Mayo concerning the systematic abduction
of children - to exercise our rights to truth and identity.
Today, of the 500 children being sought, 107 have been
found and restored to their true identity. I raise this
issue because our debates on this issue have led us to the
conclusion that justice contributes to sustainable peace
and reconciliation. Our painful experience - only one
among thousands of painful experiences that humankind
has suffered and continues to suffer - allows us to
affirm that social reconciliation, sustainable peace
and effective and genuine democracy can be achieved
through justice, truth and remembrance. I apologize for
introducing such personal testimony, but I believe that
the best way to participate in debates is to put one's
full self into them and to testify to events in our own
countries, not in order to cite them as paragons, but to
demonstrate how, in different circumstances, we can
seek and find responses that honour the principles of
truth, justice and peace.

Argentina welcomes the assertion of the Prosecutor
that previous limitations in contacts with the Libyan
Government have been overcome, and that her Office
renewed its contacts with the new Administration
following the elections of 7 July 2012. We welcome
the constructive dialogue between the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan delegation that recently
visited The Hague. We hope that they will proceed to
explore opportunities to foster the complementarity that
defines the relationship between the Court and States.

Another area of potential cooperation mentioned
by the Prosecutor concerns the possibility that aerial
attacks by NATO may have killed or injured civilians.
Like the Prosecutor, we call on NATO to cooperate
fully with the Libyan authorities in their efforts to
investigate casualties, injuries and damages to the
civilian population.

As regards cooperation on the part of all States
with the ICC, Argentina has repeatedly asserted that
it is crucial and cannot be limited to the State or
States parties explicitly involved, whose obligation to
cooperate emanates from the Rome Statute. Argentina
regrets that the Council had not reflected in clearer
terms the obligation of all Member States to cooperate
with the ICC when it makes a referral. At the same
time, we recognize that the Council, in paragraph 5 of
resolution 1970 (2011), has urged all States to cooperate
with the Court in relation to the situation in Libya,
pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

The cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi are both currently suspended by
the Office of the Prosecutor due to the challenge of
admissibility presented by Libya. We understand that
the challenge is subject to a judicial evaluation to be
made exclusively by the Court in accordance with
article 17 of the Rome Statute. Argentina takes note of
the opinion of the ICC regarding the inadmissibility of
the Al-Senassi case, and calls on the Libyan authorities
to comply with the decisions of the Court regarding the
admissibility of those cases.

As regards the investigations under way, we hope
that cooperative work will be undertaken between the
Office of the Prosecutor and the Libyan authorities
regarding gender-based crimes, on which the Office is
gathering evidence. Moreover, with respect to crimes
that may have been committed by rebel forces, we
hope that the Office of the Prosecutor shall investigate
the allegations of civilian deaths, looting, destruction
of civilian property and forced displacement by the
Misurata militias.

We recognize that Libya has demonstrated its full
readiness to cooperate with the ICC, as acknowledged
by the Prosecutor herself. We call on Libya to provide
the Court with all the information necessary to decide
on the admissibility challenges. Like the Prosecutor,
Argentina fully understands the challenges before
the Libyan authorities, and commends the ICC for its
willingness to support the Libyan Government in its
efforts to address as many cases as possible.

Argentina firmly believes, due to its past experience,
that when heinous crimes have been committed there
can be no sustainable peace without justice. Therefore,
beyond the competence of the ICC - which will
naturally focus on those who appear to be the most
responsible - it is necessary for the Libyan Government
to formulate and put into practice a global strategy for
combating impunity and rendering justice for those
horrendous crimes. Only accountability before the
law and a culture that respects human rights - which
implies a culture of collective memory as a guarantee
that crimes will not recur - will serve to strengthen
peace and provide relief for the victims. Given the
scope of the atrocities committed, Argentina believes
that a comprehensive strategy that is complemented by
the Court can lead to bolstering accountability before
Libyan domestic courts, while at the same time making
it possible for the International Criminal Court to hear
those cases that Libya's judicial authorities cannot
address.

Some of the elements of my statement have already
been made, so I shall be brief. I would like for the record
to reflect a position that Argentina has promoted, and
would ask to be taken into account - that is, with regard
to the Council's referrals and the situation in Libya,
which entail an obligation to follow up such referrals.
The Council cannot only take note of reports on the
matter. We are pleased that, in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/2, on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the Council expressed its commitment to
follow up its decisions on ad hoc tribunals and the ICC.
Similarly, Argentina reiterates its concern with regard
to the provision that the two referrals made to date
exempt from the Court's jurisdiction nationals of States
that are not parties to the Rome Statute for acts or
omissions related to missions established or authorized
by the Council or related to them. Also of concern is the

issue of the financing of the expenses stemming from
such referrals.
In each ofthe cases and in each ofthe reports - such
as the current fifth report of the Prosecutor - it is
relevant to rethink how the Council and the entire United
Nations is going to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court. At the same time, as we have indicated
and affirmed, the purpose of the Court, its noble mission
and its functioning under a multilateral system is to put
an end to impunity, establish the rule of law, foster and
promote respect for human rights and achieve lasting
peace in comformity with international law and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. That
is not something just said by this Ambassador - a
human rights activist - or even by my country; it is
something called for by the international community in
the Kampala Declaration and its preamble.

