Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union. For us, today's meeting is important both from
the standpoint of the role played by the European Union
(EU) in collective efforts to support international
peace and security and from the standpoint of the
strategic relations linking Russia and the European
Union - both major continental centres of power
with great responsibilities for the situation in Europe
and, more broadly, in the Euro-Atlantic region. In
that context, we are generally satisfied with the way
our dialogue with the European Union has evolved,
including at high-level summits. We note some
proximity in our positions on many international issues
on the agenda of the Security Council.

The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
multilateral development and improvements in the
cooperation of the United Nations with regional and
subregional organizations. That cooperation must be
based on the firm foundation of the Charter of the
United Nations, especially, its Chapter VIII.

The European Union contributes to strengthening
multilateralism, with the United Nations playing the
lead role, in combating new threats and challenges,
mitigating the consequences of natural disasters and
eliminating poverty and discrimination. We note the
useful role played by the European Union as a major
donor of development and humanitarian assistance
and their significant contribution towards financing
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding.

We value the participation of the European Union
in international efforts to help Somalia, Afghanistan
and Mali, in the Middle East peace process and in
looking for political and diplomatic solutions to the
Iranian nuclear programme, as well as in combatting
piracy at sea and in establishing regional counter-
piracy capacities.

The inspiring potential of the European Union
must therefore be used for the good of the international
community and not for compelling individual members
of the United Nations to take positions on certain issues
at odds with their own national policies. The question
of observing human rights must not become a pretext
for selective political pressure.

General Assembly resolution 65/276, adopted in
May 2011, did not change the EU's observer status; it
merely expanded some of its capacity to participate in the
Assembly's work. The resolution should be interpreted
holistically rather than as a series of separate positions.
We call on the European Union to follow the resolution
strictly in both letter and spirit.

We are concerned about the European Union's
increasingly active use of unilateral sanctions, both
those imposed in addition to United Nations sanctions
and those implemented without any corresponding
Security Council decisions. In our view, such sanctions
are counterproductive; they undermine the Council's
prerogative and add to the burden placed on the
populations of the countries on which they are imposed.
Frankly, at times such actions amount to attempts to
stifle entire sectors of the economies of independent
States, and the humanitarian assistance that the EU
sometimes provides is only partial compensation for
such losses.

Having taken upon itselfa specific role in organizing
a dialogue on Kosovo, the EU should not stray into acts
of pressure or force; such relapses have sometimes
been observed in the region. Solving Kosovo's complex
problems should not be effected only by the EU at the
expense of the United Nations presence, whose role, as
prescribed in resolution 1244 (1999), cannot be seen as
an auxiliary or second-tier one.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that,
despite the growing need for an effective mechanism
for the division of labour between the United Nations
and regional organizations, including the EU, the
leading role of the Security Council on issues of the
maintenance of international peace and security
remains unshakeable. It is enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, and to change it is out of the question.

