Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Security Council for affording
me the opportunity to brief it on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly the
latest developments in the electoral process under way
in the country.

As I have already reported to the Council (see S/PV.8318), while preparations are ongoing for the
upcoming presidential and national and provincial
legislative elections, tangible progress has been seen
in adhering to the critical stages of the calendar of
the Independent National Electoral Commission.
All political parties and groupings of the Majorite
presidentielle and the opposition have put forward
candidates for the three ballots within the timetable
foreseen by the calendar, which is an important step
towards holding the elections on 23 December. That
phase of filing candidacies for the presidential and
legislative elections has been marked by several events
that warrant underlining.

First, President Kabila Kabange honoured his
commitment not to stand for a third term. Emmanuel
Ramazani Shadary was nominated as the sole candidate
of the Majorite presidentielle under the banner of the
Front commun pour le Congo.

Secondly, the President of the Ensemble pour le
changement platform, Moise Katumbi, was not able to
submit his candidacy as he wished, since he was not
able to return to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
before the deadline of 8 August. Various reactions
followed, ranging from the request by Mr. Katumbi's
lawyers that the issue be referred to the Conseil d'Etat
to the demand by opposition leaders, the Conference
episcopale nationale du Congo and the President of the
Senate for his candidacy to be allowed to go forward.

Thirdly, according to the provisional list published
by the Independent National Electoral Commission on
24 August, six of the 25 candidates for the presidential
election were disqualified on various grounds,
including the loss of nationality of origin, conflict of
interest and a conviction for witness interference. They
are Senator Jean-Pierre Bemba, three former prime
ministers - Adolphe Muzito, Antoine Gizenga and
Samy Badibanga - as well as Jean-Paul Moka-Ngolo
and Marie Jose'e Ifoku.

Finally, it should be noted that, despite criteria
within the revised electoral law that are deemed to be
more restrictive, a large number of candidacies were
registered. According to the final list submitted by the
Independent National Electoral Commission, 19,640
candidates were registered for the provincial elections,
while the provisional lists show 19 candidates for the
presidential election and 15,222 candidates declared
admissible out of the 15,505 candidates for the national
legislative elections.
The proportion of women candidacies has not
changed since 2011, remaining at approximately 12 per
cent of the total, or 2,318 for the provincial elections,
1,784 for the national legislative elections and none for
the presidential election following the disqualification
by the Independent National Electoral Commission of
the only woman candidate.

In accordance with its mandate, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) continues to
provide technical assistance to the Independent National
Electoral Commission in the organization of elections.
The Mission also stands ready to provide logistical
support to the process, should the Commission request it.
As I have informed the Council in previous statements,
the Independent National Electoral Commission and
the Congolese authorities have repeatedly indicated
that such logistical support would not be sought and
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo wished to
organize its elections without external logistical or
financial support.

Despite the progress made and the assurances of
the Government and the Independent National Electoral
Commission that elections will be held on 23 December,
the period ahead will be marked by challenges and
intense political consultations. The publication of the
provisional list of candidates for the presidential and
legislative elections has raised challenges and questions
within the Congolese political class and society. The
Independent National Electoral Commission is accused
of having overstepped its boundaries by excluding
candidates on the basis of interpretations of electoral
law, which, according to those concerned, falls within
the exclusive competence of the Constitutional Court.
The contestation process is under way and the final
lists of candidates are expected to be published on
19 September after appeals are considered by the
Constitutional Court.

The lack ofconsensus on the use ofvoting machines
and the failure to publish the final list of voters also
remain two areas of maj or contention among the various
stakeholders. I can only encourage those stakeholders
to build on the constructive approach they took during
the nomination period in order to pursue dialogue on
those issues and resolve their differences. Of course, I
remain determined to continue using my good offices
to find solutions that build the confidence necessary for
peaceful and inclusive elections.

(spoke in English)
The perceived credibility of the electoral process
remains a key concern. The ongoing process of
review and contestation, in particular of presidential
candidates, by the Constitutional Court will be key to
the legitimacy of the electoral process going forward. A
lack of confidence or a perceived lack of credibility in
the Independent National Electoral Commission or in
the decisions of the Constitutional Court would serve
only to heighten tensions in the process. Any impression
that the Independent National Electoral Commission
may have gone beyond its remit in the interpretation
of the electoral law in determining the eligibility
of candidates to stand in the elections would only
undermine confidence in the process as a whole. It is
hoped that the decisions ofthe Constitutional Court will
help to resolve any ambiguities and instil confidence.
The scrupulous applicability of the Constitution and
electoral law is therefore key to moving forward.

The meaningful inclusion of a greater number of
women in the electoral process is a priority if the spirit
of resolution 1325 (2000) is to find meaning in the
current political context of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and if women are to play a role in the newly
elected Government and legislatures, which resolution
1325 (2000) foresees. In that regard, supporting women
candidates who will run in the elections and ensuring
that women can vote freely and safely on election day
is key.

The continued instances of targeted repression
and intimidation of political activists and human
rights defenders in certain provinces, as well as other
restrictions on political space, do not instil confidence.
Therefore, I continue to call for the lifting of the
general ban on public demonstrations and upholding
the freedom of expression and peaceful assembly,
which are crucial to making meaningful progress as
elections draw nearer.

As elections approach, the deteriorating security
situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
is also of concern. The activities of armed groups, the
Mai Mai and militia could have an impact both on the
final preparations for elections and on election day
itself. While ensuring that the security of the elections
remains the primary responsibility of the Government,
MONUSCO will remain fully engaged in all areas of its

operations to support activities of the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in preventing and
mitigating the activities of such groups.

With fewer than four months to go before elections
are held, it is clear that the required levels of confidence
and consensus around key issues must still be built. It
is also imperative that respect for fundamental rights
and freedoms be assured throughout the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in a consistent
manner, so that, moving forward, all Congolese
citizens can participate freely and fairly in all stages
of the electoral process. Failure to allow for political
engagement and participation, as foreseen by the
Congolese Constitution, could jeopardize the peaceful
nature and the credibility of the polls.

(spoke in French)

It is in that context that I reiterate my call on all
stakeholders, in particular the Congolese authorities, to
ensure that the elections on 23 December are credible
and peaceful in order to allow for the first peaceable
transition of power in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which is an essential step on the path to stability
and development in the country.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to reiterate
that MONUSCO stands ready to provide support for the
elections, if need be.

