Mr. Elaraby (spoke in Arabic): I would like at the
outset to express my deepest thanks and appreciation
to my dear friend Guido Westerwelle, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Germany and current President of
the Security Council, for his initiative in holding this
high-level meeting ofthe Security Council to debate the
situation in the Middle East and the means to strengthen
relations of cooperation and joint action between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States. Such
an initiative embodies an important principle set out
in Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, which
encourages regional organizations to tackle issues in
their regions by turning to the Security Council to
find peaceful solutions to conflict and to maintain
international peace and security.

On many occasions the Security Council has moved
in that direction. It has adopted resolutions supporting
such cooperation, most notably resolution 1631 (2005),
whose paragraph 7 refers to regular meetings between
the Security Council and regional organizations
in order to promote cooperation in maintaining
international peace and security. In that context I
must stress that transparency, clarity and frankness
are the bases required for any cooperation between
the Security Council and such parties, so allow me to
speak transparently and to be clear and frank about the
crucial need for a dialogue between the League of Arab
States and the Security Council.

The League of Arab States, which was established
before the United Nations, believes that a fundamental

pillar for international peace and security is the
effectiveness and credibility of the Security Council,
as well as the full, faithful and precise implementation
of resolutions of international legitimacy, particularly
those of the Council. The League believes that
non-implementation of those resolutions is one of the
fundamental reasons for tension and instability, both
regionally and internationally.

The involvement of the Security Council in Arab
issues is very old, going back to the birth of the
United Nations itself. Resolutions have been adopted
for more than six decades on Palestine, which is the
fundamental, central issue for the Arab world and has
been the fundamental cause of tension and instability
in the region for many decades, persisting as one of
the oldest unresolved issues in the international arena.
The League has always stressed that a just, durable
and comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, with the question of Palestine at its core,
will only be achieved through a complete and faithful
implementation of Security Council resolutions.

Those resolutions have addressed all aspects of the
conflict. The Council has adopted many resolutions
on ending Israeli occupation of occupied Arab lands,
particularly resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973);
resolutions on the legitimacy of building settlements
on Palestinian land, the most important being perhaps
resolution 446 (1979) and resolution 252 (1968) on the
non-recognition of unilateral measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, in Al-Quds Al- Sharif; resolutions
on the occupied Syrian Arab Golan; and resolutions
relating to ending Israeli occupation of the remaining
occupied land in southern Lebanon. It has also adopted
resolutions asserting that the basis for a settlement on
the Palestinian track runs through the establishment
of two States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side
within secure, internationally recognized borders.

Those resolutions have not been implemented.
Tension and instability have continued in the Middle
East. The Palestinian people are the only people in
the world whose issue has not been resolved and who
have not obtained their right to their legitimate self-
determination, freedom and independence, or indeed to
set up their own independent State.

The time has come for us to review our calculations
regarding the way in which we tackle the issue and to
review the approach of the past, which has been one
based on conflict management rather than on ending
conflict. That requires, inter alia, avoiding double
standards. It requires avoiding dual measures. With
the exception of one or two resolutions adopted in
the 1940s - and more than 200 have been adopted
since then - how strange that not a single one has the
Council acting under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. We therefore very much want the Security
Council to review the matter, and soon.

The Syrian crisis is deteriorating and escalating day
by day. The fact that the Syrian Government persists in
seeking a military security solution, including through
the use of heavy weapons and military aircraft against
its own people, and the fact that it refuses to respond to
all initiatives, including the initiatives of the League of
Arab States, have now confronted us with a serious and
tragic situation. More innocent Syrians continue to be
killed. The number of refugees flooding neighbouring
States is increasing. The spectre ofa sectarian civil war
darkens Syria's skies and indeed the skies of the entire
region and provides a warning of a potential regional
and international catastrophe that will affect all and
take years to resolve, involving threats to international
peace and security as well.

The League of Arab States has been eager to
cooperate with the United Nations to resolve the crisis
from the very beginning. Indeed, a Joint Special Envoy
was appointed by the two organizations in a new
initiative based on joint action. The League of Arab
States has turned to the Security Council and called on
it, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and the powers entrusted to it, to maintain international
peace and security; to take the necessary measures to
compel the implementation of the resolutions adopted
by this very Council; to implement the plan set out
by Kofi Annan, the former Joint Special Envoy of the
League and the United Nations; to implement the final
document of the 30 June meeting of the Action Group
on Syria in Geneva, which was agreed by consensus
and with the participation of the Permanent Five of the
Security Council; and to lay the foundation on which
to begin a political transformation in Syria towards
a democratic regime that responds to the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. We believe that the
very first step is to stop the bloodshed in Syria, so as to
begin the transformation leading to a healthy democratic
regime that responds to the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people to a life of freedom and dignity.

However, once again, the Security Council
failed to achieve any of those objectives because of a
disagreement among the permanent members, which
is, frankly, most lamentable. And, I regret to say this,
those resolutions have remained dead letters; they are
not being implemented. The serial killing, bloodshed
and destruction continue unabated. Let me state to
Council members very clearly: if we want the mission
of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States for
Syria, to succeed, the Security Council must support
him in deeds, not just in words. And it can do so by
compelling implementation of its resolutions in a way
that is binding on all parties. Binding resolutions must
be implemented in a binding manner.

The challenges confronting peace and security, on
which we may cooperate, are many and multifaceted.
Some are traditional, some are nascent and spreading
rapidly in this era of developing modern technology.
In the past few years, the world has witnessed very
disturbing events because of actions that insult Islam
and our Prophet. We fully reject and condemn the
violent reactions in some Arab countries, including
irresponsible and reprehensible attacks against
some foreign embassies and facilities, acts that most
regrettably led to the killing of the United States
Ambassador to Libya and other innocent citizens.
While we reject such actions, which are not in any
way justifiable, we would like to sound the alarm that
insulting religions, faiths, and their symbols is, indeed,
a matter that threatens international peace and security.

The Charter of the United Nations begins with,
"We the peoples of the United Nations", thereby
establishing the principle that relations among people
are the basis of international peace and security.
Therefore, the international community must firmly
deal with anything that returns us to the abhorrent
concept of racism. We prize the values of freedom of
expression. We believe that such principles must be
respected and maintained. However, we do not see any
relation between freedom of expression, which aims at
enriching culture and building civilization, on the one
hand, and activities that merely offend and insult the
beliefs, cultures and civilizations of others, activities
that incite hatred and violence. If the International
Bill of Human Rights protects freedom of religion
and faith, it is not merely affirming the right to build
houses of worship and practise a faith, it is also stating
the right of religionsto be treated with deference. Faiths
must be respected and not abused or insulted. Since
the international community has criminalized bodily
harm, it must criminalize psychological and spiritual
harm as well.

It is now clear that insulting religions and faiths
is a phenomenon that threatens international peace,
security and stability. The League of Arab States calls
for the establishment of a binding international legal
framework, based on resolution 1618 (2005), in order
to combat the denigration of religions and ensure that
religious faiths and their symbols are respected. Such
a framework would also be based on articles 19 and
20 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights.

We must work together towards a dialogue
that increases understanding between cultures and
civilizations and encourages tolerance. Cooperation
and coordination between the United Nations and the
Security Council, on the one hand, and the League of
Arab States, on the other, to confront the challenges in
the Middle East should take various forms. In Yemen,
efforts must be intensified to support the Government
in overcoming the consequences of the political crisis
and its economic repercussions and to move forward
towards reconstruction and rebuilding the State. As for
the situation in Libya, we hope that the appointment of
Mr. Tarek Mitri as the new Special Representative and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
will help to promote cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States and its representatives in Libya, to provide
assistance to the Libyan people in rebuilding the State
and reconstructing the country.

The cooperation between the United Nations,
the African Union, the League of Arab States and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
Somalia deserves credit for successfully ending the
transitional period in Somalia and has initiated the
creation of permanent institutions. There has been
success in Darfur and in the relations between the Sudan
and South Sudan where tensions must not be allowed
to return. Therefore, the League of Arab States has set
out an initiative to support the humanitarian situation,
in both Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states, in
cooperation with the United Nations and the African
Union and with the support of the Security Council. I
hope that President Al-Bashir and President Salva Kiir
will reach a definitive agreement on the controversial
issues in Addis Ababa, and I hope that this Council will
give the necessary time to do so.

Let me take this important opportunity to refer to
a serious challenge facing our region. At the end of this
year, we are to take a step long awaited by the world. It
is a practical move towards establishing a zone free of
nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East. We believe that it will mark the beginning
of the road towards an international conference to be
held in Helsinki with the participation of all States of the
Middle East. Three permanent members of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General have a mandate to
organize the conference. It requires the formal support
of the Council. We believe that the establishment of such
a zone would eliminate the spectre of a conflagration
with the use of non-conventional weapons in our region.

In dealing with the Middle East, we should not look
upon it merely asa region of conflict and threats, for it is
also a region full of hope, aspirations and possibilities.
The challenges confronting it are multifaceted. There
are political and military challenges, but there are also
development and humanitarian challenges. Cooperation
on all those and other issues requires updating and
review and moreeffective relations between the League
of Arab States and the United Nations, as well as
new mechanisms. I should like to put forward some
proposals in that regard.

First, we believe that the agreement on cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States (General Assembly resolution 44/7) signed in
1989 must be updated to keep up with priorities and
emerging and future challenges. Secondly, regular
meetings, as well as those required by events, should be
held between the Security Council and the League of
Arab States, represented by the presidency of the Arab
Summit Conference, the presidency of the Council of
Ministers of the League, and the Secretary General of the
League. Thirdly, the status of the cooperation meetings
held between the United Nations and the League of
Arab State needs to be enhanced so as to enable them
to deliver programmes which are effective, particularly
with regard to preventing and resolving disputes and
peacekeeping. Fourthly, greater importance must be
attached to cooperation between the two organizations
relating to humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, I reiterate my thanks and appreciation
to the President of the Council for his initiative to
hold this high-level meeting. At the same time, allow
me to thank all of the Ministers who have travelled
from afar to participate in the meeting. I hope that it
signals the beginning of a new interaction between the
two organizations to support peace and security in the
Middle East, with a view to transforming the region
from one of conflict and crises to one of security and
stability, whose peoples enjoy peace and prosperity,
as well as one capable of regaining its historic status
as a source of knowledge and a beacon of human
civilization. Throughout the world, the Security
Council is considered the source of international peace
and security, and I hope that will prove to be the case.

