The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Jamaica.

Last month, the Security Council had the
opportunity to be briefed by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Mr. Bernard Kouchner, and to hear his
assessment of the progress made by UNMIK since its
establishment by the Security Council in June 1999.
My delegation shared Mr. Kouchner's assessment
regarding the magnitude of the unique undertaking
entrusted by the international community to UNMIK
and the Mission's critical role in promoting peace,
reconciliation and stability, in creating viable and
democratic structures and in establishing a framework
for sustainable development in Kosovo.

As many of the issues of concern to my
delegation have been raised by other speakers, I will
limit my statement to a few brief remarks. It is evident
from today's briefing by Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi that the advances made in the area of the civil
administration of Kosovo are being hampered by
continued ethnic violence. The gains made are not
sustainable in an environment of violence and fear.
Equal importance must therefore continue to be given
to the promotion of reconciliation and tolerance. It is in
this context that the reports of the discovery of caches
of weapons are deeply disturbing to my delegation, and
we look forward to being informed of the results of the
investigations being carried out by UNMIK and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and to the prosecution of those
responsible.

We have noted the special measures being put in
place to better protect the Serb communities, and we
join other members of the Council in welcoming the
signing of the Joint Understanding between UNMIK
and the Serb National Council of Gracanica on
additional measures to protect the freedom, security
and fundamental rights of the Serb community. We
were therefore very disappointed at the announced
withdrawal of the Kosovo Democratic Party leader
Thaci from the Joint Interim Administrative Structures,
and hope that this decision will be reversed.

We wish to reiterate our concern about the attacks
on humanitarian agencies and personnel, and we hope
that, with the resumption of humanitarian activities,
more focus will be given to the protection of these
personnel. We wish to underline our support for the
efforts being undertaken by UNMIK and KFOR to deal
with the security of international personnel.

With regard to the operation of the media in
Kosovo, my delegation is of the view that there must
be responsible, unbiased reporting, as
misrepresentation of facts in this volatile environment
can have lethal consequences.

We note that the municipal election law that was
signed on 10 July has been implemented and that the
civil registration period will close on 15 July. We are
disappointed to learn about the limited number of Serbs
who have registered to participate, as we believe that it
is necessary to ensure, as far as possible, the
participation of all ethnic groups in these elections in
order to encourage a sense of ownership of the
democratic process.

On other issues, my delegation shares the views
expressed by the representatives of Bangladesh and
Malaysia on the staffing of UNMIK and the need to
resolve the situation of missing persons and detainees.

In conclusion, I again wish to thank Mr. Annabi
for his briefing and reiterate Jamaica's support for
UNMIK as it seeks to fulfil the mandate entrusted to it
by the Security Council.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Annabi to respond to the
questions and comments made.

