Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): I
thank you, Sir, for organizing this thematic discussion
on "United Nations peacekeeping operations:
negotiationsew trends". It is the right time for the
Security Council to have such a debate and the concept
note (S/2014/384, annex) is really excellent. In one way,
it is too excellent, for it raises so many fundamental
points, the sum of which would require well over a
week's worth of discussion, which we do not have time
for. We also thank the Secretary-General for his clear
analysis this morning and salute Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous for his leadership of the Department.

I have the honour to disagree most respectfully with
many of the arguments presented by my colleagues this
morning. 1 would like to begin by dispelling certain
myths about United Nations peacekeeping. It is a myth,
for example, to state that United Nations peacekeeping
today is more complex than it was in the 19605 or 1990s. It
is also a myth to state that the Force Intervention Brigade
is a new feature in United Nations peacekeeping. It is a
myth to state that classic peacekeeping was inter-State
while current peacekeeping is intra-State. It is also a
myth for us to believe that more civilians are killed now
in conflicts than in the past.
The reality is that the environments facing the
United Nations in the 1960s - in the Congo, for
example - or in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the 1990s
were no simpler then than those we face today, and the
United Nations Operation in the Congo, the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
were just as complex as anything we have now.

Secondly, the recently created Force Intervention
Brigade is almost exactly the same as the rapid
reaction force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, created by
resolution 998 (1995). The only difference being one of
presentation, not of substance: the rapid reaction force
was created "to enable UNPF/UNPROFOR to carry
out its mandate" (resolution 998 (1995), para. 9), while
resolution 2098 (2013) authorizing the establishment
of the Force Intervention Brigade refers specifically of
neutralizing armed groups. The effect was largely the
same, however. An add-on to an existing peacekeeping
operation, ostensibly founded on Chapter VI principles,
but increasingly becoming Chapter VII in orientation,
was employed to pursue - for reasons entirely
justified - a specific party to the conflict. The routes
were slightly different in appearance, but the destination
was the same.

Finally, while there once was a preponderance
of classic missions, the most demanding challenges
facing the United Nations from 1948 onward were
in conflicts not of an international character. Also
contrary to popular perception, civilians have always
borne the brunt of the casualties in war, from the time
of Herodotus onward. The only exception being the
First World War and even in that war, when the civilian
deaths caused subsequently by the influenza outbreak
are factored in, the numbers were huge.

So what is the current trend? The current trend is a
repetition of previous cycles in peacekeeping, only the
challenges posed by transnational organized crime and
international terrorism accentuate the overall demands
on peacekeeping, as the concept note correctly implies,
and yet the means to address them are diminishing.

At the heart of our growing incapacity is this
unfortunate fact - fewer countries than ever before
are willing to field troops and formed police units
for peacekeeping duty with commanders who are
ready to take extreme risks, even if the cause - such
as protecting civilians - is noble. In more specific
terms, fewer countries than was the case 20 years ago,
will accept casualties when there is no direct national
interest at stake for the contributor. And almost all
contributors will interfere in United Nations operations
when the situation becomes markedly more dangerous
than normal.

And when the challenges posed by a group like
the Mouvement du 23 mars mount, we are forced to
reconsider add-ons again, like the Force Intervention
Brigade, and ponder in other cases whether we should
contract private security firms, simply because there
is little willingness by a growing number of troop-
contributing countries to take extreme risks.

But even when we establish a force intervention
brigade, legal questions abound, and questions raised
20 years ago return to the fore, about whether a
peacekeeper acting under an initial Chapter VI mandate,
and who is considered to be a civilian and therefore,
in legal terms, a protected person under international
humanitarian law, should also be in a force, part of
which - the brigade - is given, under Chapter VII,
the authority to use military force aggressively. Both
the Rapid Reaction Force and the Force Intervention
Brigade were successful in fulfilling their intended
roles, yet these so-called Chapter VI 1/2 mandates still
need an intense discussion.

Years ago, many of us felt that the blending of
chapters was inadvisable from a security standpoint,
and was also legally very problematic. We believed
instead that certain Chapter VI mandates needed
agreed triggers built into them, which, iftripped, would
switch the geometry completely into Chapter VII. The
TCCs would know this before they joined the operation
and would be prepared for, and have accepted, that
possibility. The Council and the General Assembly,
particularly the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, need to re-enter this discussion.

Here, I would like to state that it is disastrous the
Special Committee cannot agree anymore on outcomes.
I served for several years on the Committee and it was
never like this. We have to do better and discuss these
fundamental issues with a View to reaching agreement.
The same can be said of the Fifth Committee and the
troop reimbursement rate to TCCs, based upon General
Assembly resolution 67/261 and the figure derived from
the survey (A/68/813 and A/68/859).

Returning to the need for us to adopt a new
operating calculus for how we delineate surgically
between consent and enforcement, even were this to
be possible, if large numbers of TCCs are not willing
to accept casualties there is little we can usefully
discuss. The increasing unwillingness to accept high
risk has also, in part, led the United Nations to think
of using modern technologies, such as unmanned
aerial observation platforms. My delegation supports
this initiative, and we commend the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for it.

But we all need to analyse this together very
carefully. When Dag Hammarskjold first heard,
in a discussion with leaders in the Middle East on
27 August 1958, the term "a United Nations presence",
he instinctively knew how he could develop it further.
He understood better than anyone else that there were
more alternatives to peacekeeping than simply a stark
choice between either the deployment of United Nations
battalions or the sending of an observer mission. The
presence of only one official in theatre, with a small
office, meant to Hammarskjold that the entire United
Nations was there as a whole. But, crucially, this
presence required skilled humans to fill the void - to
make the United Nations felt.

The lessons from the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan must be borne in mind, in this
regard. It was a military observer mission established
in 1994 with only 40 unarmed military observers
deployed in Tajikistan, and yet it was credited in the
first two years with saving a very large number oflives,
and potentially the country altogether, simply by being
everywhere. Whenever a situation grew critical in one
remote corner or another and demanded the observers

be there - day or night, hail or snow - somehow they
were always there.

So What is needed most for a successful
peacekeeping operation is not just the best equipment
or the best-trained soldiers, and not even modern
fighting units equipped with artillery and tanks. What
is needed, above everything else, are remarkable field
commanders and field officers. Every United Nations
peacekeeping operation deployed in a dangerous
theatre needs the very best company and battalion
commanders. They must be fearless, or at least show
no fear. They must know what military honour is; have
a clear understanding of their mandate, the concept of
operations and their rules of engagement; and know
that their supreme duty is to protect civilians when
required to do so. Every time civilians are deserted by
the United Nations, rather than protected, not only do
the civilians tend to suffer, but of course the United
Nations credibility takes a body blow. These body
blows, rather disturbingly, seem to be accumulating,
as the recent report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (A/68/787) shows us.

We should perhaps have a field commanders
academy, which instills in young commanders the sort
of leadership that could be required of them. With the
right commanders, and with us the Member States
willing to accept more risk ourselves on behalf of the
Organization, we can better ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping will remain the flagship activity of the
Organization.

Ultimately, if we do not accept the risks, we believe
that Sir Brian Urquhart was right all those many years
ago when he argued that if the Member States could
not do it, the United Nations might need its own a
standing force - a force that knew how to carry out
the very mandate set for it by the Council, and which
would not be subject to the influences and whims of the
Member States, and whether they decided to participate
or not, and if they participated presented countless
caveats. This may still be radical thinking to some, yet
inevitably we are headed in that very direction if the
threats to international peace and security expand. We
very much believe, therefore, that we need to discuss
more seriously Urquhart's still profound thoughts in the
months ahead.

