The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of Spain for his kind words addressed to
me.

There are no more speakers inscribed on my list. I
will speak now in my national capacity.

Peacekeeping operations represent an important
instrument for the United Nations in its task of
maintaining peace and security in the world. They play
a vital and effective role in reducing tension and
contribute to the settlement of disputes, peacekeeping
and securing an environment propitious to post-conflict
peace-building.

Those operations have proven their effectiveness
in past years in the diverse tasks mandated to them,
ranging from traditional monitoring of ceasefire
agreements to complex challenges involved in
administering territories. They have demonstrated that
they are a vital instrument that can deal with dangers
that beset peace and security in the world.
Peacekeeping operations achieved successes in Sierra
Leone, Timor-Leste, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Prevlaka. We hope that those operations and their
activities will extend to other areas that have remained
marginalized, such as in Somalia.

Despite the important role played by
peacekeeping operations, they are not an alternative to
a permanent solution to a conflict; they may be a
temporary measure to prevent conflicts from
escalating. They contribute to ending hostilities and
reducing the potential for conflict escalation, providing
an appropriate environment for ending them.
Consequently, we believe they must be time-bound.
They must be guided by the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Those
include respect for the principles of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
States.

The focal role of the Security Council contributes
to the success of those missions. That role should be
carried out by defining clear mandates for those
operations and by following up developments on the
ground. For example, the Council this month has
adopted resolution 1493 (2003), which reinforced the
mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). For
the first time since the Mission was established, it is
now authorized to use all necessary means to enforce
the mandate given to it in the area of Ituri and in North
and South Kivu. The Council adopted resolution 1497
(2003), which authorized Member States to establish a
multinational force to support the ceasefire agreement
and achieve stability in Liberia, taking into
consideration the regional aspects and their importance
in that respect.

We affirm the importance of enhancing
cooperation between United Nations missions and
regional and subregional organizations. Such
cooperation - with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), for instance - has led to
more stability in Sierra Leone and Liberia. MONUC
has worked with the African Union in establishing the
Joint Military Committee to monitor the ceasefire and
to undertake the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. United Nations missions
also cooperate with the African Union in Ethiopia,
Eritrea and the Western Sahara.

In the Balkans, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo represents an
important model for coordination with regional
organizations - the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We have every hope that the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) will support the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
achieving security in Kabul and the rest of Afghan
territory, which would bolster the economic and
political process.

The United Nations started its peacekeeping
operations more than half a century ago in the Middle
East. It still plays its role in peacekeeping responsibly
and implements its tasks with all efficiency and
precision. In this respect, Syria values highly the
sacrifices made by the commanders and the members
of the peacekeeping operations throughout the world,
and in our region in particular. Syria expresses its
appreciation for the cooperation between the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) and
Syria, and also between our Permanent Mission and the
Secretariat's Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Recently we have witnessed heinous crimes
against members of United Nations missions and its
agencies in different places, such as Jenin, Qana and,
most recently, Baghdad. Those acts of aggression
against United Nations offices and personnel represent
aggression against all the members of the United
Nations. Consequently, the international community
must hunt down the perpetrators of these crimes and
punish them. Security measures must be enhanced to
protect the security and safety of those who have
dedicated their lives to achieving world peace.

The Security Council's unanimous adoption of
resolution 1502 (2003) was a clear expression of its
determination to undertake every possible measure to
protect those who serve in United Nations missions and
offices. It reflected the Council's determination to
pursue and punish the perpetrators of what the
resolution describes as war crimes. In that connection,
we propose that the Secretariat prepare a
comprehensive study on ways to protect United
Nations missions and on taking the necessary measures
to prevent attacks against them, in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 1502 (2003).

In conclusion, the delegation of Syria affirms the
importance of establishing a genuine three-way
partnership among the Security Council, the Secretariat
and troop contributors in the areas of mission planning,
preparation, organization and security. We stress the
need for consultation with troop contributors when and
if changes in the tasks or structure of a mission are
contemplated. We believe that Council meetings and
the machinery established by resolution 1353 (2001)
will play effective roles in the success of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Once again, I should like to express my sincere
thanks to all Council members for their valuable and
rich contributions to today's meeting on peacekeeping.
Those contributions have provided a degree of
perspective, and perhaps some possible solutions, for
the Secretariat and its Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. A number of proposals were made by
Council members; they will enrich Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi's report (S/2000/809) and its
recommendations in that regard.

Finally, I should like to express my sincere thanks
to the United Nations staff in every peacekeeping
operation and to all Secretariat and Security Council
staff. I would be remiss if I did not thank the
interpreters - the real force in the booths - who
make it possible for our voices to be heard correctly by
the United Nations and the rest of the world; their
efforts are nothing short of mighty. I thank the
Secretariat staff for making our work in the Council
easier; they are always available in and near the
Council Chamber. Finally, I should like to thank the
United Nations security staff as well as members of the
media, including photographers and television camera
operators.

In conclusion, I express my sincere thanks to my
colleagues on the Security Council who have addressed
very kind words to me; I shall not disappoint them. I
trust that they will continue their cooperation with the
Mission of the Syrian Republic, which will be headed
by my colleague, Ambassador Fayssal Mekdad, who is
very well known to them, having worked with me
throughout these eight years in New York. Colleagues,
I thank you all.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 pm.
