Mr. Gambari: I wish to join my colleague, Mr.
Jean-Marie Guehenno, in commending the European
Union and other partners for their support in the
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I wish also to commend Mr. Solana in
particular for his leadership role in this regard.

The successful holding of elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo towards the end of
2006 is now a matter of historical record. Although
elections are never an end in themselves, they are,
when credible, a critical part of any democratic
process. Holding successful and credible elections as
the international community did in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, led by the United Nations, is a
testimony to what can be achieved when there is a
collective effort.

The Department of Political Affairs (DPA) is
charged by the General Assembly with coordinating
and supporting all United Nations electoral activity.
DPA, through its Electoral Assistance Division, has
been involved with the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since 2003, when it

conducted the initial needs assessment which preceded
the establishment of the Electoral Division of the
United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). DPA has continued to provide
ongoing advice and support to our colleagues in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and MONUC
in the largest electoral assistance mission ever
conducted by this Organization.

The role of the United Nations electoral team,
which includes the Projet d'appui au processus
electoral en Republique Democratique du Congo
(APEC), a programme supported by the United Nations
Development Programme, has been to support the
Independent Electoral Commission of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, at the IEC headquarters, as
well as in field offices nationwide.

On 18 and 19 December 2005, the Independent
Electoral Commission, with the support of MONUC,
organized the constitutional referendum, in which the
Congolese voted overwhelmingly to adopt the
constitution, which was subsequently promulgated on
18 February 2006. The voter registration exercise
conducted between June and December 2005 resulted
in the establishment of voters lists containing the
names of 25.5 million eligible voters. Once again, I
wish to join my colleague, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
in congratulating the Commission, and especially its
Chairman, the indefatigable Abbe Malu Malu, on these
monumental achievements.

The first round of presidential and national
assembly elections were held on 30 July 2006. DPA
also conducted several field missions in the country in
2006 to assist the MONUC Electoral Division with the
operational planning for the 30 July and 29 October
elections. From its roster of electoral experts, DPA
continues to provide clearance for electoral staff and
consultants.

In my own capacity as United Nations Focal
Point for Electoral Assistance Activities, I visited the
country in early October, along with Mr. Craig Jenness,
Director of my Electoral Assistance Division. I met
with the major stakeholders, including the two
candidates, to encourage an environment of calm,
tolerance and national reconciliation during and after
the electoral process. In light of the disturbances
following the first round of results, I specifically
stressed the need for positive and constructive
campaigning, conducted in accordance with the
7

electoral code of conduct. I also urged acceptance of
the results by all parties and avoidance of a winner-
takes-all attitude by the successful candidates.

The presidential run-off and the provincial
assembly elections were subsequently held, as we
know, on 29 October. The conduct of these elections by
the Electoral Commission, including the transparency
of the count and tabulation process, was generally
praised by international observers, the media, and
several world leaders. Observers noted that, in spite of
the enormous logistical challenges involved, these
elections reflected the outcomes of lessons learned
from the first round of elections - that is, more
efficient collection of results from the 50,000 polling
stations in 12,000 locations, greater transparency in the
electoral operations and improved training of the
250,000 polling workers. As a matter of fact, during
my visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo last
October, I observed firsthand in Mbandaka, in
Equateur province, several training sessions for some
of those polling officials.

The elections have resulted in the establishment
of the first democratically elected national institutions
in more than four decades. Of that, we can all be justly
proud - most especially, the Congolese themselves.
However, much still needs to be done. The Global and
All-Inclusive Agreement of 2002 called for free and
transparent elections to be held at all levels, including
local elections. Therefore, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is now in a post-transitional period. But this
is by no means a post-electoral period, because indirect
elections by the provincial assemblies for senators,
governors and vice-governors are expected to take
place by the end of this month.

Local elections for municipal and rural councils
are expected in the latter part of 2007. As a matter of
fact, there are several legislative prerequisites for that
to take place. The organic law establishing the post-
transition national Independent Electoral Commission,
mandated under the constitution to organize and
conduct elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, still needs to be adopted. Similarly, the law on
decentralization, which would define the new
provinces in accordance with the constitution, as well
as the local constituencies for administrative and
electoral purposes, must be adopted.

Following the adoption of those legislative
instruments, the Electoral Assistance Division of the

Department of Political Affairs will continue to assist
MONUC's Electoral Division in providing capacity-
building and support to the new election commission
- particularly in finalizing the modalities for the local
elections - as well as a voter registration update and
operational preparations for and conduct of the 6,000
polls of the local elections. That effort could take
anywhere from 13 to 18 months, depending on the
modalities chosen. The actual elections will probably
not begin before September 2007.

The establishment of local structures and
institutions that have been freely chosen by their
constituents is, in our View, essential for the legitimate
extension of State authority, improved governance and
the building of durable peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which will have consequences
for the region. As has been stated, the Great Lakes
region is an area in which we are following very
closely developments in the areas of governance,
development and security.

Permit me to express our gratitude to our
colleagues in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and MONUC and to our European Union
partners. It was only by pooling our resources, ideas
and expertise and by sharing responsibilities that the
international community was able to deliver in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, despite the
challenges.

In conclusion, I encourage the members of the
Security Council and other partners, such as the
European Union, the African Union, South Africa,
Turkey and others, to continue to provide the generous
assistance that they rendered during the 2006 electoral
process. The logistical challenges in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remain. The Council's
continued support for the electoral process through
financial, technical and other assistance, as well as its
endorsement of the Secretary-General's proposals for
local elections, will be very critical in that regard.

