Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
today's briefers. Poland highly values and welcomes
the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Tadamichi Yamamoto to support
peace and development in Afghanistan. We praise his
dedication and commitment. I also thank Ms. Khurram
for her informative briefing and valuable comments on
the role of youth in Afghanistan.

Before I make my remarks on the current
situation in Afghanistan, I would like to pay tribute to
Mr. Tetsu Nakamura. The respected physician and head
of Peace Japan Medical Services, who had recently been
granted honourary Afghan citizenship for his decades
of humanitarian work in the country, should serve as
an example of dedication and commitment for all of us.

The recent presidential election has proven that the
Afghan people highly value democratic principles and
their meaningful implementation. That is why, despite
challenging security circumstances, they decided to
actively participate in the latest round of presidential
elections. We all have to respect and acknowledge that
act of courage. The Afghan political elite cannot let the
Afghan people down. We have been following closely
all the events after the election, and we firmly believe
that only independent and impartial electoral bodies
can develop a solution to the existing situation. We
therefore call on all stakeholders and political leaders
to respect the verdict of the constitutional bodies.
Particular interests and ambitions should not hamper
the future of Afghanistan and its people.

We have condemned in the strongest terms the
ongoing terrorist activity targeting innocent civilians
and public facilities. The recent attack in Bagram,
which targeted a hospital, constitutes a grave violation
of international law. However, Poland strongly believes
that the peace process should continue. The current
situation can be resolved only through political means.
We support pursuing the Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned peace process, but that should not be done at the
expense of the rights of women and minorities.

