Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate my colleague, the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process and the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen
O'Brien, for their comprehensive briefings today.

We meet once again in the Council to discuss
the situation in the Middle East. The situation is
deteriorating, given the crises in the region and the
resulting humanitarian tragedies. The failure of
the international community to reach a lasting and
comprehensive solution to the crises in the region
threatens international peace and security more than
ever before.

The protection of the region from destruction
and violence is an important responsibility of the
international community and the Security Council,
pursuant to international instruments and resolutions.
We have a choice to make - either to work collectively
and seriously to ensure peace for future generations or
to surrender this world to obscurantist Powers and let
them sow division and chaos. The ongoing situation
in the Middle East and instability in the region should
not prevent us from working effectively to relaunch the
peace process, end the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
land and find a just and comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question. That is key to ensuring peace in
the region.

The absence of a solution to the Palestinian
question is at the heart of tensions in the region. The
solution to the Palestinian question should ensure the
rights of the Palestinian people and allow them to fulfil
their aspirations towards establishing their viable and
sovereign independent State on Palestinian land within
the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, based on the two-State solution, international
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, as the fruit
of serious and effective negotiations within a specific
time frame.

Such negotiations should preserve the highest
national interests of Jordan, especially with regard
to the final-status issues, including refugees, water,
Jerusalem, borders and security. Accordingly, Jordan
reiterates its condemnation of Israel's continued
settlement activities in occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, which are dangerously and
systematically undermining the two-State solution.

With respect to East Jerusalem, our position
is based on the historical Hashemite guardianship
of Muslim and Christian holy sites in the city under
the supervision of His Majesty the King of Jordan.
Pursuant to that guardianship, Jordan will continue
to make every effort to protect these holy sites,
especially Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
Jordan will continue to counter any Israeli violations.
We will work effectively in the international arena to
protect Jerusalem and to take every diplomatic and
legal measure against any violation that targets these
holy sites, which is in line with the historical role of
Jordan in Jerusalem, as recognized by the peace treaty
between Jordan and Israel.

The recent decision of the Executive Board of
UNESCO reflects the international concern over the
dangerous violations committed by Israel, the occupying
Power, in occupied East Jerusalem, especially against
Al-Aqsa Mosque. This decision mirrors the UNESCO
Director-General's press statement issued in September
2015. The decision, prepared by Jordan in cooperation
with the Palestinians, stresses the importance ofthe Old
City of Jerusalem and its walls for the three revealed
religions, but does not address the legal status of East
Jerusalem as a city under Israeli military occupation.
Nevertheless, Israel, the occupying Power, has a
number of obligations that it must fulfil in accordance
with international law and international humanitarian
law. We would note that the decision uses the correct
names of the holy sites, including Al-Aqsa Mosque
and its surrounding installations. The decision also
provides for Jordanian obligations over the management
of Al-Aqsa Mosque, including maintenance and repair
and access to the site.

Jordan is concerned by the ongoing Israeli
settlement activities, in particular its continued
settlement expansions, in violation of international law.
To date, Israel has not been compelled to respect the
Security Council resolutions condemning its settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory. That has
undermined the possibility of reaching any peaceful
solution, in particular the two-State solution, and
has contributed to increased violence in Palestinian
territories. If Israel sincerely wishes to achieve peace
in the region and live peacefully with its neighbours,
it should pay closer attention to the international
community's calls for it to change its unilateral and
irresponsible policies.

Terrorism today is threatening our present and our
future, making us lose sight of our aspirations to peace
and security. Terrorist groups have nothing to do with
Islam or its noble, humane values. These groups have
no identity; they oppose tolerance and moderation and
meet mercy with further isolation. How can there be
any link between these groups and Islam or any other
religion?

Our response should be commensurate with
expectations and address the threat of terrorism across
the world. We believe that collective efforts are much
more important than individual efforts. Therefore, in
order to confront violent extremism and terrorism, there
should be a collective effort at all levels that is not be
based on military solutions alone but should also wage a
battle of enlightened ideas against extremist ideologies
and hate speech, founded on affection, tolerance and
positive values enshrined in our daily lives and in our
national and international policies. In that regard, my
country rejects violent extremism and terrorism in all
their forms, regardless of their motivations. We are
committed to implementing all relevant United Nations
counter-terrorism resolutions in order to combat these
terrorists and to preserve our human values.

Regarding Iraq, Jordan hopes that the fight to liberate
Mosul will eliminate theIslamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), one of the most heinous manifestations
of violence and crime against humankind. Jordan hopes
that we will be able to achieve this goal as soon as
possible so as to spare the suffering people of Mosul,
who have already suffered at the hands of ISIL for
two years. In this regard, Jordan stresses the need to
stabilize the city while preserving the lives of civilians
and ensuring their protection.

The Syrian crisis is now entering its sixth year.
We are witnessing increasing violence around Syria,
especially in Aleppo. Jordan stresses its position on the
need to reach a political solution that ensures the safety
and territorial integrity of Syria, with the participation
of all factions of the Syrian people, provides an
environment conducive to the return of its people, meets
the aspirations of Syrians and ends violence, extremism
and terrorism in Syria. We must implement Security
Council resolutions on the matter, including resolution
2254 (2015), and to launch a serious political process
leading to a political solution based on the statements of
the International Syria Support Group and the Geneva
communique' (S/2012/523, annex).

All Syrian parties should commit to resolution
2268 (2016), which endorses the cessation of hostilities
in Syria, and resolution 2258 (2015), which calls for
the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria. The
crisis of Syrian refugees is an urgent global issue. The
international community must alleviate this crisis,
which is one of the most disastrous humanitarian
tragedies of our times. Jordan is hosting more than
1.4 million Syrian refugees, who represent 21 per cent of
its people. Our capacities have been strained due by the
cost ofhosting these refugees, which has had disastrous
effects on host communities and infrastructure.

