Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize for requesting the floor once again.

The scene that we have just witnessed is quite sad.
There are those in the Council who prefer to overlook an
enormous elephant that we have spoken of before. The
elephant is the direct American military occupation of
one-third of my country's territory - a direct American
military occupation of one-third of the Syrian Arab
Republic territory. However, there are those who speak
of minor details which they believe to be pivotal. No,
the political scene is far more dangerous than that.

We are a State whose sovereignty has been facing a
direct military violation by a permanent member of the
Council. That is the true scene, and not the allegations
and the film prepared by the terrorist organization
known as the White Helmets established by British
intelligence. We need to focus on the main scene here.
Some would claim that they are fighting Da'esh in Syria
and Iraq. However they have given air cover to Da'esh.
Whenever the Syrian Arab Army makes advances
against Da'esh, United States, British and French war
planes bombard our military sites. Why? To prevent our
decisive victory against that entity. However, they failed
and we were able to achieve victory against Da'esh with
our brothers in Iraq in three years and not in thirty, as
former President Obama predicted.

We understand that the capitals of the three
countries that launched the aggression against my
country are frustrated. Some colleagues who voted
against the Russian draft resolution (S/2018/355) claim
to support a political settlement. We tell them now,
after their shameful vote against the draft resolution,
that those who voted against it are no longer partners of
the Syrian Government in any political process.

The British Ambassador explained things about
the Malvinas Islands. That testimony reveals the
facts about the imperialistic policies of Britain. I am
actually the Rapporteur of the Special Committee on
Decolonization (C-24) and I work under the agenda
of the United Nations and the Secretary-General. My
task and that of my colleagues in the C-24 is to end
colonialism throught the world. The Malvinas are on
the list of territories that do not enjoy self-governance.
We are working in accordance with the United Nations
agenda to end the British occupation of the Malvinas.

As for my colleague the Ambassador of Kuwait, I
remind him 4 although he and his Government are well
aware of it 4 that when my country participated in the
liberation of Kuwait, we did not justify our principled
position to the people of Kuwait. Our position was a
principled one. We did not need draft resolutions,
meetings or any tripartite aggression. We did not look
into the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
or undermine our national obligations to our brothers
in Kuwait, nor did we join any bloc that was hostile
to Kuwait. We fulfilled our national duty towards
our brothers in Kuwait. The Ambassador of Kuwait
will also recall that my country could have played a
different role at the time and could have negatively
impacted the peace, safety and security of Kuwait, but
we chose not to do so. We acted pursuant to a national
principled position that was not subject to negotiation
or discussion.

The meeting rose at 1.50 pm.
