Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) for his briefing, which, as
always, was very enlightening.

UNOWAS is a valuable tool that enables the United
Nations to play a role not only in conflict prevention
but also in peacebuilding, in line with the Secretary-
General's vision for sustainable effective action that
must cover the entire peace continuum. We hope that
the strategic review to be undertaken in the coming
months will provide an opportunity to ensure that
UNOWAS is provided with all the resources needed to

accomplish its mission. Preventing crises rather than
resolving them after the fact is, of course, the best way
to avoid suffering, as well as to achieve shared savings.

I will make several remarks with regard to
responding to the crisis at hand. The deterioration of the
security situation in a number of regions of West Africa
is an alarming development that requires our continued
action. That is especially the case in the Sahel, where
the terrorist threat is spreading geographically together
with a dangerous increase in intercommunal tensions
not only in central Mali but also, as of now, in the north-
western part of Burkina Faso. The same holds true
for the area surrounding the Lake Chad basin, where
the increase in attacks by Boko Haram is threatening
once again territories that were only recently liberated
from its control. As always, a response to those crises
and threats depends on a comprehensive approach
encompassing political, security and development
aspects, which is a point that we have often insisted
upon given its importance.

In the Sahel, France is committed to supporting
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali by the Malian parties, which,
in the short term, will require the priority measures
identified in resolution 2423 (2018) to be implemented
by next March. France is engaged in combating
terrorist groups through Operation Barkhane, as well
as its support for the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel and for the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel through the
mobilization of the Alliance for the Sahel to provide
faster, better coordinated and more targeted assistance
to the most vulnerable populations. In the Lake Chad
basin, more must be done to support the continued
action ofthe States ofthe Multinational Joint Task Force
and ensure that its work is conducted in a manner that
ensures the people's full support. The United Nations
has a central role to play in helping the States of the
region identify appropriate and coherent responses in
all its aspects. Work must be carried out in the short
term to ensure that the resources implemented by the
United Nations system on the ground correspond to
the needs of the countries most affected by the current
violence. We believe that such work is particularly
urgent and critical in the case of Burkina Faso.

In addition to the steps that we have taken in those
crisis areas, it is more important than ever to preserve
the fundamental elements needed to ensure regional
stability in West Africa and the Sahel. In that regard, I
will underline three key points.
First of all, as the Special Representative just
reminded us, credible, transparent and inclusive
electoral processes are required. In Nigeria, we
welcome the commitment of all actors to respect the
outcome of the elections and refrain from violence,
as part of the prevention work by actors in the region
and UNOWAS. In Guinea-Bissau, it is necessary that,
this time, the authorities respect their commitment to
the holding of legislative elections on 10 March, as
was requested by the Economic Community of West
African States and the Security Council. In other
countries, such as Togo and Guinea, it is important to
continue consultations among all stakeholders so as
to strengthen the inclusiveness and acceptability of
future electoral processes. Focus must be placed on
strengthening the representation of women in areas of
responsibility, which is hardly the case in the countries
of the region at the present time.

Respect for the rights of all and the fight against
impunity are also key factors for achieving stability. The
many abuses committed against civilian populations
in the various conflict areas of the region must not
go unanswered, no matter who committed them. The
transitional justice processes under way, in particular
in Mali and the Gambia, must be seen to fruition in
order to create the conditions necessary for sustainable
reconciliation. The protection of children in conflict
must be the focus of our attention, and UNOWAS has a
clear role to play in following up that issue. Stability also
goes hand in hand with long-term support for countries
emerging from crises. The continued involvement of
the international community in supporting Liberia,
following the closure of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, is particularly critical for ensuring the success
of the remarkable democratic transition that took place
just a year ago in that country.

I will conclude my statement in the same way
that the representative of Germany concluded his, by
stressing that the link between climate and security
is becoming increasingly clear in the countries of
the Sahel. The effects of climate change are creating
tensions over resources with a direct impact on
populations in the region. Accordingly, the sustainable
management of those resources, such as water and
arable land, constitutes one of the conditions necessary
for maintaining stability in an area like the Sahel,
characterized by political and social vulnerabilities. The
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
and the Paris Agreement, as well as the establishment
of a regional dialogue on climate and environmental
issues, are essential in that regard. That will be the
main focus of the meeting of the Climate Commission
for the Sahel Region to be held in early February in
Niamey. UNOWAS has a strong role to play in actively
supporting that dynamic.

