Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
outstanding work as President of the Security Council
for this month.

The delegation of Peru associates itself with the
statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. My delegation
also wishes briefly to touch on certain issues pertinent
to today's debate.

The illicit traffic in drugs is a severe problem for
many States and is cause for international concern. The
world demand for cocaine alone amounts to almost
1,000 tons a year, with an estimated value of some
$70 billion. Regardless of the status of the affected
States, be they producer, consumer or transit States, it
is clear that it is a global problem, the responsibility
for which is shared by all, as was recently reaffirmed in
the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem
(see E/2009/28), adopted recently at the high-level
segment of the fifty-second session of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs.

Although the world drug problem is addressed in
the appropriate forums of the United Nations system -
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and its subsidiary bodies, including the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs - we understand that
when the issue is compounded by other problems it
generates instability and can threaten the security of
certain States and their neighbours. That is so because
drug trafficking is associated with violence and
organized crime, and in certain countries is linked with
terrorist activities. Drug trafficking is also associated
with other criminal activities, such as money-
laundering, arms trafficking and corruption, causing
major material damage and the loss of human life.

This dangerous interrelationship is especially
clear in Africa. It is disturbing that, due to demand
generated mostly in Europe, some parts of Africa, West
Africa in particular, have become transit zones for
cocaine trafficking. West Africa has also emerged as a
transit point for heroin and the precursors of
amphetamine-type stimulants. According to statistics
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
volume of cocaine that is said to reach Europe is some
250 tons a year, with a market value of approximately
$11 billion. In that regard, West Africa supplies Europe
with some 30 per cent of its total consumption of
cocaine. However, over the past two years, as a result
of changes in modes of drug consumption in Europe,
those levels fell by 14 per cent in 2008.

In spite of the reduced quantities being trafficked,
such activity continues to have a negative impact on
West Africa, where concern is rising over the indices of
corruption and the impunity enjoyed by drug
traffickers, who also contaminate weak national
economies with their abundant funds. This is
particularly serious when we consider that some
countries facing such threats, especially in West Africa,
are emerging from conflict situations or severe internal
political tensions and remain economically, socially
and politically fragile.

Poverty and the lack of basic services increase
social discontent and remain a challenge to stability in
the region. In this context, organized crime, especially
illicit drug trafficking and corruption, finds fertile
ground for its activities, exacerbating existing
problems and creating additional obstacles to State-
building, the well-being of their populations and the
security of the subregion.

The Peacebuilding Commission is playing an
important role in addressing this set of problems,
which is among the many fundamental reasons why
Peru supported its establishment and anticipates
providing it with support in the immediate future. One
concrete example of the Peacebuilding Commission's
work on this issue was the inclusion in 2007 of
Guinea-Bissau on its agenda, with Peru's support at a
time when my country was a non-permanent member
of the Security Council.

None of the affected countries nor the region as a
whole can address the drug problem facing Africa by
themselves, since it is not exclusively an African
problem. It is a problem that must be tackled by the
international community as a whole through bilateral,
regional and multilateral strategies. It is high time that
the developed countries, and in particular the consumer
countries, give cooperation against drug trafficking
pride of place on their agendas, especially as the
Political Declaration adopted at the fifty-second
session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
highlights the need to intensify and strengthen joint
efforts, inter alia, by increasing and coordinating
technical and financial assistance.

For Africa, in spite of the resolve of its countries
and their strenuous efforts - especially through the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States, with the precious support of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime - even more technical and
material assistance is needed to reinforce border
controls along their coasts and in their airspace, as are
increased training and better equipment for police
forces investigating the activities of organized crime
and drug trafficking. International cooperation is also
needed to create the appropriate legal framework for an
active criminal justice system, to establish the
necessary law enforcement measures, and to gather
reliable data to assess the magnitude of the problems of
drug trafficking and abuse affecting the region.

We must therefore understand where the
cooperation, especially in the form of financial
assistance, is being directed so that we can understand
how States are responding to the drug problem at the
international level. If necessary, we must redirect that
cooperation to the countries in greatest need. In that
regard, Peru believes that we need a global report that
compiles statistics and relevant information on the
resources that international cooperation is devoting to
the fight against illicit drug trafficking and that
identifies key programmes of enhanced cooperation
with the countries most affected by illicit drug
production and trafficking. We believe that a first
step in that direction is that the draft resolution on
international cooperation against the world drug
problem, which will soon be submitted to the General
Assembly for adoption, recognizes the need for this
information and calls on Member States to support the
dialogue on this theme, through the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs.

Supporting African countries suffering the
consequences of drug trafficking on their territories is a
necessity that the international community cannot
ignore, especially when this situation, together with
specific national situations, generates political
instability that can even affect regional security.
Hence, the support we can provide should be part of an
integrated development and security strategy that will
contribute to building lasting peace in Africa.

