Mr. Kurz (Austria): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this very important
debate. At the moment, we are witnessing a dramatic
rise in extremism in the name of religion. Tensions
among different religious communities within our
societies are increasing. A brieflook at Facebook shows
that especially young people seem to be the target
of radicalization. That is a dangerous development
and shows that one of the biggest challenges for my
generation is to safeguard the cohesion of our societies.

The situation is particularly dramatic in the Middle
East and North Africa - regions that are suffering
from the terror of Daesh. The terrorists there are
enslaving children, raping women and beheading
men. In particular, minorities such as the Yazidis and
the Christians are suffering. More than 50 per cent of
the Christians in Iraq have disappeared over the past
10 years. Christians are already the most persecuted
religious group worldwide, with 100 million suffering
from persecution. In that context, we fully support
the action plan proposed by the French presidency
in that regard. We also have to call the shocking acts
committed by Daesh by their names. They are war
crimes, crimes against humanity, and even genocide.
We must not let them go unpunished. Therefore the
Security Council should quickly refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court.

In Austria, many people think Daesh is far away and
chiefly a problem of the Middle East. However, Daesh
has already reached our homes via YouTube, Facebook
and Twitter. It is globally recruiting foreign fighters,
and the attacks in Paris and Copenhagen have proven
that nobody is safe. Daesh poses a threat to our partners
in the Middle East, threatens wider international
security and is a direct threat to our societies.

Austria is taking action and intensifying international
cooperation especially with the Western Balkan
countries. Last week, we adopted an action plan to
confront jihadism together with all Western Balkan
States. It includes, for example, closer cooperation
among law enforcement authorities, enhanced border
security, and joint efforts to remove terrorist content
from the Internet.

If we want to succeed in decreasing the tensions
within our societies, it is not enough to fight Daesh. We
have to do more. First, we have to make clear that this
is not a conflict between the Western and the Muslim
worlds, or between different religious beliefs. Rather, it
is a conflict between all of us and terrorism.

Secondly, we have to stand up for religious freedom
and coexistence. There is no natural law that Muslims,
Jews and Christians cannot live together peacefully.
We therefore have to use all channels of intercultural
and interreligious dialogue, and we have to encourage
religious leaders of each country to raise their voices
when people are being persecuted for their beliefs.

Thirdly, we also have to be credible and live our
values. We have to make it clear that diversity is an
integral part of our culture. There is, for instance, an
ongoing debate on whether Islam is part of Europe or
not. The answer is clear: yes, it is, just as Judaism and
Christianity are part of the Middle East. It is possible to
be a proud European citizen and a believing Muslim at
the same time. This is also true for any other religious
group in any other part of the world.

We must not allow our societies to be divided.
We must stand up against all forms of intolerance and
radicalization, and we have to be united in our fight
against terrorism. In all the above points the United
Nations can and should play an even greater role. I can
assure you that Austria will continue to contribute to
that effort with all the means at its disposal.

