Mr. Zhang Yishan (China): I wish to
congratulate your country, Madame, on presiding over
the Security Council for this month. The Chinese
delegation will fully support your work. I also wish to
take this opportunity to express our thanks to the
Russian delegation for presiding over the Council last
month. I thank Ambassador Lavrov for his diplomatic
skill, which led to the successful completion of the
Council's work for last month.

The Chinese delegation thanks the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2003/675) and Mr. Steiner for
his briefing. Over the past year, Mr. Steiner has led the
efforts of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to restore social stability
and economic development in Kosovo. He has made a
tireless effort. We express our appreciation for that.

We are pleased to note that over the past several
months the situation in Kosovo has shown progress.
The Transfer Council is up and running. The Kosovo
Police Service has set up the unit against organized
crime. UNMIK has decided to establish a special board
to monitor the Kosovo Protection Corps. That deserves
our positive appraisal.

At the same time, we are concerned at the slow
progress in national reconciliation and in the
establishment of a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo. As
the Secretary-General pointed out in his report,
violence and crimes against ethnic minorities are still
taking place. Ethnic minorities, especially Serbs, find
that there are still difficulties ensuring their freedom of
movement and that their mass return to their homeland
is difficult. They still encounter problems in using their
own language and in participating in politics and public
life. To make Kosovo a genuinely democratic and
tolerant society, such a situation should be reversed at
an early date.

We have noted that yesterday the Serbian leaders
in Kosovo invited all internally displaced persons and
refugees to return to their homes. We have taken note
of that appeal. We hope that the parties concerned will
take practical actions so that all refugees and internally
displaced persons can return to their homes at an early
date and in decent conditions.

The settlement of the issue of Kosovo ultimately
depends on dialogue and cooperation between the
Government of Serbia and Montenegro and the Kosovo
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. We
welcome the willingness to cooperate shown by the
leaders of both sides. It is a positive sign. We hope that
with the support of the international community, both
sides will maintain dialogue and gradually find a
proper solution to outstanding issues in order to
achieve long-term peace, stability and development in
Kosovo.

China has always been concerned by the situation
in Kosovo and in the Balkan region in general. The
Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs of China will soon
visit Serbia and Montenegro and he will go to Kosovo
to establish contacts with the local parties. We will
continue our own efforts for the full implementation of
Council resolution 1244 (1999).

