Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): Permit
me to thank you, President Arias, for the initiative of
convening this meeting. Costa Rica's commitment to
peace and disarmament is well known; your presence
among us is an honour and highlights the importance
of this debate. I should also like to recognize the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Samuel Lewis-
Navarro, Vice-President and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Panama, and to thank Ambassador Sergio
Duarte, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
for his presentation.

(spoke in English)

Collective security is a comprehensive concept
that should include the consideration of initiatives
geared towards conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Furthermore, the positive effects of development on
peace and security should not be forgotten.

The collective security framework established in
the Charter has yet to be fully implemented.
Insufficient progress has been made regarding arms
regulation, which includes arms control, arms
transparency, non-proliferation and disarmament. A
system of collective security must also ensure that
breaches are promptly corrected. That entails the
commitment and availability of resources under
multilateral controls to create a credible deterrent.

The collective security framework of the United
Nations was designed before the existence of nuclear
weapons was widely known and before the further
development of their means of delivery. Early on, the
challenges posed by such weapons were a cause for
concern among United Nations Members.

The early efforts in the Security Council to
formulate plans on a system for the regulation of
armaments were thwarted by the beginning of the cold
war. It was up to the General Assembly, in the light of
the mandate set out in Article 11 of the Charter, to
continue the consideration of the issue. Thirty years
ago, the General Assembly held its first special session
on disarmament, during which the current disarmament
machinery was established. Although some progress
has been achieved, the goal of general and complete
disarmament remains elusive.

It is a cause for concern that decades have gone
by and nuclear disarmament has not been realized. That
is compounded by other factors, such as the persistence
of nuclear doctrines that admit first use; the lack of
binding negative security assurances; the ongoing
research on nuclear explosives, including subcritical
tests; and maintaining readiness to resume full-scale
testing. Other worrisome developments are new alleged
justifications for retaining nuclear arsenals. No matter
how carefully crafted, these appear to be increasingly
inadequate in the face of the current international
situation. On the one hand, it is evident that nuclear
weapons are not a deterrent to new threats from
non-State actors; on the other, holding on to nuclear
arsenals only seems to encourage others to go down the
same path. The cost of stalling on nuclear disarmament,
in terms of non-proliferation, is all too clear.

Brazil believes that the issue of strengthening the
collective security framework of the United Nations
merits our best efforts. In that context, the regulation of
armaments will play a substantial role. We remain
committed to the endeavour of providing the
Organization with an adequate framework for
effectively addressing challenges to peace and security.

