Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes the report of the Security Council mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We thank the
members of the delegation for their work on behalf of
peace in that country and hope that their practical
expression of the commitment of the Security Council
to the region will encourage an equally genuine sense
of engagement by the signatories to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreements.

We believe that the timing of this mission was
critical. While the disengagement agreement signed on
8 April has largely held, the eruption of armed
hostilities in Kisangani on 5 May, in which large
numbers of civilians were killed, demonstrates that the
vigilance of the Council remains necessary and that
without it much can still be lost. In this case the
delegation moved quickly and was a crucial factor in
getting the parties to acknowledge the need for a
mechanism to reduce their military exposure. On 8
May we witnessed the fruit of this labour in the
commitment by Rwanda and Uganda to demilitarize
Kisangani and its surroundings.

(spoke in English)

Much work remains to be done before confidence
can truly be said to exist among the signatories to the
Lusaka Agreement. We commend this mission for
seizing the parties of the need to agree on a venue for
the Joint Military Commission and for the inter-
Congolese dialogue, the latter being of particular
interest to Canada. As a financial supporter of the
inter-Congolese dialogue process, we are impressed by
the resolve of the Congolese people to establish a
democratic political structure and to develop
institutions conducive to good governance, just as we
are impressed by the demand of civil society for a
viable political track to displace the disfunctional
military option. We thank the delegation for its efforts
to move the parties towards consensus on these issues,
and we encourage those who have pledged funds in
support of the inter-Congolese dialogue process to
make this funding available to the facilitator as soon as
possible.

Canada also appreciates the mission's efforts to
harmonize relations between the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as demonstrated by
the signing of the status-of-forces agreement on 4 May.
The removal of administrative obstacles - for
example, surrounding the issue of MONUC flight
clearances - will facilitate the process of insuring the
ability of MONUC to work effectively. We note that
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has yet to offer firm and credible guarantees,
however, on the freedom of movement of United
Nations personnel within the country and on stable and
non-extortionary exchange-rate mechanisms.

Canada remains gravely concerned by the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which continues to deteriorate despite the
parties' commitment to the disengagement agreement.
While we are encouraged that the mission was able to
secure consensus on the need to proceed with the
release of prisoners of war, we are disappointed that
the parties were not more forthcoming with respect to
assurances of improved humanitarian access. We also
note that the delegation found unacceptable many of
the parties' justifications for the high incidence of
human rights abuses, which have so far been
committed with utter impunity. We urge Member States
to ensure that the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights field office in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo receives appropriate funding
and resources, and to ensure that human rights
violators are indeed held accountable.

This issue is of great concern to Canada, because
we do not believe that the United Nations Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as currently
planned has the capacity to ensure or even verify
compliance with relevant provisions of international
human rights and humanitarian law. In fact, in light of
developments in Sierra Leone, we are more concerned
than ever that MONUC does not have the capacity to
achieve even the core elements of its mandate.

As we stated in February, the resolution
authorizing phase II of MONUC falls perilously short
of matching the Mission's mandate with the resources
needed for its success. Canada has long argued that an
adequate match between mandate and resources is not
an option but an operational necessity. Surely it is time
to learn and absorb this lesson. The recent events in
Sierra Leone, the parallels of which cannot he wished
away, have reinforced our conviction that short-
changing United Nations peacekeeping missions in
terms of quantity or operational capability or of quality
is indeed penny-wise and pound-foolish. More than
that, it is an abdication of the fundamental
responsibilities that are incumbent upon every Member
State of this Organization, responsibility to the soldiers
who serve in our names and responsibility to nurture
and uphold the reputation and effectiveness of this
Organization - responsibilities for which the members
of the Security Council are directly accountable.
Recent developments in Sierra Leone have
demonstrated dramatically the imperative of the United
Nations deploying capable and well-trained troops that
are fully equipped from the moment of their arrival in
theatre.

While the responsibilities of the Council and of
the Secretariat are evident and important, those of the
parties to this conflict are paramount. We reiterate our
call on the parties to fulfil, in letter and in spirit, their
obligations under Lusaka and subsequent agreements.
Without such a commitment to pursue peace, the
necessary conditions for an effective United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will necessarily elude us.
There is a human security disaster unfolding in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that requires
immediate action. As Council members, our
responsibility is to make certain that MONUC has the
necessary resources to be more than a passive witness,
while also ensuring its own safety. We should review
carefully and soon the current plans and parameters for
MONUC in this light.

We thank the delegation we sent to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for drawing the
international community's attention to the importance
of considering the situation in that country on its own
merits. It is precisely because of the unique complexity
and delicacy of the current situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that we wish to emphasize the
relevance of what has occurred in Sierra Leone. We
should approach the significant challenges awaiting the
United Nations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with very clear eyes and well prepared for the
worst.

It is a particular pleasure for me to be joined at
this table this morning by a pre-eminent Canadian
diplomat and statesman, The Honourable Mitchell
Sharp, who has served his country in many capacities
as public servant and Minister, including, as my first
boss in the 1960s, as Secretary of State for External
Affairs. I am glad he could be with us today.

