Mr. Feltman: On behalf of the Secretary-
General and as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), I thank Chad
for convening this timely debate. Chad is playing a
leadership role in the Sahel to address terrorism and
cross-border crime. We sincerely appreciate President
Deby Itno's vision and commitment to seeing the
United Nations mission in northern Mali succeed, and
we deeply regret the loss of the Chadian peacekeepers
in recent months

This week, we were reminded yet again why we
must not tire in our efforts to counter terrorism - the
despicable attack on a school in Pakistan by the Taliban.
Let us mourn and honour the 126 children killed by
countering rhetoric and acts of hatred with concerted
international efforts. Terrorism represents today a core
threat to international peace and security. Transnational
crime is fuelling terrorism with money, arms and
support to move across borders and destabilize States,
particularly the most challenged.

In the Secretary-General's recent visits to Africa
he was constantly reminded that terrorism and cross-
border crime cannot be addressed separately. The
Secretary-General stressed earlier this year in his
report to the Council on terrorism in Africa that
terrorists increasingly rely on cross-border criminality
to further their agenda and that these linkages "pose a
major threat to peace and stability" (S/2014/9, para. 12).

Drug-trafficking, organising abduction rings,
extracting natural resources, conducting joint financial
operations - the ways in which terrorists and
organized criminals work together seem boundless.
Cross-border crime weakens the authority of the State
as it puts into question the Government's ability to
maintain security and provide a peaceful context for
economic development. It also creates the conditions
that foster corruption and human rights violations,
thereby undermining the State's legitimacy.

Our efforts will not bear fruit unless we combine
law enforcement actions with measures to strengthen
good governance, rule of law and human rights. We
will not uproot the ideologies that lead to violence if we
do not win over hearts and minds.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy takes precisely that comprehensive approach,
particularly in its pillar I, which focuses on addressing
the political and socioeconomic conditions conducive
to terrorism. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force supports Member States' efforts in
implementing the Strategy. The CTITF articulates the
United Nations response to terrorism and cross-border
crime by, first, monitoring and analysing the threat,
and assessing the needs of Member States; secondly,
implementing tailored capacity-building projects; and
thirdly, delivering this assistance in a coordinated and
coherent manner to multiply impact.

First, in the area of monitoring and assessment,
the Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities - one
ofthe CTITF's 35 entities -plays a key role in analysing
the evolving terrorist phenomenon and reporting on
it. Recently, it submitted to the Council a report on
specific cases of cooperation between crime syndicates
and the Taliban and associated terrorist groups.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which is also a CTITF entity, consistently
warns in its country assessments against the strategic
spaces that transnational crime opens to terrorists, and
has developed valuable initiatives to promote regional
cooperation in challenged areas such as the Maghreb,
the Sahel, and West and East Africa.

Secondly, in the area of capacity-building, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
is implementing a vast array of projects in Africa to
strengthen legal regimes, criminal justice cooperation
and border controls. The Regional Judicial Platform
for cooperation in the Sahel, the West Africa Coast
Initiative to create transnational organized crime units,
and the Global Firearms Programme are good examples
of the valuable work of UNODC in the region.

The United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism
(UNCCT) has stepped up capacity-building efforts to
address terrorist threats at the national, regional and
global levels. The Centre is supporting Southern and
Central African countries to develop regional counter-
terrorism strategies to significantly strengthen their
ability to jointly combat terrorism and transnational
organised crime. These efforts build on the UNCCT-
supported development of a joint plan of action for the
Central Asian region adopted in 2011, which recognized
linkages between terrorism and organized crime.

Thirdly, in the area of coordination, the CTITF's
10 inter-agency working groups devote considerable
attention to the transnational linkages of terrorism,
including organized crime, and how the United Nations
can more systematically address them at the national,
regional and global levels. From a global project on
assets freezing to a regional one on border controls in
the Sahel and North Africa, as well as a national project
in Nigeria on countering violent extremism, the Task
Force and its working groups decisively contribute to
strengthening the capacities of challenged countries
and regions.

In the same spirit of developing comprehensive
responses to current security challenges, the Secretary-
General also established an inter-agency task force on
drug trafficking and transnational organised crime,
co-chaired by UNODC and the Department of Political
Affairs. Another coordination tool, the United Nations
matrix of CTITF projects and activities, which includes
more than 220 projects around the world, serves as a
useful tool to better map gaps and needs, efficiently
allocate resources and increase transparency and
accountability in areas of our activities.

As a way to strengthen system-wide coordination
and emphasize that terrorism and crime affect the
development, human rights and rule-of-law sides of our
work, the United Nations has also developed a number
of broader initiatives. The United Nations Development
Programme and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations are strengthening the rule of law in settings
that are at risk of being used by terrorists or criminals
to conduct their operations. In one of those settings, the
Sahel, the United Nations is implementing an integrated
strategy that relates governance, security and resilience
to development.

Those are just some examples of how the United
Nations is confronting terrorism and cross-border
crime. Going forward, we need to better understand
the implications of terrorist and criminal collaboration,
systematize our responses and focus on impact in
affected countries and regions. Just as recent peace
operations have incorporated cross-border crime
analysis into their mission planning, terrorism should
be part of the mainstream of the work of the United
Nations, particularly through our special political
missions, peacekeeping operations and country teams
in the field.

The need for urgent action to address terrorism
and its transnational linkages is, regrettably, well
illustrated - for example, by the intensification of
Boko Haram activities throughout the Lake Chad basin
region of Central Africa. Over the past few months,
Boko Haram has started to take over and control
territories in parts of north-east Nigeria, further
compounding the threat to regional peace and security.
This situation is expected to worsen as cross-border
tension and violence persist. All efforts should be made
to ensure the swift operationalization of regional and
international initiatives to address the cross-border
threat posed by Boko Haram following the security
summits in Paris, London and Abuja.

As instructed by the Security Council, the United
Nations Office for Central Africa and the United
Nations Office for West Africa will continue to work
together, in the spirit of their recent joint mission to
Chad and Cameroon. They will assist the countries
of the Lake Chad Basin Commission to address the
transnational impact of Boko Haram activities on the
political, socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in
the region. That will include transnational linkages to
organized crime.

Boko Haram, Al-Qaida, the Taliban, Daesh and
their sinister peers make it abundantly clear that the
pervasive synergies between terrorism and cross-
border crimes foster conflicts, prevent their resolution
and increase the chance of relapse. Ensuring that the
tools that we have at our disposal are relevant and
effective against the new face of international terrorism
will be essential to protect innocents, resolve conflicts
and promote the principles and values of the United
Nations.

While I can assure the Council that the Secretary-
General and the United Nations family will continue
to use, but also to adapt, its expertise and tools to
address the multidimensional and interrelated security
challenges of terrorism and its transnational linkages,
including organized crime, we also count on all members
of the Council and all members of the international
community to unite in advancing our capacities and
coherence, not only to counter but to prevent terrorism.
