Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Baroness Catherine Ashton for their statements and
express our full support for the presidential statement
just adopted by the Council (S/PRST/2014/4). I would
also like to say hello to some friends from Brussels,
the city where my wife and I met: it is Valentine's Day.

Today's meeting is an opportunity to take stock.
The European Union (EU) and its States members have
a common set of objectives on matters of international
peace and security. Driven by the values that have
been central to European integration following the
Second World War, those objectives are also evident in
the cooperation between the European Union and the
United Nations. Today I want to focus on three themes,
namely, diplomatic engagement, responding to crises
and taking action.

First, regarding diplomatic engagement, at the
outset, I want to pay tribute Baroness Catherine Ashton
and to her wider team for the role they have played and
are playing on two critical dossiers: Iran and Kosovo.

On Iran, the United Kingdom welcomes the
agreement of the joint plan of action between the E3+3
Governments and Iran. Through the Office of the High
Representative, the European Union played a crucial
role in that process, and we look forward to the start
of negotiations on a comprehensive solution next week.
It is our firm belief that skilled diplomacy has worked
only because of the economic pressure brought to bear
on Iran through international sanctions. In order to
negotiate a comprehensive agreement that addresses
all our proliferation concerns, it is critical that that
pressure now be maintained.

On Kosovo, the European Union has played an
instrumental role in facilitating several rounds of talks
in Brussels between the Prime Ministers of Kosovo
and Serbia, which resulted in the historic 19 April
Agreement on Normalization of Relations between
the two countries. The Agreement was the result of
painstaking diplomacy, which Baroness Catherine
Ashton has just described, and will aid the irrevocable
progress of both countries towards the European
Union - a process that will have a profound and lasting
impact on the stability of the Western Balkans.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Foreign Secretary
and President of the Council has already expressed his
deep concern at the violence we saw in protests last
week. The protests should be a wake-up call to all of
us. We need a major international effort to bring the
country closer to the European Union and to NATO and
to shore up its institutions and territorial integrity. The
United Kingdom is ready to play its part, and we are
proud of our military contribution to Operation Althea.
The recent protests demonstrate clearly that stability is
not yet fully entrenched in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the continued need for the safeguard that the European
Union-led peacekeeping force provides.

Secondly, I want to turn to the issue of crisis
response. The European Union has been a steadfast
supporter of United Nations efforts in response to a
number of humanitarian crises.

On Syria, the European Union has been working
closely with the United Nations to provide the financial
support and humanitarian assistance that is so necessary
today. A greater international effort is required, and we
urge others to increase the level of their contributions.
Aid is necessary, and more is needed. But the ability
to deliver that aid to those who need it is currently
undermined by a regime using blocking and stalling
tactics. For that reason, the United Kingdom, with
its partners in the Security Council, supports urgent
progress on agreeing on a draft resolution on the
humanitarian situation. More broadly, our position
remains clear on other aspects of the transition.
Al-Assad has no future in Syria. That is something the
European Union has also been very clear on.

On Somalia, the United Kingdom welcomes the
partnership between the European Union and the United
Nations. We are united in our support for a more stable
and prosperous Somalia, through our respective, direct
and indirect support to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia and bilaterally. We should be proud
of our efforts. For the first time in nearly two decades
of extremism and poverty, Somalis have hope for a
better future.

But our partnership in Somalia extends even
further. AMISOM. has been at the heart of efforts to
rid Somalis from the dark shadow of Al-Shabaab.
The European Union and United Nations support to
AMISOM. has enabled it to make progress that even
five years ago seemed unimaginable. The United
Kingdom also welcomes the European Union training
mission in Somalia, which has now trained more than
3,000 Somali troops and continues to provide high-
level support to the Somali national forces. That is
vital, because it is only through supporting Somalia's
own security forces that a long-term solution to one of
Africa's saddest stories will have a happier future.

Thirdly and lastly, I want to look ahead to future
action. In that regard, I want to focus my remarks on
just one place, the Central African Republic, following
the Secretary-General's remarks.

The imminent deployment of the EU mission will
help address the security and humanitarian situation in
the Bangui area and, as it works closely with the United
Nations, will help stop further deterioration. The
policing component that Baroness Catherine Ashton
described is a critical component of that, as is the
strong cooperation between the European Union and
the African Union on this issue and many others, which
the representatives of Nigeria and Chad both referred
to. The United Kingdom has worked closely with our
European partners to ensure that that was possible, and
I strongly align ourselves with the remarks that the
representative of France made about the need for both
creativity and realism in the next phase.

In conclusion, those examples are just a small part
of the significant and wide-ranging work the European
Union and the United Nations have delivered together
in the past year. It shows the effect we can have when
we act in concert and from the same values-based start
point. The United Kingdom will continue to play a full
role in both organizations as we seek to tackle threats
to international peace and security.

