Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock for their briefings. In recent months, we have entered a new phase in the ruthless strategy of the Syrian regime. After the horror of the destruction of Aleppo at the end of 2016 and the battle in Ghouta in 2018, we are now witnessing a similar scenario in Idlib, but this time on an unprecedented scale, as nearly 3 million Syrians are involved. It is therefore urgent to silence the weapons in Idlib. France condemns in the strongest possible terms the intense bombardments by the regime's air force and its allies, which continue to indiscriminately target the civilian population and infrastructure in the north-west. When entering the Security Council Chamber, one passes a tapestry reproduction of Picasso's Guernica. Its meaning is simple - never again. Three million people - nearly 80 per cent of them women and children - and nearly 600,000 people newly displaced since December are exposed to daily attacks by the regime and its allies. Through those strikes, the regime and its allies are turning thousands of civilians onto the streets. That will do nothing to enable the voluntary return of refugees. In the face of that tragedy, de-escalation must be a priority for us all. The High Representative of the European Union expressed that view today in Brussels. France will support the Special Envoy's efforts in that connection. We call on the signatories to the September 2018 Sochi agreement, first and foremost Russia, to ensure a genuine cessation of hostilities in the north- west. The fight against terrorism cannot justify the sacrifice of civilians and repeated violations of international humanitarian law. That will only bolster the terrorist threat and promote the radicalization of combatants, with a real risk of the spread of terrorists as a result of population movements. Finally, it runs counter to the efforts of the international community over the past five years to extinguish the hotbed of international terrorism that Syria has become. All parties must respect international humanitarian law. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel and civilian infrastructure, must remain an absolute priority. It is unacceptable that health infrastructure, including health facilities that have been deconflicted, and schools continue to be the target of attacks, in defiance of international humanitarian law. Attacks on hospitals and health workers are war crimes, which must not go unpunished. In that regard, we reiterate our full support for the investigation launched by the Secretary-General. Every effort must also be made to ensure full humanitarian access to all those in need of aid through cross-border assistance. In the face of the worsening humanitarian crisis, France has allocated nearly €19 million in response to the needs in north-western Syria in 2019. The tragedy we are witnessing makes a political settlement more necessary than ever before. The offensive in the north-west and the regime's obstruction of the work of the Constitutional Committee are in fact two sides of the same coin. The strategy of the regime and its allies is to pursue a military solution to the conflict. As we all know, only an inclusive political solution can bring about lasting stability in Syria and enable the refugees to return to their country. It is more urgent than ever to truly get the political process back on track for the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). For that, the cessation of hostilities in Idlib remains an essential precondition. Working in parallel on the conclusion of a ceasefire, the launching of the work of the Constitutional Committee and on the other provisions of resolution 2254 (2004) is the only possible solution. The Special Envoy has our full support in that regard.Finally, France, together with its European partners, stands ready to finance reconstruction and lift sanctions as soon as a political settlement is firmly and irreversibly in place - not before. The key to breaking the current deadlock is therefore in the hands of the regime and its allies. In the face of the tragedy unfolding before our eyes in Idlib, it is essential today to work together to avert the humanitarian, political and security disaster under way.
