Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Rarely do we find among international society
such clear and broad agreement as we are witnessing
today with respect to the situation in Afghanistan. We all
share a logical and rational political and legal vision as to
the origins and substance of the Afghan crisis, the
assigning of specific responsibilities and obligations, and
ways and means of settling the conflict.

 

Nonetheless, confrontation in Afghanistan has in
recent months not only persisted but escalated and
worsened owing to, inter alia, new military offensives by
the Taliban forces; a stepping up of ethnic and religious
persecution; gender-based discrimination; the use of Afghan
territory to shelter terrorist groups; an increase in the
cultivation, production and trafficking of illegal drugs; and
the deteriorating standard of living of the civilian
population.

Given such a disquieting picture, and although
practically everything has been said about the Afghan
situation, my delegation deems it imperative to issue a
renewed and strong appeal to all internal and external
parties to the Afghan conflict to take, once and for all,
responsibility for finding an early and negotiated settlement
to the armed conflict that has beset that country for
decades.

We demand of the Afghan factions, and of the Taliban
in particular, that they put an immediate end to military
confrontation and conclude a ceasefire. Given the present
circumstances, that will be possible only as a result of
negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations,
through its Special Envoy and with the unswerving and
active support of the "six plus two" group, which we would
ask to redouble its efforts to that end.

An effort of this nature requires credibility and
confidence among all parties. In this connection, we believe
it essential for the Taliban to shoulder the responsibility it
bears with respect to the murder of international
humanitarian workers and of diplomats from Iran. This
extremely serious matter requires a prompt and transparent
investigation to clarify responsibilities and identify the real
perpetrators of those murders.

Likewise, Costa Rica deems it imperative to demand
of the Taliban that it put an end to its policies and actions
that violate human rights, in particular with respect to
discrimination against women and girls. We believe that an
appropriate solution to the Afghan problem must address
this issue and that, although some have attempted to
minimize its importance or regard it in relative terms, it
must continue to command the Security Council's attention.

Furthermore, we demand once again of all factions,
and of the Taliban in particular, that they cease any and all
activities contrary to international humanitarian law, in
particular those aimed at hindering and impeding the
delivery of aid to the civilian population.

All of these matters in and of themselves are of
extreme importance in resolving the internal situation in
Afghanistan. Nevertheless, Costa Rica wishes to draw
attention to two issues of particular importance that have
international implications which go beyond Afghan
borders and in whose connection the Taliban's
responsibility has been noted. I refer here to the shelter
and protection that it has offered, and continues to offer,
to foreign terrorist groups on the one hand, and its active
participation in drug-trafficking activities on the other.
These are extremely sensitive matters for the international
community. The Taliban's involvement is unacceptable
and must cease as soon as possible and unconditionally.

As we have said, the principal responsibility for
resolving the Afghan problem lies with the factions within
that country, in particular the Taliban. But that alone will
not suffice, because the Afghan crisis involves external
actors with ties to and interests in the struggle, whose
identity we all know and who must be held accountable.
I refer here to those that have promoted and backed
internal groups - politically and materially - and to
those that have sinned by omission by not using their
particular influence and weight to put an end to the
conflict.

Costa Rica wishes to take this opportunity to
demand of those countries, all of which are Members of
the United Nations, that they commit themselves to, and
act in accordance with, a constructive policy aimed at a
cessation of the conflict, an end to intolerance, and
respect for human rights in Afghanistan.

It is for these reasons that we have participated
actively in the negotiations and consultations that led to
the draft resolution before us for consideration. We
believe that it is the obligation of the Security Council to
take a well-defined approach to this conflict, but above all
we feel that it is the responsibility of this body to
promote and support a joint position on resolving the
Afghan problem. This text is a step in the right direction,
and for that reason we lend it our full support.

