Mr. De Soto: The forthcoming Israeli withdrawal
from Gaza and parts of the northern West Bank
continues to overshadow all other issues. That is a
statement of fact.

Disengagement is an important step forward and
withdrawal from occupied territory, albeit partial and
on terms largely set by the occupier, is a positive,
precedent-setting step and one that the entire
international community cannot but support. Moreover,
as stated repeatedly by the Quartet, it offers an
opportunity to re-energize the road map. It is a moment
pregnant with hope, but also fraught with peril.

With respect to the Quartet's engagement and
activities, the Quartet has met in recent weeks to
review the situation at this critical time. In a statement
released after its meeting in London on 24 June, the
Quartet underscored its commitment to the broader
implementation of the road map, which this Council
endorsed in its resolution 1515 (2003), and to the
vision of two States -Israel and a sovereign, viable,
democratic and contiguous Palestine -1iving side by
side in peace and security.

The Quartet continues to consider the road map
and the two-State vision to be the best way to achieve a
permanent peace and an end to the occupation that
began in 1967. The Quartet condemned the upsurge in
violence in Gaza and urged both parties to avoid and
prevent any escalation in violence so that the Israeli
withdrawal could proceed peacefully. It highlighted the
importance of Israeli withdrawal and reiterated its full
support for its Special Envoy for Gaza Disengagement,
Mr. James Wolfensohn, and his efforts to assist with
the non-security aspects of disengagement and the
revival of the Palestinian economy. The Quartet is
intensifying its monitoring of the situation. Envoys met
in Jerusalem only last week and will meet again next
month and in September. Mr. Wolfensohn has spent
much time on the ground devoting his energy and
ingenuity to restoring a sense of hope and security
among Palestinians and Israelis following the apparent
paucity of results of the much-anticipated meeting
between Israeli Prime Minister Sharon and Palestinian
President Abbas on 21 June.

Specifically, Mr. Wolfensohn's efforts are
focusing on a set of six key issues, which the parties
are addressing jointly and urgently with his help and
encouragement. They are, first, border crossings and
trade corridors; secondly, connecting Gaza with the
West Bank; thirdly, movement within the West Bank;
fourthly, the Gaza airport and seaport; fifthly, the
houses in Israeli settlements; and sixthly, the
greenhouses and dairy industry in the settlements.

In addition, Mr. Wolfensohn has pointed out three
essential areas the Palestinians should address, with the
support of the international community. Those are,
first, the Palestinian Authority's fiscal crisis and
development of a fiscal stabilization plan for
incorporation into the 2006 budget; secondly, the
creation of a broad development plan linked to a
fiscally sound financial plan for 2006 to 2008; and
thirdly, the design of a package of quick-impact
economic programmes that would provide an adequate
response to pressures and demands for employment
generation in the short term. United Nations agencies
operating in the occupied Palestinian territory remain
committed to supporting Mr. Wolfensohn's rapid action
programme.

With respect to violence, the last few weeks have
seen a gradual erosion of the informal quasi-ceasefire
that had prevailed since the Sharm eI-Sheikh summit
and President Abbas' Cairo agreement with Palestinian
factions. Palestinian militants staged a number of
attacks with mortar and Qassam rocket fire against
Israeli settlements, as well as urban centres inside
Israel. Shooting incidents in the West Bank, in
particular, claimed the lives of several Israeli settlers,
and the level of frequency of such incidents grew
significantly. Partially in response to such incidents,
Palestinian militants as well as unarmed Palestinians,
among them teenagers, were killed by Israeli troops
and security forces. On 20 June, a young woman from
Gaza carrying 10 kilos of explosives -apparently a
suicide bomber -was caught at the Erez crossing
trying to enter Israel. Following the gradual increase in
the violence of the last 10 days, Israel is taking more
forceful action. The suicide bombing on 12 July in
Netanya that killed five Israelis and wounded many
others prompted Israeli forces to enter the West Bank
city of Tulkarem, which, in turn, led to a firefight in
which two Palestinians, one of them a member of the
security forces, were killed.

Israeli forces have continued to operate in the
West Bank city and have arrested large numbers of
Palestinians. On 14 July, a Qassam rocket killed a
young Israeli woman and wounded others, and Israel
retaliated by firing missiles against targets in the Gaza
Strip, after the Palestinian Authority's declaration of a
state of emergency in the Strip and Palestinian security
forces acting forcefully to prevent the launching of
further rockets.

In the following days, the violence escalated
further, with Israel, breaking the restraint observed in
the past few months, resuming its earlier practices of
targeted killings with the stated purpose of preventing
terrorist operations. Seven Hamas militants were
killed. Several escaped a missile attack on their
vehicle. Israel began amassing military forces outside
the Gaza Strip but vowed to give the Palestinian
Authority a last chance to prevent mortar and Qassam
rocket fire against Israeli targets inside and outside the
Gaza Strip. Prior to those incidents, Israelis and
Palestinians had continued their regular meetings in the
realm of security with the help of United States
Security Coordinator General William Ward.

The Palestinian Authority has been hard-pressed
to establish law and order in both the West Bank and
Gaza. Palestinian Authority President Abbas reiterated
his commitment to working towards "one authority,
one gun" - a clear pledge to assert the Palestinian
Authority's monopoly on the use of force.

I have referred to recent efforts following the
increase of rocket firing from Gaza by militants against
Israeli targets, which saw a number of casualties
among Palestinian security forces, militants, and the
civilian population in Gaza. Earlier, a number of
worrying incidents had underscored the imperative
need and urgency for the Palestinian Authority to
assert its control and end violence and internal unrest.

On 23 June, a Palestinian policeman was killed as
gunmen opened fire on a police station in Jenin. Later
that evening, the house of a Palestinian Legislative
Council (PLC) member in Jenin came under attack.
Gun battles erupted on 24 June, as Palestinian
Authority security forces searched for and arrested 10
men suspected of being connected to the shooting
incident.

Two international development workers were
kidnapped on 13 July by armed Palestinians seeking
the release of a family member from prison. United
Nations intercession with the family helped to secure
the release of the two later the same day.

More ominous were the statements and
challenges to the Palestinian Authority emanating from
Hamas prior to the confrontation between the militant
group and the Palestinian Authority on 14 and 15 July.
Rejecting an offer by President Abbas to join the
Authority, a senior leader of the group threatened open
confrontation with the Palestinian Authority and the
continuation of attacks against Israel, "in order to
liberate the West Bank and Jerusalem". But the
Palestinian Authority has lately shown resolve to
confront militants challenging its authority and to live
up to its obligations under the road map to end the
violence and begin dismantling terrorist capabilities.

On 23 June, a deal was reached involving the
handover of weapons by more than 200 militants in
Nablus, after earlier such deals had been reached and
partially implemented in Tulkarem and Jericho. Upon
Palestinian Authority President Abbas's arrival in Gaza
last week, the barrage of rockets that was fired by
militants against Israeli targets aggravated the problem
further.

On 16 July, in a prime-time radio and television
address, President Abbas made a ringing appeal to the
Palestinians in which he strongly reiterated his
commitment to assert his authority vis-a-vis militants
threatening to upset the fragile calm that had prevailed
in recent months. He stated:

"No one is above the law, and we will chase those
who participated in the attacks and punish them.
There will be no more weapons on the street or in
our cities and camps...We will use force against
anyone who tries to trigger internal fighting
Some have mistaken our keenness to preserve
national unity as a sign of weakness. We will not
allow anyone to obstruct the Israeli withdrawal."

Since then, with the help of Egyptian mediation,
the clashes between Palestinian factions have given
way to a renewed commitment to the relative calm that
prevailed previously.

Turning to the Palestinian Authority elections, on
18 June, the Palestinian Legislative Council passed,
with a significant majority, a new election law
introducing the amendments proposed by President
Abbas. The President additionally asked the PLC on
27 June to amend the Basic Law in order to create the
position of Vice-President. No official decision has yet
been announced concerning the date of the elections
for the legislature, but the target appears to be January
2006.

Israeli domestic preparations for the withdrawal
continue at a rapid pace. The Israeli authorities have
had to deal with protests and demonstrations,
efficaciously clearing a building in Gaza taken over by
extremists opposed to disengagement. In addition to a
number of arrests and minor injuries, a Palestinian
teenager was attacked by Israeli extremists on 29 June
but was rescued by an Israeli soldier. Following those
incidents, the Gaza Strip was permanently closed off to
Israelis not residing in the settlements there on 13 July.
A similar order was issued with regard to the northern
West Bank region, though its application has been left
to the discretion of the local operational command.

On 3 July, the Cabinet had overwhelmingly
rejected a proposal to postpone the withdrawal, thus
underlining again the fact that the Government remains
committed to the implementation of its plan, without
delay. Following that vote, the Knesset, with an equally
clear majority, rejected three bills calling for a delay of
the withdrawal on 19 July, amid prolonged protest and
demonstrations by those opposing disengagement and
attempting to march on the Gaza settlement block of
Gush Katif.

There is considerable evidence that settlement
activity continues. Recent figures from the Israeli
Central Bureau of Statistics indicate that construction
in West Bank and Gaza settlements during the first
quarter of 2005 significantly exceeded the overall rate
of construction in Israel. New tenders have also been
published, most recently on 6 July, when the
construction of 18 housing units in Elkana was
publicized.

At its meeting on 24 June, the Quartet once again
expressed its concern over Israeli settlement activity
and reaffirmed the need to avoid any action that would
contravene the road map or prejudice final-status
negotiations. On the other hand, on 10 July, buildings
in the West Bank settlement outpost of Amuna were
evacuated voluntarily after a petition against the
settlers living there.

Israel has also continued and accelerated
construction of its barrier in the West Bank. On
10 July, the Israeli Cabinet discussed and approved
remaining details of the route of the barrier around
Jerusalem, which, it is projected, will cut off some
55,000 Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem from the
rest of the city. The Government also decided on
1 September as the new deadline for the completion of
the barrier around Jerusalem.

I now turn briefly to Lebanon, where the situation
remains a cause for concern. The Council has already
been briefed on the assassination of George Hawi on
21 June, and I will not dwell on it. On 12 July, an
explosion in a northern suburb of the capital caused the
death of one person and injuries to 13 others, including
the then Deputy Prime Minister and current Minister of
Defence, Elias Murr. Both the Secretary-General and
the Security Council have issued statements on those
matters.

After the successful conclusion of the
parliamentary elections carried out under the
Government led by Prime Minister Nejib Mikati,
Lebanon set about forming its new Government. On
28 June, Nabih Berri was re-elected as the Speaker of
the National Assembly and Fuad Siniora, former
Minister of Finance, was designated Prime Minister.
Two days ago, Mr. Siniora announced agreement on the
membership of the Cabinet, which will be subject to a
vote of confidence in parliament early next week.

On 29 June the Security Council met to discuss
the exchange of fire that had taken place that day
between Hizbullah and the Israeli Defence Forces
(IDF), which began when a group of Hizbullah fighters
breached the Blue Line in the Shaba'a farms area -
one of several incidents along the Blue Line. The day
after, Israeli helicopters violated Lebanese airspace and
flew over the cities of Tyre, Sidon and Beirut dropping
leaflets. Another incident occurred on 12 July, when,
according to the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL), unidentified armed elements
approached the Blue Line from the Lebanese side and
fired four rounds from an AK-47 rifle towards an IDF
position. Also over the past two weeks, there have been
a substantial number of daily ground violations by
Lebanese shepherds and civilians along the length of
the Blue Line. The Secretary-General's report on
UNIFIL (S/2005/460) refers to all of those matters.

The incidents along the Blue Line of 29 June and
12 July illustrate once again the need for the
Government of Lebanon to make every effort to
prevent attacks from its side of the Blue Line.
Responding to the situation on the ground, the
Secretary-General's Personal Representative for
Southern Lebanon again urged the Lebanese authorities
to exert their control over all of the country and to
refrain from any violation of the Blue Line. He also
called on Israel to cease its continuing violations of
Lebanese airspace. Maximum restraint will be required
in order to prevent the deterioration that all sides state
they wish to avoid.

My erstwhile colleague Kieran Prendergast last
briefed the Council in June and announced that I would
come this month to give members my "first
impressions". That is a tall order. The old vaudeville
expression that someone is a hard act to follow applies
doubly in this case: I walk in the footsteps not only of
Kieran Prendergast, but also of Terje Roed-Larsen.
Both brought to their work vast Middle East
experience - decidedly not my case.

I ask members to bear in mind those mitigating
circumstances as they consider the very personal
closing comments I am about to offer, barely six weeks
after taking on my current assignment. Without
detriment to the United Nations commitment to the
achievement of a comprehensive peace, I will
concentrate on the Israeli-Palestinian portion of my
mandate.

As I said at the outset, Israel's disengagement
from Gaza dominates the agenda less than one month
before the announced starting date. Some
commentators draw an incongruous parallel between
rocket and mortar attacks by Palestinian militants in
Gaza against Israelis and the less lethal but very
strident physical efforts of Israeli disengagement
opponents to impede the implementation of that
decision. They have in common only that they are rear-
guard efforts to obstruct a move that is viewed
positively by clear majorities on both sides.

The driving force behind the Israeli
Government's decision to remove settlers from Gaza
and to end the Israeli presence there is Israel's own
interest. Prime Minister Sharon describes evacuation
from Gaza as "vital" to Israel. In the classic calculus
that a win for one side is a loss for the other, satisfying
an Israeli interest may strike some Palestinians as a
loss, judging from their efforts to jeopardize it. Here,
however, we are in the presence of an important step
which defies that calculus: how could the
dismantling - the first ever - of Israeli settlements in
occupied Palestinian territory be anything but a gain
for the Palestinian side, offering as it does - through
the efforts of James Wolfensohn, with the strong
support of the international community - the prospect
of an early and tangible improvement in the daily lives
of Palestinians and a return, via the road map, to
substantive peace efforts?

Although the deterioration of the informal
ceasefire is profoundly disquieting, there have been
encouraging developments since late last week,
consisting of the vigorous actions of the Palestinian
Authority security forces, pursuant to President
Abbas's efforts, to restore law and order and
particularly to intercept militants preparing to attack
Israelis. The President's forceful address to his people
at the end of last week was a most welcome display of
leadership. Hope was also provided by the report only
two days ago that the ceasefire has been renewed and
that the Palestinian factions are committed to end
internal fighting.

I have no doubt regarding the determination of
the Government of Israel to proceed unswervineg with
disengagement. Israeli authorities have provided clear
evidence that they will not allow Israeli extremists to
prevent the plan from being carried out. It is to be
hoped that the combination of measures by the
Palestinian Authority and the return of relative calm
will make it unnecessary for the Israeli Defence Forces
to use the unlimited discretion that they have
reportedly been given to take intrusive military action
to quash attacks against Israelis from Gaza. At this
time, it is essential not to lose sight of the overall goal.

The unease, suspicion and even cynicism that
bedevil Israeli-Palestinian relations can be attributed in
large part to the fact that the disengagement is not
taking place within an unequivocally agreed
framework for the next steps towards the overall
solution to which both sides claim adherence, that is,
two States living alongside one another in peace.
Israelis need to be assured of their security, and
Palestinians need to be provided with hope. Beyond the
tangible improvements in their daily lives, the
intangible element of a perspective for the future
would be critical to instilling that hope.

It is of paramount importance that stability be
preserved and that the Palestinian Authority be
empowered to successfully counter militancy and
extremism. Such empowerment will also be an element
of central significance in the preparations to take
control of the areas that Israel is withdrawing from. As
we have stated repeatedly in the Council in recent
months, and as United States Security Coordinator
Lieutenant General Ward has pointed out, Israel could
and should do more to support the Palestinian
Authority in its efforts to reign in the militants.
Consequently, both the Palestinian Authority and Israel
have homework to do: the Palestinian Authority has to
continue to exert control and authority, while Israel has
to strengthen the hand of moderate forces and enable
the Authority to impose itself successfully.

One area in which Israel can and should take the
initiative is meeting its parallel obligations under the
road map, in accordance with which Israel should
freeze all settlement activity, including natural growth,
and immediately dismantle all settlement outposts
erected since March 2001. The recent voluntary
evacuation of the West Bank outpost of Amuna - after
a petition had been filed against the settlers living there
following the Government's official adoption of the
Sasson report's recommendations - illustrates that it
is possible to meet those obligations.

It is equally important that Israel take steps to
meet its legal obligations related to the barrier. One
senior Israeli cabinet minister recently stated that,
among other things, the route of the barrier "also
makes Jerusalem more Jewish". While it would not be
entirely fair to hold the Government to a perhaps
inadvertent choice of words of an official in the heat of
a radio interview, that and the revelation that some
55,000 Palestinian residents of Jerusalem will be shut
out of the city as a result of the routing can only fuel
the fear that the barrier is designed to prejudge the
outcome of eventual permanent status negotiations.
Those issues should be as much a part of the short-term
action agenda as energetic Palestinian action against
militants targeting Israelis.

The broader implementation of the road map and
the eventual realization of the two-State solution, as
outlined in Security Council resolution 1397 (2002),
must remain the goal. We aspire to the end of the
occupation that began in 1967, the establishment of a
sovereign, democratic, viable and contiguous
Palestinian State and its coexistence in peace and
security alongside Israel. We also continue to work
towards the broader realization of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, in accordance
with the road map and the 2002 Beirut Arab summit
declaration and based on resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), and 1515 (2003).

In sum, while there was a perilous turn back to
the abyss in the past month or so, there have been some
glimmers, particularly in the last week, that may point
to a new beginning.

