Mrs. Juul (Norway): Let me start by
emphasizing that the international community has a
common desire for improved security, political stability
and development for the people of Afghanistan. We all
share that goal, and we also agree that a joint political
strategy is the only way to bring about a sustainable
peace in Afghanistan.

Unfortunately, through the years since the Bonn
Agreement, we have witnessed, in efforts by the
international community, a lack of unity on how to
reach a sustainable political solution in Afghanistan.
This fragile situation cannot be allowed to continue.
There is thus an urgent need for concerted action to
focus on joint priorities under Afghan leadership and to
coordinate in a way that empowers Afghan institutions.
There needs to be a gradual and responsible transfer of
authority to the Afghan Government.

The aim of our joint efforts should be to enable
Afghans to fulfil their responsibility to manage Afghan
institutions and national programmes in a transparent
and competent manner. Enhanced international
coordination should produce focused priorities, better
delivery in line with Afghan priorities, and more
accountability to both the international community and
the Afghan authorities.

It is necessary to ask how we and the Afghan
Government should set our priorities and where we can
improve our performance. Succeeding in Afghanistan
will depend on our ability to improve and strengthen
our capacity to coordinate international civilian and
political efforts. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) plays a key role in
finding constructive answers to these questions. To
maintain both legitimacy and broad international
support, it is vital that the United Nations play the
leading role in coordinating all political and
international civilian support to Afghanistan. All major
donors should also step up international coordination
and accept being coordinated under the primacy of the
United Nations, in order to avoid duplication or
fragmentation and to strengthen Afghan capacity.

At the same time, we need to recognize that the
political mandate of the United Nations should be
better combined with the role of coordinating
international development assistance. The UNAMA
mandate to be renewed in March needs to cover the
relationship between UNAMA and the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and their
coordination functions. ISAF needs to strengthen its
capacity and competency in civilian assistance to
ensure more effective delivery of provincial
reconstruction team assistance aligned with Afghan
priorities. But the overall civilian coordination needs to
lie with UNAMA. UNAMA should also be granted a
more independent role with regard to developing a
political strategy. Such a strategy is critical in
providing guidance for the military efforts. UNAMA
also needs to focus more of its work on rule of law,
human rights and transitional justice.

UNAMA's ability to deliver optimally requires
resources, qualified personnel and a more conducive
security environment. We are very pleased that the key
role played by UNAMA in Afghanistan is reflected in
the significant increase in the Mission's budget for
2010. Only with a sufficient level of predictable
funding will UNAMA be able to implement its
mandate effectively. We therefore welcome the
approval of the UNAMA budget in the Fifth
Committee, but call on the United Nations Secretariat
and UNAMA to provide for concrete measures that can
be implemented to speed up the recruitment and
deployment of personnel to Afghanistan. It is critical
that UNAMA become fully staffed without delay. It is
also important that the enhanced UNAMA field offices
get a clearer mandate that is based on best practices
and lessons learned. The Mission's presence should
also correspond with where UNAMA can add the most
value. Norway also welcomes the additional budgetary
allocation for ensuring the security of United Nations
staff.

The past few months have been difficult ones for
all who have been engaged in Afghanistan, but
especially hard for the United Nations. UNAMA and
its staff face difficult and often dangerous
circumstances. We commend their courage and
dedication in risking their lives as they work for a
better and more peaceful Afghanistan.

As this is the last briefing by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kai Eide in
the Council, we would also like to express our deep
appreciation for his dedicated leadership over the past
two years and for his principled commitment through a
difficult period.

The Afghan presidential election and its
aftermath last year illustrated clearly how challenging
it can be to conduct elections in conflict-affected areas.
The controversy of the 2009 elections undermined
confidence in Afghan leadership and affected
negatively the international engagement in
Afghanistan, though the result was acceptable to
Afghans and respected Afghan laws and institutions.

The result of the elections last year confirmed the
fact that Afghan institutions are weak and fragile.
Serious flaws and weaknesses in the Afghan electoral
institutions need to be corrected before we can engage
in similar support to parliamentary elections this year.
We need to see progress and reforms that can prevent
fraud from taking place.

It is not only the Afghan people but also the
international community that have expectations and
demands. As stated by President Karzai in his
inaugural speech on 19 November, the new Afghan
Government will have to commit itself on a larger
scale and take all necessary measures to combat
corruption and the culture of impunity, improve
governance - in particular at the local level and
including the rule of law - protect human rights and
women's rights, and improve the security situation and
its capacity to deliver basic services to the Afghan
people.

As members of the international community, we
must stand ready to assist the next Afghan Government
in meeting these demanding commitments to the
people of Afghanistan. Norway looks forward to the
London Conference, where the partnership between the
Afghan Government and the international community
will be renewed and key actions of the new Afghan
Government will be endorsed. This will be an
important road map to the next Afghan-led conference
in Kabul, expected to be held later this year. Norway
welcomes the focus on transition within the military
and civilian sector in order for the Afghan people to
assume more responsibility for their own country.

