Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, for committing this first meeting of
the Council under your presidency to hearing a briefing
by Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor of the two
International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and for Rwanda (ICTR).

We warmly welcome the presence of Ms. Del
Ponte in the Council for the second time since her
appointment as Prosecutor. We thank her for the
concise yet comprehensive briefing she has just given
the Council on the two Tribunals, particularly on the
ICTR, as she had promised the Council in her briefing
last November.

We View the establishment of these two ad hoc
Tribunals as important developments in the application
of international law with respect to the prosecution of
individuals accused of committing war crimes,
genocide and crimes against humanity. When the
Council established the two Tribunals, it embarked
upon uncharted waters. In creating and supporting
ICTY and ICTR, the United Nations has taken
measures which are both noble and far-sighted.
Although events in Kosovo and elsewhere have shown
the continuing gap between aspirations and realities,
history will record that the international community,
through these ad hoc Tribunals, has sought to defend
humanitarian values and contributed to the restoration
and maintenance of peace in parts of the world that
have been beset by unspeakable violence.

Malaysia is pleased to note that the two Tribunals
have evolved into fully operational international
criminal courts, providing fair trials to the accused
while affording protection to the victims and witnesses.
We commend the manner in which the Tribunals'
victims and witnesses unit has handled the important
issue of providing protective measures for witnesses
appearing before the Tribunals, as well as counselling
and support.

The cooperation of States is vitally important to
the successful conduct of the work of the Tribunals.
This is particularly true with respect to the execution of
arrest warrants, provisional detention and transfer of
suspects and accused persons to the seats of the
Tribunals, given the fact that the Tribunals do not have
a police force orjurisdiction independently to effect the
apprehension of suspects. Clearly, the prompt and
effective execution of arrest warrants issued by the
Tribunals has been and will continue to be critical to
the Tribunals' ability to function effectively.

We note that, in the case of the ICTR, States have
been supportive of the Tribunal. This support has been
clearly demonstrated by the arrests of Augustin
Ndindiliyimana, former Chief of Staff of the
Gendarmerie, in Belgium on 29 January 2000; of
Lieutenant-Colonel Muvunyi in the United Kingdom
on 5 February 2000; of two former high-ranking
military officers of the Rwandan armed forces,
Francois-Xavier Nzuwonemeye in France and Innocent
Sagahutu in Denmark on 15 February 2000; and of
Jean de Dieu Kamuhanda, former Minister for Culture
and Higher Education in the interim Government of
Rwanda in 1994, again in France on 7 March 2000; and
by the transfer of Pastor Elizaphan Ntakirutimana by
the United States to the United Nations detention
facilities in Arusha on 24 March 2000.

Regrettably, this has not been quite the case in
respect of the ICTY. In particular, we express our
dismay at the continued non-cooperative attitude of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as just stated by Ms.
Del Ponte. We reiterate our serious concern that
publicly indicted persons remain at large. My
delegation calls upon those in a position to do so to
exert more serious and determined efforts to apprehend
and bring to justice these war criminals as soon as
possible. Failure to do so would be sending the wrong
message to those responsible for such heinous crimes.
It would also, unfortunately, convey a lack of resolve
or political will on the part of the international
community to deal with these crimes. The continued
presence of indicted persons in certain States and
entities, enjoying freedom with Virtual impunity, not
only sends the wrong message, but also contributes to
sustaining a climate of fear and insecurity that inhibits
the return of refugees, particularly in minority areas.
The arrest and prosecution of indicted war criminals
are an issue not only of justice, but one which will
contribute substantively to the process of healing and
reconciliation and to the attainment and consolidation
ofpeace.

Malaysia continues to believe that the work ofthe
Tribunals is a vitally important contribution not only to
meting out justice, but also to the healing process in
both regions, which would contribute in no small
measure to strengthening the process of restoring
peace, security and stability in the respective regions.

My delegation would like to ask the Prosecutor,
at this stage of our observations, about the Tribunals'
outreach programmes. We believe that these outreach
programmes are important in increasing awareness of
the role of the Tribunals in protecting and enhancing
humanitarian values and should therefore continue.

The Tribunals deserve unqualified support from
this Council in all aspects of their work. The
Prosecutor of the Tribunals has just made a clear,
strong and direct appeal to the Council for this support.
This Council must respond appropriately to Ms. Del
Ponte's appeal. The issue of indicted war criminals still
at large and the lack of cooperation extended to the
Tribunals in this regard must be seriously addressed by
this Council and the rest of the international
community.

