Mr. Kusljugie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): My
delegation joins previous speakers in expressing
deepest condolences to the families and the
Governments of the United Nations personnel killed
today in a tragic accident in Sierra Leone.

It is my privilege to address the Council at such
an important meeting. Allow me, before I go any
further, to express the appreciation of my Government
to the President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the Honourable
Judge Theodor Meron, and to the Prosecutor, Ms. Carla
Del Ponte, for their comprehensive and detailed
briefings. It is comforting to know that my
Government and the two most important officials of
the ICTY have almost identical views concerning the
role, the purpose, the main goals, the obstacles and the
closing-down strategy of the Tribunal. Furthermore, we
have nothing but praise for the results the Tribunal has
achieved so far in tackling the nearly insurmountable
task of individualizing and processing countless
unspeakable crimes; this will eventually enable the
peoples of my country to lay down the heavy load of
the past in order to catch up with the far fitter and
lighter remainder of Europe.

The unprecedented international agreement
known as the Dayton Peace Accord has been analysed
and scrutinized ever since its conception. It has its
friends and its foes; it has its up-sides and its flaws.
But one simple fact has never been disputed: it is a
powerful instrument of international law. It created
obligations for the parties involved that have to be
observed and obeyed. And it is fair to say that my
Government never denied its obligations stemming
from that agreement - just as it is fair to say that the
international community never missed an opportunity
to remind us of those obligations. Cooperation with the
ICTY was always the first thing to be mentioned,
whether as a condition for membership of the
Partnership for Peace, as a requirement with regard to
the Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union, or as a mighty stick in the hands of
the High Representative - a stick that certain elected
officials feared most of all.

This is neither the time nor the place to go on
repeating our recent achievements and successes in
implementing the Dayton Peace Accord, like a
schoolboy trying to defend himself before his strict
parents by bragging about his outstanding performance
on the football field while having failed mathematics.
But in all fairness, Bosnia and Herzegovina has done a
lot when it comes to cooperation with the ICTY since
the last report of the President and the Prosecutor of
the Tribunal. The question here is: How much is
enough? And can we make it on our own?

In the years 2003 and 2004, cooperation with the
ICTY has been the number-one priority of the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina. All the
required legislation is in place; both entities have laws
on cooperation with the ICTY; the criminal code has
been amended with a provision regarding war crimes;
the Special Chamber of the State Court will be
operational soon, pending the availability of the funds
donated by the international community - and here I
join the plea of Judge Meron for speedy completion of
the financing requirement; and the newly established
State Information and Protection Agency will be fully
equipped and trained for apprehension of the war crime
indictees who are at large and for witness protection. In
short, all the institutional requirements are in place.

According to last year's report of the State
Prosecutor's office, 9,641 persons in Bosnia and
Herzegovina were reported as potential suspects in war
crimes: 7,120 in the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and 2,521 in Republika Srpska. Four
thousand five hundred ninety-six cases were sent to
The Hague for further assessment. In total, 350 persons
were accused of war crimes. Out of that number, 127
persons, all of them from the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, were tried and sentenced for war crimes.
Six of the highest-ranked former officials of the so-
called Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia have
voluntarily surrendered to the Tribunal, even though -
for whatever reason - their indictments were never
served to the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There are countless examples of judicial
assistance extended by the local courts of the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Tribunal.
Thousands of pages of relevant documents, including
16 crates of war archives from the Ministry of the
Interior of Republika Srpska, were surrendered to the
Tribunal. Not two months ago, the leading elected
officials of the State and both entities signed a pledge
of full and unconditional cooperation with the ICTY,
naming it again as their number-one priority. In
addition, several attempts to arrest indictees - some in
cooperation with the Stabilization Force and some
independent - have been made recently. Yet all these
efforts are deemed to be insufficient by the
international community, creating an insurmountable
obstacle to our joining the Partnership for Peace and
placing a colossal roadblock on our path towards
membership in the European Union. Hence, we remain
the hostages of Radovan Karadzic and the like, who
see our difficulties as their strengths and our failures as
their victories.

The story of the ICTY is not only the story of
indictments and arrests, sentences and appeals, closing
statements, plea bargains and admissions of guilt -
however significant and important those are in setting
the record straight. The real drama unfolds in the
minds and souls of ordinary people. It would be unfair
to them if I did not mention what is possibly the
greatest joint achievement of the international
community and local elected officials - one that
marks a turning point in the post-war history of my
country. The recent report of the Special Commission
of the Government of Republika Srpska on the events
in and around Srebrenica between 10 and 19 July
1995 - the Bosnian Srebrenica report - as well as the
statement by Mr. Dragan Cavic, President of Republika
Srpska, and the reactions of the general public, lead us
to believe that a turnaround is beginning to happen in
the collective conscience of the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina: from total denial to acceptance of
responsibility, from a priori blaming others to
accepting blame oneself, and from general and
impersonal remorse all the way to redemption and,
eventually, catharsis.

