Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the Government of the Sudan, and on my
own behalf, I would like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his quarterly report (S/2015/729)
on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), as well as for his close personal
monitoring of the work of the mission, which has
included the engagement of the Sudanese Government
in the process since the adoption of resolution 1769
(2007). I also thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations and all the staff of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for their good
cooperation in achieving our common goals.

I should like to express my condolences to
UNAMID and to the friendly Government of South
Africa following the death of that country's citizen
in Darfur. We face armed groups that are killing the
messangers of peace.

We are greatly concerned about references in
various parts of the report to the lack of progress towards
a peaceful political resolution of the conflict in Darfur,
as well as about the Secretary-General's repeated call
on both the Government and the armed movements
there to immediately and without preconditions resume
direct talks. I sincerely hope that no one will seek to
be excused from adhering to the 2011 Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur as a precondition for participating
in the talks. There is no alternative to a negotiated
agreement of international nature. Abandoning this
would lead nowhere but to a recurring cycle of violence
and a return to a protracted conflict situation, which
has already been surmounted on the ground in Darfur.

We call upon the members of the Security
Council to review the conclusions of the meeting
of the Implementation Follow-Up Commission of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, which is
made up of representatives of the Government of the
Sudan, the five permanent members of the Council,
neighbouring countries and international partners
for peace. The Commission meets twice a year with
a view to eliminating obstacles that could hinder
progress in implementing the agreement. Granting this
international Commission due relevance and support
would ensure the elimination of all the obstacles to
implementation. Moreover, the establishment of such a
mechanism was a landmark event in the history of the
peaceful settlement of disputes in the world.

The Sudan is currently in the process of an
inclusive national dialogue, as called for and launched
on the basis of an initiative of the President of our
country. The dialogue includes armed movements
and groups that have resorted to violence as a means
to achieve political aims in Darfur. The initiative
aims at exploring the prospective configuration of a
future political environment in the Sudan by building
consensus on the drafting of a permanent constitution
to replace the provisional Constitution of 2005, which is
credited for time-bound achievements in implementing
the principle of self-determination and conducting the
referendum that led to the creation of the State of South
Sudan.

Presidential and parliamentary elections took place
in April throughout the country, including the five
states of Darfur. The successful holding ofviolence-free
elections in the context of an internal conflict provides
indisputable proof of a return to normalcy in the
conflict area. In that regard, I would like to note that
the holding of elections in a zone of conflict anywhere
in the world is indicative of the prevalence of post-
conflict measures. I hope that the Council will take that
into account.

What I have just mentioned does not mean that
the states of Darfur are free of violence. However,
incidents of violence in Darfur are not indicative of
the existence of an internal conflict commensurate
with the definition of such under international law, in
particular the one set out in the 1997 annex II to the the
four Geneva Conventions of 1949. That is also true with
regard to the political narrative depicting the security
situation and the real state of events on the ground in
Darfur.

I should also like to refer to paragraphs 16, 25
and 27 of the report of the Secretary-General, which
indicate that incidents of crime, including theft, armed
robbery, carjacking and other crimes, are all being
committed by individual outlaws.

The facts of the situation we have described
unequivocally point to a transition from a conflict-
management situation to a conflict-ending situation
having occurred. What is required now is commitment
to development efforts and to mitigate the devastating
effects of desertification and environmental degradation
in Darfur. That requries the fulfilment of the financial
commitments made for development by the international
community, in line with the parameters set out in the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

We are deeply concerned about the incidents
involving attacks on UNAMID patrols by individuals
or groups of individuals. They are robbing and looting
and, while their numbers and weapons are inferior
to those of UNAMID, they have met with little to no
resistance. Seen in the context of carrying out its duty
to protect civilians and their right to self-defence, those
incidents justify the growing concerns regarding the
relevance and efficiency of UNAMID.

We regret that we have to scrutinize the statistics
with regard to certain areas in the report. For
example, the report has removed those statistics from
their appropriate contexts, such as in the case of the
accusations levied against the Sudanese Government,
which has allegedly refused to issue visas to UNAMID
staff. Likewise, the number of displaced persons is
inaccurate. That statistic does not take into account, for
example, inter-tribal clashes, which are usually followed
by immediate measures taken by State authorities to
contain those hostilities. That is done with the help of
the long-standing and traditional magistrate-mediated
system, by creating buffer zones between the belligerent
parties, which consequently results in the return of
displaced persons to their villages and towns. Those
numbers are not reflected in the report.

Furthermore, there is the phenomenon of what
we might call temporary displacement. That involves
farmers who are attracted by the material conditions
offered in the internally displaced persons camps, who
usually return to their villages of their own accord to
cultivate the surrounding land during the rainy season
and afterwards return once again to the camps. That
kind oftemporary displacement was not fully taken into
account when the statistics were tabulated. We would
like to draw the Council's attention to the statistics cited
by the Darfur Regional Authority, established under
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. They are in
complete contradiction with the numbers contained in
the report.

Controversy has erupted here at the United Nations
during the past two weeks with regard to two episodes
mentioned in the report under consideration. The first
has to do with the withholding of visas for UNAMID
staff members. We would like to refer the Council to a
bulletin of the Office for Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) issued in Khartoum in May. It states
that positive responses to requests for visas and travel
permissions varied - and I emphasize this - between
86 per cent and 96 per cent. That statistic comes from
OCHA. The arbitrary numbers mentioned in the report
concerning the issuing of visas and the way that they
are taken out of general context are meant, in our
opinion, to level accusations against the Government in
order to deem it non-cooperative, and therefore stall the
peacekeeping operation.

In addition, the UNAMID mission insisted on
terminating the service of a number of local staff
members and replaced them with international staff,
for whom visas were requested. That runs contrary to
the strategic review recommendations, which called
for a reduction in the number of international security
personnel, who were to be replaced by local staff.

I would like to call on the Council once again to
scrutinize those reports, the elements contained in the
UNAMID report and the facts and figures related to the
issuing of visas. We have brought those statistics here,
Sir, and if you allow us, we could circulate them. The
Sudan has exercised its sovereign right in disseminating
those facts and figures.

The second issue is related to the customs
clearance of food containers in Port Sudan. The
problem of the food containers could have been solved
without complications, if the UNAMID mission
had complied with the customs rules that had been
agreed upon * particularly in connection to its
acting head - regarding the advance submission
of the containers' inventories. The mission elected
not to inform the Ministry for Foreign Affairs or the
tripartite commission made up of UNAMID itself,
the Government of the Sudan and the African Union
in seeking a timely solution to the issue and avoiding
a worsening of the situation. We have informed the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
of the particulars of that matter.

As I said at the beginning of my statement, we are
prepared to cooperate with UNAMID to achieve the
common goals, based on resolution 1769 (2007), on the
establishment of the mission, including the development
of an exit strategy, and to build on what was delivered
by the tripartite commission. In that regard, we are
pleased to note that the report includes clear references
to cooperation on the part of the Government of the
Sudan, as well as to achievements in that regard. I
would like to cite the following examples.

First, there was a decrease in displacement during
the reporting period.

Secondly, there is clarification of the reasons for
launching air strikes against rebel armed groups and
their targets:

"The combined air and ground offensive succeeded
in dislodging [Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid] from Rokero, Rowata and Burgo villages."
(S/2015/729, para. 3)

Thirdly, in paragraph 42, the report mentions that
UNAMID military personnel conducted a very large
number of patrols and humanitarian armed escorts.
That fact serves to refute accusations of restrictions on
the movement of those forces.

Fourthly, in paragraph 73, the report refers to the
efforts of the Government to contain the effects of
fighting among local tribes.

Fifthly, the Secretary-General thanks the
Government of Qatar for its continued support for the
Doha Document for Peace, which is embraced and
adhered to by the Government of the Sudan as well as
by the United Nations, which was the advocate, sponsor
and partner of the peace negotiations.

Lastly, in paragraph 75, the report refers to the
progress made in the implementation of the Darfur
Internal Dialogue and Consultation.

