The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Colombia, Cuba, Israel,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates and Yemen, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yaacobi (Israel)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Lamamra
(Algeria), Mr. Garcia (Colombia), Mr. Rodriguez
Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Takahashi (Japan),
Mr. Abu-Nimah (Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait),
Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon), Mr. Azwai (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Razali (Malaysia), Mr. Snoussi
(Morocco), Mr. Biprn Lian (Norway), Mr. Khan
(Pakistan), Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Hallak
(Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia),
Mr. Tang (Turkey), Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Obadi (Yemen) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter
dated 12 April 1996 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which has been issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/ 1996/274 and reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the Security
Council invite Mr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, to
participate in the current debate of the Security
Council with regard to the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the
current debate in accordance with the rules of procedure
and with previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter dated 12 April 1996 from the Acting Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Acting Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, I have the honour to
request that I be invited to participate in the debate
on the situation in the occupied Arab territories,
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda.

In accordance with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Ravan Farhadi, Acting Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 12 April 1996 from the Charge
d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Guinea to the
United Nations, which reads as follows:

 

"I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr.
Engin A. Ansay, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the United
Nations, during the Council's discussion of the item
entitled 'The situation in the occupied Arab
territories' ."

That letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1996/277.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to His
Excellency Mr. Ansay.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in response to the
request contained in a letter dated 10 April 1996 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Arab Emirates to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, document S/1996/257.

I wish also to draw the attention of members to
document S/1996/235, which contains a letter dated 2 April
1996 addressed to the Secretary-General by the Charge
d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Observer Mission of
Palestine to the United Nations.

The first speaker is the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, on whom I now call.


