The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, ministers and other distinguished
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

On behalf of the members of the Security Council,
I should like to welcome the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, who is taking part in a formal
meeting of the Council for the first time in his new
capacity. In the short time since he has taken up his
post, the Secretary-General has made an active effort
to informally engage with the Council's members - a
much appreciated gesture. Let me express the hope that
the Council will continue to build the closest and most
productive cooperation possible with the new Secretary-
General in carrying out its primary responsibility of
strengthening international peace, security and stability.
We should support the Secretary-General's already
expressed intention to pursue a surge of diplomacy for
peace. An open and mutually reinforcing relationship
between the Secretary-General and the Council, based
on trust and mutual respect, can form a foundation for
this effort.

In a world that is increasingly interconnected, and
where conflict and insecurity continue to undermine
the lives of millions, we must recognize that no one
can resolve the problems we face when acting alone.
Working together, though sometimes difficult, we may
just have a chance to rescue the future for who are at
present without hope.

I should like to take this opportunity to express
gratitude and pay tribute to Mr. Ban Ki Moon, who
carried out his duties as Secretary-General over the
course of many years in a dignified manner.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, the Marshall Islands,
Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia, Morocco,
Namibia, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Moldova, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Slovakia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, the United
Arab Emirates, Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate
in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Joao
Vale de Almeida, Head ofthe Delegation ofthe European
Union to the United Nations; and Ms. Alison August
Treppel, Executive Secretary of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism of the Organization of
American States.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/6, which contains a letter dated
4 January 2017 from the Permanent Representative of
SwedenaddressedtotheSecretary-General,transmitting
a concept paper on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres.

