Mr. Liu Guijin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates the initiative of South Africa to hold
today's high-level meeting on the United Nations-
African Union (AU) partnership. We are convinced that
this meeting will further strengthen the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the AU,
build consensus and bolster efforts to resolve conflicts
in Africa and to achieve peace and security on the
continent.

In June 2008, during its presidency of the
Council, South Africa convened a high-level meeting
on strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union (see S/PV.5868), at which broad
consensus was reached on establishing a strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. Over the past three years, thanks to the
concerted efforts of all parties, cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU has increased and
yielded effective results.

Various forms of exchange and cooperation
mechanisms have been established between the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council and between the United Nations Secretariat
and the AU Commission. With the assistance of the
United Nations, the AU has strengthened its internal
mechanism and capacity-building, and cooperation
between the two sides has led to progress on issues
such as Darfur and Somalia and enhanced peace and
security in Africa.

However, it should be noted that Africa remains
the continent with the highest number of conflicts and
the most fragile security situation. Faced with a
plethora of interconnected traditional and
non-traditional security threats, constrained by its
capacity and lack of resources, the AU finds itself
unable to cope with all the challenges alone. It is of
even greater concern that some AU peace efforts in
recent years have not received the timely and effective
support of the international community and failed to
achieve the anticipated results. That is detrimental to
the long-term development of the United Nations-AU
partnership.

The international situation is now undergoing
complex and profound changes. The prosperity and
future of countries have never been as closely
interlinked as today. Under such circumstances, peace
and security in Africa have a direct impact on the
interests and well-being of each and every member of
the international community. Helping Africa to deal

with global challenges is not only the unshirkable
responsibility of the international community, it is also
in the common interests of all parties. As the most
universal, representative and authoritative
intergovernmental organization in the world, the
United Nations has a unique role to play in supporting
and assisting Africa. It should work hand in hand with
the AU to build on the results of, and increase, the
existing cooperation in order to make a greater
contribution to peace and development in Africa. In
that connection, China wishes to make the following
proposals.

First, we should take full account of the
importance of Africa and continue to increase input in
the continent. In recent years, the United Nations and
the international community have increased their
investment in Africa, but it still falls short of the huge
demand from Africa. Against the backdrop of a bleak
global economy, with countries facing fiscal
contraction, it is becoming increasingly difficult for the
international community to increase assistance to
Africa. Nevertheless, we should still View Africa from
a strategic and long-term perspective and fully
understand the significant impact of African peace and
development on the prosperity and security of the
world as a whole. We need to address African issues
with a greater sense of urgency and continue to
increase input in Africa. The United Nations and the
international community should heed the views of
African countries and earnestly address their concerns.
The United Nations should continue to mobilize funds,
optimize the allocation of its resources and give
priority to efforts aimed at building peace and security
in Africa.

Secondly, African efforts to resolve African
issues should be strongly supported. In recent years,
African countries have actively engaged in settling
conflicts in Africa. The relevant African countries and
the AU have played their role in the settlement of the
Libyan crisis. China highly commends the leadership
of South Africa and of His Excellency President Zuma
in that regard. We believe that many African issues
have complicated causes and involve the interests of
many parties. As a regional organization built and led
by Africans, the AU has a better understanding of those
situations. Moreover, African parties are generally very
cautious about external interventions. They are more
likely to accept peace and mediation efforts from
fellow Africans. In that regard, the international
community should have faith in the wisdom and
experience of African people, take into full account the
opinions of the AU and provide all manner of support
to the AU in its efforts to carry out mediation, good
offices and peacekeeping missions. We encourage the
United Nations and the AU to increase communication
and coordination so as to give full play to their
comparative advantages.

Thirdly, we should assist the AU in strengthening
capacity-building. As a Chinese saying goes, it is better
to teach one the skill of fishing than to offer him fish.
In the long run, peace and development in Africa
mainly relies on the efforts of the AU and African
countries themselves. The AU, however, is constrained
by insufficient capacity in human resources, material
and financing. The UN and the international
community should respond sincerely to the legitimate
requests of the AU and strengthen cooperation with the
AU in personnel training, institutional development,
the sharing of information and experience, the
management of resources, logistic support and other
areas. In the meantime, the United Nations should
enlist other countries in providing assistance. In recent
years, the United Nations has undertaken some active
exploration and gained positive experience in
providing assistance to the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. Such exploration and experience
merit timely study, assessment and dissemination.

China highly values its friendly relations and
cooperation with the AU. The development of our
friendly relations has gained momentum in recent
years. China appreciates and fully supports what the
AU has done to resolve hotspot issues in Africa, and
has provided financial and material assistance to the
AU. China will continue to work with the international
community to support the close strategic and
cooperative relationship between the United Nations
and the AU, and make its contribution to African peace
and security.

