Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to express my gratitude
to Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for his informative
briefing today, and to Her Excellency Mrs. Florentina

Adenike Ukonga, Executive Secretary of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission. And through you, Mr. President, I
would like to thank Equatorial Guinea for coordinating
this debate on an issue that the Dominican Republic
also considers particularly important.

Transnational organized crime at sea continues to
be one of the main threats to international security and
global economic stability, which is obvious, considering
that the sea, which occupies two-thirds of the planet,
is an essential space for the continued development of
humankind. It is up to all States, regardless of their
geographic location, to protect this essential common
good. As we have already seen, piracy, armed robbery,
trafficking in arms and drugs, the smuggling ofmigrants
and trafficking in persons are some of the scourges
committed by organized crime throughout our seas
and oceans whose modalities are constantly changing.
That requires appropriate action. In that regard, the
availability of resources and cooperation among States
are essential.

Among the evils that have been mentioned, one
of the most harmful is transnational drug trafficking,
which affects almost all regions, and our country is
no exception to that scourge. Regardless of where
our countries are placed in the range of activities of
those criminal organizations, whether in production,
trafficking or consumption, the severe negative impacts
of such activities damage our societies and economies.

The figures available regarding this issue are
heartbreaking and alarming. The trafficking of cocaine
and heroin gives rise to drug trafficking by sea of
more lethal substances, which have been described as
epidemics. I am talking about the trafficking of opioids,
which in 2018 represented nearly 90 per cent of global
seizures, in the countries of North, Central and West
Africa alone, and in the United States in 2017 claimed
the lives of approximately 48,000 people, equivalent to
68 per cent of all overdoses.

Bearing witness to that reality, we can understand
that apart from the dangers that it poses to public health,
transnational drug trafficking is an obstacle to economic
growth and a threat to the national security of our
countries, which weaken the rule of law and undermine
public confidence, heightening the weaknesses of our
regions and limiting our development.

From our own regional experience, we understand
that combating transnational organized crime and the
use of our seas and oceans for such purposes depends
to a great extent on our ability to deepen cooperation
among our nations. It is a matter of joining efforts
to combat a common evil that affects all of us by
optimizing resources and strengthening our national
and regional capacities.
The implementation ofjoint maritime operations,
improvements in the collection, analysis and exchange
of intelligence information, the best possible
infrastructure, equipment and training, and judicial
and law enforcement systems, including customs,
counter-narcotics agencies and coast guards, among
others, are in accordance with the relevant international
instruments on the protection of our maritime space.
All that should keep pace with the threats that we face
and the capacity of each State, since the burden of
responsibility of some transit States, such as ours, is
sometimes disproportionate to that of others that are
the final destination or market.

That assessment is relevant, since it serves as a
way to contain a general problem that has differentiated
impacts on States and tends to drain Vital resources for
the development of basic social policies. We must ask
ourselves whether that strategy is beneficial to all and
how cooperation mechanisms can better distribute the
burden of responsibilities.

Finally, we cannot fail to address the root causes that
fuel the participation of young people in transnational
organized crime, including limited development
opportunities, as a preventive policy.

