Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I am grateful to you,
Madam President, for this opportunity to meet with
Foreign Minister Joao Bernardo de Miranda and to hear
a firsthand account of the developments in Angola. I
also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Ibrahim
Gambari for his lucid and comprehensive update on the
situation.

I wish to use this opportunity to reaffirm
Ukraine's strong support for the peace process in
Angola and for the steps taken by the Government of
Angola aimed at promoting the democratization
process, the rule of law and the protection of human
rights.

Earlier this year, my country arranged for an
exchange of delegations to our respective capitals and
had very constructive and useful talks. Let me also
reaffirm that my country will continue our efforts to
bring peace, stability and prosperity to Angola. We
hope that we will continue to build on and expand our
friendly and mutually beneficial relations.

Ukraine welcomes the general improvement in
relations between the Government of Angola and the
United Nations, and the strengthening of an atmosphere
of trust. This is a welcome result of what has been done
in the Security Council, and of the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Adviser for Africa.
We believe that the role played by the United Nations
Office in Angola (UNOA) in the coming months will
be particularly essential for the continuation of the
peace process, especially in view of the request to
UNOA by the Angolan Government to seek the
completion of the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol.

The promulgation of an amnesty law, the creation
of a peace fund, the announcement of elections and
other forward-looking measures are indeed valuable
contributions to peace and reconciliation in Angola.
The growing involvement of the civil society and the
churches in the peace and democratization processes is
also very encouraging. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General and Minister Miranda's briefing
today confirmed that UNITA increased its terror
campaign in different parts of Angola, which is
targeted primarily at the civilian population and aimed
at undermining hopes for a peaceful settlement. We
hold the Savimbi-led UNITA fully responsible for this
aggravation of the situation in the country, which
testifies to UNITA's lack of genuine commitment to the
peace process. UNITA's sustained military activity is
unacceptable and gives the lie to its repeated
declarations that it seeks a peaceful resolution of the
conflict.

We are glad to hear that the Government of
Angola is still ready to restart a dialogue with UNITA,
and we join other members of the Council in
welcoming the four-point agenda for peace prepared by
the Government of Angola. Indeed, the past month's
developments underlined the urgency of a negotiated
settlement of the conflict, which remains the only
viable alternative to the prospect of another long
decade of guerrilla warfare.

Here, I think, it is important to underline that the
resumption of dialogue with UNITA should not mean a
renegotiation of the Lusaka Protocol, which should
remain the main point of departure for further steps in
the peace process. As we have just heard, the
Government of Angola made its position very clear in
this regard.

I believe it is important to re-emphasize that the
Council should continue to strengthen its sanctions
policy against UNITA. I would like to reiterate that the
Government of Ukraine fully supports the work of the
monitoring mechanism. Its latest report, together with
the previous reports, provided us with an elaborate
picture of UNITA's operations and functioning, and of
sanctions-breaking mechanisms and channels. I wish to
voice our strong support for the continued monitoring
of sanctions against UNITA and our agreement with
the recommendations of the Monitoring Mechanism
regarding the need to establish a permanent capacity
within the United Nations to ensure the monitoring of
sanctions. Continued violations of sanctions remain a
serious concern for my delegation.

We appreciate the efforts of the Organization of
African Unity, the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and individual Member States to
reinforce the detection and suppression of cross-border
movement of arms and petroleum, and other sanctions-
breaking activities. At the same time, we note the
critical role played by illegal flight activities in
resupplying UNITA with weapons and ammunition. We
recognize that SADC needs a great deal of assistance in
pursuing this matter. In fact, it needs special and
sophisticated equipment, adequate training for staff,
sufficient financing and other important things.

The Government of Ukraine stands ready to assist
in this process, in particular through providing training
in air navigation to personnel. When preparing for this
meeting, I took with me some materials containing
information on equipment that can be provided to
SADC to enhance its capacity to strengthen air-traffic
control systems in the subregion. We intend to send
these materials to the Chairman of the Angola
sanctions Committee shortly. Ukraine is also interested
in participating in the donor conference relating to
Angola, which will provide additional assistance to
SADC member States in implementing the sanctions
regime.

Finally, let me reiterate that the restoration of a
lasting peace in Angola cannot be complete without the
economic rehabilitation of the country. The assistance
of the international community in overcoming the
consequences of the conflict, and the provision of
humanitarian aid to the war-affected population, should
be regarded as indispensable parts of the overall peace
efforts in Angola.

