Lord Triesman (United Kingdom): May I begin
by thanking Special Representative Pronk for his
comprehensive briefing and for all of the efforts that he
and his team are making to bring peace and security to
the Sudan. The progress in implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) owes a great
deal to their efforts. Special Representative Pronk has
also made plain this afternoon the continuing
problems.

We must continue to work to underpin the CPA,
Where the United Nations Mission in southern Sudan
has played such a valuable role. As was borne out in
the Council's visit to the Sudan in May, it is clear that
embedding peace in southern Sudan also depends upon
on our ability to secure peace in Darfur.

On 31 August, the Council decided to authorize a
United Nations mission to support the implementation
of the Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA). The Council
remains united in its view that a United Nations force
is the only solution to the crisis in Darfur. The African

Union (AU) itself and the Council have favoured
transition from the AU to the United Nations in Darfur
for many months. We have all recognized that the
complex task of implementing the DPA requires a
larger, better supported and multidimensional peace
operation. That is no reflection on the exceptional
efforts of the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS), which has done a remarkable job in very
difficult circumstances but, rather, a recognition, fully
shared by Africa's leaders, that the United Nations is
best placed to provide the sustainable and
comprehensive international peacebuilding support that
Darfur needs.

It is unacceptable that the Government of the
Sudan has so far refused to accept the idea of a United
Nations force in Darfur, despite its successful
cooperation with the United Nations force with an
almost identical mandate in southern Sudan. Worse, the
Government of the Sudan has proposed its own
approach to implementing by military force the Darfur
Peace Agreement, an approach that violates the
Agreement and the Government's commitment to it, as
well as resolution 1590 (2005) and 1591 (2005). In the
words of Kofi Annan, that will be catastrophic for the
people of the region.

We are now at a tipping point for the future of
Darfur. Antagonists, as we have just heard, have
returned to violence, and humanitarian groups and
AMIS forces are losing lives, along with the innocent
people of Darfur. We need to arrest that collapse into
chaos. My Government sees the priorities for resolving
the tragedy of Darfur as clear and compelling.

First, the Government of the Sudan and rebel
groups must immediately stop fighting in Darfur -
what Special Representative Pronk called a truce.

Secondly, non-signatories must accept the Darfur
Peace Agreement, and it must be implemented by all.

Thirdly, we must prevent the development of a
security vacuum. The Government of the Sudan must
agree to the continuation of the African Union force
and accept its transition to a United Nations force. We
have to ask, in full recognition of the gravity of such a
request, that the African Union Peace and Security
Council continue its brave and arduous task of
peacekeeping in Darfur while we intensify efforts to
persuade the Government of the Sudan to accept a
United Nations force to succeed AMIS. We look
forward to the crucial AU meeting to be held later this
week.

The United Nations and all of us must deepen and
accelerate our support of AMIS and, more generally, of
the humanitarian relief effort in Darfur.

I am sure that we are clear why the United
Nations has a right and duty to make this case to the
Government of the Sudan. The scale of the disaster is
already immense: 200,000 innocent people have died;
almost 2 million have been displaced from their homes;
nearly 3 million people in Darfur depend upon
international aid for their survival, half a million being
cut off from that aid by the fighting; and 50,000 more
people have been displaced in the past couple of
weeks. Imagine what further deterioration could bring.
The regional implications - for Chad in particular -
of the present crisis and the risk of a downward spiral
are of obvious concern. We urgently need proposals to
provide humanitarian assistance and security to the
camps in eastern Chad.

The moral imperative for the international
community to act, set out so eloquently by the
Secretary-General in the Chamber last week, is clear.
Every United Nations Member State at the Summit last
year embraced the concept of the responsibility to
protect. The Council affirmed it in a resolution drafted
by the United Kingdom on the protection of civilians,
which was adopted unanimously this spring and later
recalled in resolution 1706 (2006), which was also
drafted by the United Kingdom, three weeks ago.

This is first and foremost a responsibility for the
State concerned to exercise, to protect its own citizens.
It is clear that the Sudan is not protecting its people in
Darfur, quite the contrary. In such cases the
responsibility to protect means that the international
community has a right to get involved, primarily in
efforts to help the State concerned to carry out its
responsibilities. That is what the United Nations has
done in southern Sudan, and it is what we will all want
to see happen in Darfur.

But our responsibility cannot end there if our
offers of help are turned away. We cannot, in all
conscience, allow the situation in Darfur to slide from
crisis to catastrophe because of the ill-founded fears of
the Government of Khartoum. We must therefore
redouble our efforts - in the United Nations, the AU,
the European Union, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference - as friends of

the Sudan and its peoples, to make clear the positive
contribution the United Nations will make in Darfur, in
full respect of the sovereignty of the Sudan and with a
heavy African character to the force, as the Council has
repeatedly made clear. We must also make clear the
benefits of peace for the Sudan's Government and
people in economic, political, security and
humanitarian terms. The Sudan is a country with great
economic resources. It should be an economic
powerhouse, not a humanitarian crisis spot. And we
should make clear that the responsibility for failures,
increased conflict and death in Darfur will not rest with
the United Nations, but with those responsible. It will
be down to those who deny a United Nations
peacekeeping force to the people of Darfur and who
reject the offer of international support for the DPA and
the sovereignty of the Sudan set out in resolution 1706
(2006). That is not a scenario that we want to realize;
but it is a road that we may well have to travel if the
Government of the Sudan does not relent in its
opposition to the will and decisions of the international
community.

The United Nations was established to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. In
Darfur, as in southern Sudan, peace, not war is in
prospect. But, in Darfur in particular, that prospect now
hangs by a thread, and if that thread snaps, the people
of Darfur will pay a terrible price.

If our United Nations and this Council mean
anything, we must make the effort to avert that. On 11
September this year, Kofi Annan asked the Council a
question: "Can the international community, having not
done enough for the people of Rwanda in their time of
need, just watch as this tragedy deepens?" (S/PV.5520, p. 3). The answer to the question of the Secretary-
General is a simple "no". If the Government of the
Sudan is genuinely concerned about the welfare and
protection of its citizens, there is no reason for it not to
give its consent to a United Nations force.

For us today, it is not about saving face; it is
about saving lives. We should make clear what the
Sudan can expect from the international community if
it shoulders its responsibilities in Darfur. And what it
can expect if it does not. No one should doubt the
international determination to see the conflict resolved.

