Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this timely debate on
energy, security and climate. Switzerland welcomes
your initiative and shares the passionate arguments and
concerns you have raised in your concept paper.

It is important that the Security Council
contribute to raising awareness about the repercussions
of environmental degradation on international peace
and security, including through its impact on the
drivers of conflicts. We must also reflect on ways to
improve our response to such challenges. We do not
consider this initiative to be an encroachment by the
Security Council on the responsibilities and functions
of the General Assembly. We believe that climate
change and environmental issues in general are themes
that will have to be addressed by different bodies in the
framework of their respective mandates.
Climate change and conflict are closely linked.
However, the problem of climate change constitutes
only one important aspect of the broader problem of
environmental degradation. Conflicts are often a
consequence of dwindling natural resources such as

energy, water and soil. The causes of such conflicts
will not be resolved by focusing on climate change
alone. We therefore should bear in mind the often-
neglected environmental dimensions of conflict as a
whole and address them at all stages: conflict
prevention, conflict management and post-conflict
recovery.

Switzerland is particularly concerned about the
looming food and water insecurity in many parts of the
world due to the cumulative effects of population
growth, changing food habits, shortage of cultivable
land, spreading degradation of the soil and water-
resource constraints. The need to produce more and
healthier food from less land with less water is a reality
that should be tackled urgently by both Governments
and the private sector. Climate-related factors of
change tend to aggravate this already enormous
challenge, because those countries most exposed to
their likely negative impact are often those with
inadequate means to adapt or to take the necessary
preventive measures.

As rightly stressed in the concept paper, Member
States have the primary responsibility for efforts to
prevent conflicts and reduce the risks of disaster.
Switzerland would like to invite all stakeholders to
participate in the first session of the Global Platform
for Disaster Risk Reduction, to be held in Geneva from
5 to 7 June 2007. This high-level event intends to raise
awareness and to consider ways and means to move
disaster risk reduction higher up on the international
policy agenda.

Environmental degradation, including climate
change, and its impact on all forms of livelihood
constitute an additional challenge because they can
contribute to forced migration, with all the
destabilizing effects that can have on societies in
countries of origin, transit and destination. In
managing that phenomenon, Member States are urged
to respect their obligations under international law. In
this respect, I should like to highlight the positive
contribution made by the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee in adopting the Operational Guidelines on
Human Rights and Natural Disasters. These guidelines
are increasingly being used by humanitarian and
development actors and by the Security Council to
reinforce those positive effects.

The protection of the environment and
sustainable development are a pillar of our foreign
policy. Switzerland is currently undertaking a more
structured analysis of the links between environmental
degradation, the use of natural resources and violent
conflict. We are therefore ready to contribute
substantively to the discussion within the United
Nations.

Already, at this early stage it is safe to say that
each conflict has its specificities with regard to the
environmental drivers of conflict; there are no simple
answers. There is therefore an obvious need to
strengthen our analytical capacities in order to channel
targeted and authoritative input into the Council's
policy debate. However, potential risk factors should
be examined on a case-by-case basis rather than by
predefining priority areas. Where environmental
factors are elements explicitly affecting security, the
Council may wish to consider creating a specific
environmental capacity for conflicts and thus
strengthen its own abilities in this area.

Above all, we see added value in that the Security
Council, when debating a specific conflict, would have
recourse to environmental expertise that could help it
understand the drivers of conflict or provide
assessments of the environmental impact of the
conflict. The United Nations Environment Programme,
which we have collectively designated as the central
environmental pillar of the United Nations system,
must be strengthened so that it can respond to such
requests. As we are organized at present, we may get
opinions on possible drivers of conflict but rarely get
relevant and authoritative advice.

As the Security Council has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, Switzerland very much welcomes
its readiness to examine the challenges that climate
change and environmental degradation pose in terms of
causes of conflicts. The resulting threat to international
peace and security is both interdependent and
multidimensional; it thus has social and economic
repercussions. We hope that this debate will provide
impetus, including with regard to the need to
strengthen the coherence of the United Nations system
and international environmental governance, in the
framework of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and other relevant entities of the
system, including the Security Council.

