Mr. Toro Jimenez (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela would like to invoke the
preamble of the Charter of the United Nations. Its
authors spoke not just of States and nations, but of "We
the peoples of the United Nations". Let us therefore
heed the voice of the socio-political actor who, after
centuries of colonial oppression, is the main
protagonist of modern history, having founded the
United Nations. It should therefore be underscored that
the States of the United Nations are simply mandated
representatives vested with a renewable power granted
by their respective sovereign peoples. Our primary
duty is to respect that mandate and to exercise it
faithfully while also respecting its most basic aspect:
respect for self-determination, which is the foundation
of this intergovernmental Organization.

Let us consider the actions of the Security Council
in so-called humanitarian crises, dealt with initially
through peacekeeping operations which then - often
without any resolution of the issue of continuity - are
as if by magic transformed into peacebuilding
operations. Let us begin by making a conceptual
distinction between peacekeeping operations and the
most recent peacebuilding operations. The former have
the specific and limited objective of ending an internal
conflict in a given State. Based on the premise that a
civil war has ended, the latter have the objective of
rebuilding a country devastated by war once peace had
been re-established in order to prevent further conflict
and to lay the foundations for a country's future
development. To allow or encourage any confusion
between those two types of operations produces
irreconcilable contradictions between different
objectives that cannot be resolved through either a
single mandate or through successive or renewed
mandates entrusted to the same persons. That can also
have serious consequences for the affected States.

Peacekeeping operations imply the use of
repression by the United Nations once peaceful means
to end a conflict have been exhausted. That is the
responsibility of the Security Council and, on a
subsidiary basis, of the General Assembly.
Peacebuilding operations, however, are exclusively the
responsibility of the people of the country afflicted by
conflict. The United Nations is obliged to respect the
self-determination of peoples; its sole task is to support
the process through international cooperation and on
the basis of the parameters, norms and principles freely
established by the people concerned. Doing otherwise
would be to disregard the right of peoples to decide
upon their own destiny. In contrast, in its peacebuilding
operations, the Security Council has repeatedly
disregarded the principle of the self-determination of
peoples as well as the specific powers of the General
Assembly with regard to international cooperation in
this regard. Through that recurring practice, an attempt
is being made to twist the interpretation of the Charter
to legitimize the Council's usurpation of powers, thus
securing its interference in the internal affairs of a
State for unspeakable ends, taking advantage of the
weakness and the helplessness of its people afflicted by
war. In addition, it is an attempt to have the General
Assembly's recognition of that practice form a key part
of the proposed reform of the United Nations.

Attempts to justify that unjustifiable interference
by the Security Council employ two different
scenarios. The first is that of a State considered to have
collapsed or failed as a result of a destructive, violent
conflict, or a State that, although it has not suffered a
civil war, is considered to be an unfeasible model of
government for its people. The other scenario relates to
a State whose Government, in the exercise of its
legally established authority, is nevertheless judged to
have committed massive violations of human rights
against its population or significant sectors of that
population.

The two scenarios share an deliberate absence of
an historical perspective and implicitly condemn the
population as the cause of its own degradation,
conflict, poverty and neglect while discounting the
factors that led to the outbreak of the armed conflict. If
we examine the historical causes of the internal crises
of African countries, we shall see that the internal
conflicts that led to peacekeeping operations are
entirely due to the persistence of a regime of
oppression and plunder established by an imperialist
power omnipresent in the country.

With respect to Haiti, the people's situation of
extreme poverty and distress does not reflect the most
incredible feat and revolutionary model of 1804, when
the country made a qualitative political leap as a
republic of slaves in a hegemonic world of monarchies
claiming divine right. After suffering the opprobrium
of colonial exploitation by France for centuries, Haiti
fell prey to the United States from 1916 to 1934,
masked as a protectorate. That was replaced by a
similar regime, which is still in place, masked by a
peacebuilding operation.

States that are free of all internal conflict can be
chosen as recipients of peacebuilding operations,
having been labelled as failed States. It should simply
be noted that a plan is being prepared to destabilize
selected Member States of the United Nations by
provoking an internal crisis so great that it requires the
multilateral cloak of a peacebuilding operation, a crisis
with characteristics resembling the recent
transformations in certain former Soviet Republics.
There is an imperialist project under way, which
intends to hijack sovereignty and self-determination. It
is supported by an office in the United States State
Department that possesses a list of 25 States not yet
destabilized that can be targeted for immediate or
future restructuring operations, with the agreement of
the patrons of messianic fundamentalism in the
Administration of President Bush.

The second scenario involves the predetermination
that a massive violation of human rights has taken place
in a country as a result of the Government's alleged
systematic negligence or direct repression of the
population. In that case, the peacekeeping operation is
justified on the basis of the doctrine of the
responsibility to protect, which is rooted in the belief
that the international community - a euphemism by
which the great Powers define themselves - has the
fundamental right to intervene in any Member State of
the United Nations, by decision of the Security
Council, in a false rescue operation on behalf of the
people supposedly afflicted by State repression, and to
impose sanctions on the State and Government if they
fail to assume their obligation to do so themselves. In
the inventory of States threatened by this intervention
mechanism are all the States of the South, which are an
annoyance for the empire.

It is clear that no such fundamental right exists; it
has no basis in the Charter of the United Nations or
international law. Nor does the so-called implied
representation that the international community
attributes to the Security Council exist. That blatant
manipulation directly jeopardizes the very foundations
of international society and peoples' right to freedom
and to take their leading role as the founders of the
United Nations.

