The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of India.

At the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador
Moraes Cabral, Permanent Representative of
Portugal, and his delegation for co-authoring with
my delegation the concept note for today's open
debate (8/2012/853, annex). I would also like to put on
record our deep appreciation of Ambassador Moraes
Cabral's stewardship of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions
this year. His active involvement and guidance have
enabled the Working Group to consider several issues
related to the Council's working methods in order to
promote transparency and the greater involvement of
elected members in the Council's work.

The Security Council is mandated by the United
Nations Charter with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
What the Council does and how it acts to discharge
its responsibility is thus of interest to the entire
international community, not only to Council members,
let alone the permanent members.

Over the years, there has been a growing realization
that the Council's composition, rooted in the situation
obtaining in 1945, and its working methods are divorced
from contemporary reality of international relations.
This is exemplified by the fact that the Council has
shown little interest in consulting with those affected
most by its decisions and in adopting transparent and
inclusive rules of procedures that remain provisional
even after the Council's existence for six and a half
decades. The Council has also not acted to harness the
capabilities of the wider United Nations membership.
Its all-too-evident eagerness to apply methods of
coercion under Chapter VII, to the neglect of provisions
under Chapters VI and VIII, has proved to be counter-
productive in resolving several crises, even while the
Council has sought to expand the definition of peace
and security with a view to encroaching upon the
Charter-mandated roles of other United Nations organs.

Let me briefly share India's perspective on how the
Security Council could better its performance. First,
the permanent members of the Security Council must
recognize, not only individually but also collectively,
that the Council must be reformed to make it reflect
the contemporary realities of the international system.
Secondly, the international community as a whole
must be cognizant that enlarging the Security Council
to reflect contemporary geopolitical realities would
improve its representative character and grant greater
legitimacy and credibility to its decisions. Thirdly, there
is a need for real improvement in its working methods
to enhance the Council's effectiveness and efficiency.
Cosmetic changes to working methods alone will not
help. Real improvement needs changes in both process
and approach, which require reform of the composition
of the Council.

Insofar as the working methods of the Council
are concerned, the first and foremost necessity is
to make them transparent and inclusive. Access to
documentation and information is an issue of particular
concern, and the tendency to hold closed meetings that
have no records should be curbed. During the past
two years, we have strongly supported efforts in the
Informal Working Group aimed at improving Council's
working methods. Some specific points include the
following.

First, the Council should amend its procedures so
that items do not remain on its agenda permanently.

Second, the reporting cycle should be practical
and results-oriented so that issues do not come for
consideration so routinely as to bog down the limited
time that the Council has at its disposal.

Third, the mandate cycle should be streamlined to
spread the Council's work throughout the year.

Fourth, Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter must be
fully implemented by consulting with non-Security
Council members on a regular basis, especially
members with a special interest in a substantive matter
under the Council's consideration.

Fifth, penholders should allow the greater and
systematic participation of elected members as
co-penholders.
Sixth, non-members should be given systematic
access to subordinate organs of the Security Council,
including the right to participate.

Seventh, the participation of troop- and police-
contributing countries in decision-making concerning
peacekeeping operations must cover the establishment,
conduct, review and termination of peacekeeping
operations, including the extension and change of
mandates, as well as for specific operational issues.

Eighth, countries having a specific interest in a
particular agenda-item must be consulted before an
outcome document on that item is adopted.

Ninth, the Council should concentrate its time and
efforts on dealing with issues concerning its primary
responsibility with regard to international peace and
security as mandated by the United Nations Charter,
rather than encroach upon the mandate of the General
Assembly.

Tenth, before mandating measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter, the Council should first make serious
efforts to achieve pacific settlements of disputes through
measures under Chapter VI. In this connection, the
Council must also improve its cooperation with regional
organizations, particularly the African Union (AU),
since a large volume ofthe Council's work concerns the
African continent. Such cooperation must be serious
and include providing assistance for the AU's capacity-
building, as per its requirements, not only when some
permanent members deem it in their interest.

It is our expectation that these ideas will be
pursued by Council members in the coming months so
that the views expressed by the wider United Nations
membership find resonance in the Council's work and
working methods.

In conclusion, let me reiterate India's considered
View that genuine reform of the working methods of
the Security Council requires a comprehensive reform
of the membership of the Council, with expansion in
both permanent and non-permanent categories, not
only improvement in its working procedures. This is
essential both to the credibility and to the continued
confidence of the international community in this
institution.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Before I invite speakers under rule 37, I wish to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.

