Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to join others in thanking the Secretary-General for
being with us here and for his very clear presentation
of the situation in Kosovo. I would also like to thank
Mr. Tadie, President of the Republic of Serbia, for
being here. We salute his firm commitment to
democracy and to his country's European integration.

Kosovo declared its independence yesterday.
Pursuant to international law, it is up to each State to
decide whether or not to recognize the new State. In a
letter sent to the President of Kosovo, the President of
the French Republic, Mr. Nicolas Sarkozy, has just,
effective immediately, recognized Kosovo as a
sovereign and independent State, in full accordance
with the statement by European Ministers for Foreign
Affairs issued today in Brussels. Other recognitions,
especially on the part of the great majority of our
European Union partners, have taken place or will take
place in the days and weeks to come.
We now face a new reality, which no doubt will
be taken into account by the Security Council and the
Secretary-General. Once again, we should recall that
this is a unique situation, since it marks the outcome of
a particular historic process: the break-up of the former
Yugoslavia during the 1990s, followed by a period of
international administration under United Nations
auspices. The nature of the common European
perspective offered to Kosovo and Serbia is also
specific to the situation in question.

Faced with this new reality, the international
community must shoulder its responsibilities by
ensuring, in the immediate future, that the process
under way takes place in a calm manner, without
violence, avoiding any destabilization of Kosovo or of
the region. The protection of the population, especially
the minorities in Kosovo, is a common priority for the
members of the Security Council. We note that calm is,
in fact, prevailing on the ground in spite of a few
isolated incidents, and we welcome in that regard the
responsible approach adopted during this crucial period
by the parties, in particular the Serb authorities, as has
just been shown again by President Tadic' before the
Council.

We should remain extremely vigilant, in order to
avoid any backsliding. We call upon the Security
Council to give its full support to the Secretary-
General in this task, because the United Nations, in
particular the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), with the support of the
International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR), will
bear the primary responsibility for maintaining order in
the period ahead.

The European Union, as it has already
announced, will assume its responsibilities in helping
to settle this issue. In particular, it has decided to send,
in full accordance with international law and within the
framework of resolution 1244 (1999), a substantial
police and justice mission to Kosovo. The presence of
the European Union will allow us to supervise the
emergence of a Kosovo that is genuinely multi-ethnic
and democratic, pursuant to the provisions of the
Ahtisaari plan. It has an essential role to play in
protecting all the communities living in Kosovo. It will
be particularly vigilant in ensuring that the Kosovar
authorities fully implement the commitments entered
into for the protection of the rights of minorities,
especially the Serbs, and of their cultural and religious
heritage.
To that end, the European Union will continue to
cooperate with the United Nations, KFOR, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the other international actors involved. For its part,
France will strengthen its commitment beyond the
2,000 soldiers already deployed as part of KFOR, in
order to help Kosovo make rapid progress towards the
establishment of the rule of law and of good relations
with all of its neighbours.

In re-electing President Tadie in January's
presidential elections, the Serb people vigorously
reiterated their determination to include the process of
integration into the European Union in their future. We
are very pleased that the Serb people have chosen
Europe. It is in line with our conviction that the future
of the Western Balkans lies in the European Union and
that Serbia's progress towards the European Union can
be accelerated. We hope that the conditions set out for
the European rapprochement of Serbia will soon be
met, so that Serbia will be able to proceed through the
necessary stages for the recognition of its status as a
candidate. A European future for the peoples of the
Western Balkans within the framework of the European
Union is the best measure of their reconciliation
following the tragedies of the previous decade.

