Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): Allow me first of
all to express my appreciation to the Chairmen of the
1373, 1267 and 1540 Committees for their informative
briefings.

The briefing by the Chairman of the
1267 Committee pursuant to paragraph 31 of resolution
1735 (2006) was very encouraging. Resolution 1735
(2006), which reaffirmed the need to implement
sanctions measures imposed by resolution 1267 (1999)
and subsequent resolutions relating to Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, reminds Member States of their obligations
under those resolutions.

The Chairman's briefing indicated the
appreciable progress that has been made since
resolution 1735 (2006) was adopted. It is against this

background that we commend the Chairman and the
1267 Committee for their efforts in improving the
accuracy and quality of the consolidated list. The
accuracy of the list is critical not only for the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime, but also for its
credibility. In that regard, it is worth noting, as stated
by the Chairman of the Committee, that since
ownership of the list is vested in all Member States, the
primary responsibility for achieving the objective of
accuracy and improving quality rests with States. It is
therefore imperative that States provide the necessary
inputs and assistance to facilitate the Committee's
efforts in that area.

We also wish to commend the Chairman for the
idea of open briefings for the general membership. We
believe that that outreach approach provides the best
platform to sensitize the membership to their
obligations; it is also an opportunity for an interactive
dialogue on how best to tackle the issues of
implementation. The importance of the Chairman's and
the Monitoring Team's visits to States cannot be
denied. The wealth of information and knowledge
gathered on those field visits have enhanced and
shaped policymaking and rule making to suit the
practical realities on the ground.

On the newly established focal point for
de-listing, we are happy to note that States and
individuals are now availing themselves of the
facilities offered. On that point, we wish to reiterate
our position that the idea behind the focal point is
access, simplicity and transparency. It is therefore
essential that we avoid overly bureaucratic and
complicated procedures that might frustrate petitioners
and undermine the very objective of the mechanism.

With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
we note with satisfaction the ground covered in the
Committee's work programme for the period from
lJuly to 31 December, in three areas, namely;
monitoring the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), facilitating technical assistance and
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005).

We are satisfied with the progress made in the
Committee's analysis and adoption of Preliminary
Implementation Assessments. We also support the
decision of the Chairman to convene an informal
meeting of all States to explain the format of the
Preliminary Implementation Assessments, which is an
invaluable tool in the evaluation of States'
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

On the facilitation of technical assistance, we
commend the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
and the Committee for organizing the fifth special
meeting with international, regional and subregional
organizations in Nairobi from 29 to 31 October, on the
topic "Prevention of terrorist movement and border
security". We believe that the results of those
deliberations will enhance cooperation between States
and those organizations. We also agree that such
meetings provide a valuable opportunity for the
exchange of ideas and the facilitation of technical
assistance.

On the question of the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005), which deals with incitement to
terrorist acts, we consider the decision of the
Committee to explore the technical assistance needs of
States in the area as timely in view of the fact that
quite a significant number of States are yet to fulfil
their reporting obligations.

Finally, we wish to commend the experts of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate for their
invaluable support of the Committee, and welcome the
new Executive Director. We call on the Council to
extend the mandate of CTED when it expires in
December this year.

Concerning the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), my delegation commends
the Chairman, the Committee and the group of experts
for their tireless efforts, as evidenced in ensuring the
realization of the underlying objectives that informed
the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). Despite that,
we remain concerned that the objective of universal
reporting is yet to be attained.

While cognizant of the challenges confronting
some States in the fulfilment of their commitment, it is
equally an incontrovertible truth that anything short of
universal adherence to the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004) would undermine the collective efforts
against the twin scourge of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and terrorism. We
therefore urge the non-reporting States to take urgent
measures towards fulfilling their primary obligation.
We also encourage the Committee to relentlessly
pursue its mandate by continuing with its outreach
activities, as well as to deepen and widen its
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.

If we acknowledge that all States, irrespective of
their economic status and military capabilities, are not
insulated from the threat of nuclear terrorism, then the
collective strength of the community of nations should
be harnessed to prevent non-State actors from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction and their means
of delivery, which resolution 1540 (2004) seeks to
achieve.

