Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, who has
briefed us today.

To paint an objective picture of developments in
the Bosnia and Herzegovina process, we recommend
that the members of the Security Council carefully
familiarize themselves with the twentieth report of
the Republika Srpska to the Secretary-General and the
Security Council, in which the commitment of Bosnian
Serbs to international law and the spirit of Dayton is
clear.

We sympathize with the leadership and population
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which in May and August
experienced catastrophic flooding. Russia backed
international efforts to alleviate the consequences, and
our Ministry of Emergency Situations sent substantive

volumes of humanitarian shipments to both entities.

We agree that the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains stable. October's elections were
democratic and recognized as successful. They again
reaffirmed the ability of local parties to resolve their
issues without relying on the international protectorate.
We deem it important that the process of forming new
bodies of authority in the country should take place
without external interference, first and foremost that of
the High Representative. In the post-electoral period,
the international community should prioritize efforts
to promote the development of inclusive inter-Bosnian
dialogue and the search by both sides for mutually
acceptable options for socioeconomic and structural
reform, in keeping with the Dayton mechanisms and
principles.

In the post-conflict settlement process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the finalization of the implementation of
the 5+2 agenda remains of priority importance. We deem
it unacceptable to infuse it with new concepts related to
the integration of the country into the European Union
and NATO. The High Representative must definitively
and finally reject the use of his emergency Bonn
powers. Like other problems that remain unresolved
within the framework of the 5+2 agenda, issues of
fundamental importance to the future of the country
must be resolved by the Bosnians themselves through
inclusive dialogue and on the basis of the consent of the
three peoples of the State.

We are convinced that the potential of external
oversight of the situation by the mechanism of the High
Representative has exhausted itself. There is no need
to seek artificial reasons to preserve the mechanism.
On the contrary, we should work towards its timely
conclusion. We note once again that the standard
criticism of the leadership of the Republika Srpska
repeated in the reports of the High Representative is
unwarranted, destructive and harmful. The continuous
accusations levelled against Bosnian Serbs and Croats,
undermining the Dayton foundations of the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, add further
tension to relations among the Bosnian sides and
interferes with their dialogue.

Instead of piling on its shrill rebukes of the
Republika Srpska, the international presence should
give greater attention to the growing threat of militant
Islam in the country and to problem of radical Islamist
fighters leaving Bosnia and Herzegovina for the
Islamic State and other terrorist organizations active in
Iraq and Syria. In that context, we welcome the efforts
of Sarajevo to strengthen the criminal responsibility
of fighters, illegal armed formations abroad and their
accomplices.
Following the end of the destructive armed conflict
in 1995, Bosnia and Herzegovina was able to achieve
concrete results towards a settlement. That is why the
decisive vector of the peace process should remain the
transfer of responsibility for what takes place in the
country to the Bosnians themselves.

