The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the democratically elected Government of
Guinea-Bissau, and underlines that all parties
concerned, especially the members of the former
military junta, must continue to uphold the results
of the elections and the principles of democracy,
the rule of law, and respect for human rights and
civilian rule in the country.

"The Security Council welcomes the return
to peace, democracy and constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau, and urges all parties to work
towards the consolidation of peace in a spirit of
cooperation and reconciliation.

"The Security Council notes with
satisfaction the political progress made so far in
Guinea-Bissau, and stresses the importance of
continued cooperation by all parties towards the
consolidation of sustainable peace in Guinea-
Bissau. The Council calls upon the members of
the former military junta to subordinate
themselves fully to the civilian institutions and to
withdraw from the political process. The Council
underlines that the primary responsibility for the
consolidation of peace lies with all the parties and
the people of Guinea-Bissau and is concerned that
renewed political unrest may be harmful to the
consolidation of peace and to the commitment of
donors to support the reconstruction of Guinea-
Bissau.

"In this connection, the Security Council
underlines the importance of an energetic
continuation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process and the need for an

urgent and accurate census of all military forces.
It recalls the statement of its President of 23
March 2000 (S/PRST/2000/10), and underlines
that timely funding for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration is a critical
factor to the successful implementation of the
peace process in Guinea-Bissau. The Council
commends the support provided by the Bretton
Woods institutions to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process in
Guinea-Bissau, and stresses the importance of
integrated and the coordinated support of Member
States for these activities.

"The Security Council recalls the statement
of its President of 29 December 1998
(S/PRST/l998/38), and recognizes that the
challenges of the post-conflict situation in
Guinea-Bissau require an integrated and
consolidated approach by all actors to support the
Government of Guinea-Bissau, including the
United Nations system, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, as well as bilateral
donors. In this regard, the Council once again
underlines the importance of ensuring a smooth
transition from conflict management to post-
conflict peace-building and reconstruction, which
can be greatly enhanced through adequate
coordination of the efforts of all. The Council
stresses the special position of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS) in this regard.

"The Security Council recognizes and
commends the important role played by
UNOGBIS towards helping consolidate peace,
democracy and the rule of law, including the
strengthening of democratic institutions, and
expresses its appreciation for the activities of
UNOGBIS. In order to optimize the efforts of
UNOGBIS, some degree of flexibility on the part
of donors and financial institutions is required
concerning issues such as debt relief, trade
policies and internal budget constraints.

"The Security Council reiterates that
economic rehabilitation and reconstruction
constitutes one of the major tasks facing Guinea-
Bissau as it emerges from conflict and that
significant international assistance is
indispensable in promoting sustainable
development there. The Council underlines that

an integrated and coordinated approach

is

required for Guinea-Bissau combining sustainable
post-conflict peace-building and economic and
the

development issues.

"The Security Council calls upon Member
States to provide generous support at the next
round-table scheduled for February 2001 in
Geneva.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
relevance of the regional dimension. It welcomes
the initiatives the President of Guinea-Bissau and
the President of Senegal have taken towards
stabilization of their common border region. The
Council encourages both Governments to explore
further possibilities to achieve peace and stability
along the regional borders. It commends the
Economic Community of West African States and
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
for their continuing contributions towards the
return of peace and democracy in Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to keep the situation in Guinea-Bissau
under regular review and to coordinate with all
actors in the post-conflict peace-building
process."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2000/37.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 5.10p.m.
