Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zannier for his briefing to the Security
Council today. We wish to convey our support to the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for the work it has done in Kosovo
over the years. We also welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and we thank
him for his statement. We also welcome Mr. Hoxhaj.

South Africa remains convinced that resolution
1244 (1999) continues to be the legal basis for the
resolution of this crisis, and that it remains in force as
mandated by the Council.

My delegation welcomes the report that direct
dialogue, as mandated by the General Assembly and
facilitated by the European Union, has started between
Pristina and Belgrade, a process we fully support. We
have noted that the meetings to date have focused on
critical matters aimed at improving the lives of the
people of Serbia and Kosovo. We welcome the fact that
this process has taken place in a positive and
constructive atmosphere. My delegation encourages the
parties to continue their dialogue in that atmosphere,
aimed at finding lasting solutions.

Moreover, we believe that this regular direct
contact between the parties is an important confidence-
building measure that will hopefully help the parties to
address more difficult matters. Sustainable peace,
stability and development in the region will be served
by reconciliation between Belgrade and Pristina. We
therefore encourage the parties to continue with this
process of dialogue in good faith and to exert all efforts
to achieve agreement in the spirit of compromise. We
have noted that the Secretary-General has remarked on
the cooperation between the European Union and the
United Nations on this matter. We agree with his
assessment that continued reporting to the Security
Council on the process of dialogue is essential.

On reconciliation, we are pleased with the
continued progress made in the Working Group on
Missing Persons, chaired by the International
Committee of the Red Cross. We encourage the parties
to continue with those efforts. However, we are
concerned by the lack of funding for the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission, which is
tasked with the reconstruction and preservation of
religious and cultural heritage sites. The work of the
Commission is an important factor in reconciliation
efforts. Its work should continue beyond 2011.

We welcome the slight improvement in the
situation in northern Kosovo, which is calm but tense.
However, that improvement will not be served by the
repeated efforts of Pristina to deploy Kosovo Police
units without consultation with local communities,
which have been construed as methods of intimidation.
It is important that all sides consider their actions and
focus their efforts on maintaining and building
conditions for dialogue and reconciliation.

During the Council's debate on this issue in
February (see S/PV.6483), we stated that the limited
progress on reconciliation between the communities
could be undone by the allegations of organ smuggling
against several leading Kosovo personalities, as
reflected in the so-called Marty report adopted by the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. It is
important that a credible, thorough, impartial and
independent inquiry into these allegations be
conducted as quickly as possible. It is also essential
that such and investigation have the ability to conduct
investigations outside of Kosovo and have a strong
Witness protection programme.

In this regard, we have noted the statement by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo that it
has the capacity, expertise and jurisdiction to handle
the investigation and that it has assumed responsibility
for it. Equally, we have noted the request by Serbia that
the Security Council mandate an ad hoc mechanism
under its authority to conduct this investigation. South
Africa has taken note of the concept paper circulated
by the Serbian Government in this regard
(S/2011/256), and we will continue to study it
carefully.

