Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to congratulate all
the members of the Security Council at the start of
the new year 2018, with the hope that it will bring us
good health, prosperity and success in our endeavours.
In particular, we congratulate Kazakhstan, through
Ambassador Umarov, on assuming the presidency of
the Council for this January and for the dynamic way in
which he has set out to take up the work of the Council.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is very
honoured to be seated for the first time in the Security
Council Chamber, and I would like to sincerely thank
all the States Members of the United Nations for the
trust they have shown in our country. In particular, we
would like to express our gratitude to all the members
of the Security Council, both the current members and
those who have just left the Council - namely, Japan,
Senegal, Egypt, Ukraine, Italy and Uruguay - for
the valuable support they have given us over the past
few months. I extend this expression of gratitude to all
the members of the Department of Political Affairs of
the United Nations Secretariat, and in particular those
responsible for Security Council affairs, for all the
support that has been extended to us.

The situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran,
which is before us today, is due to the demonstrations
that have taken place in several cities of the country.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
recognizes the right of citizens to demonstrate, as
has been recognized by the Iranian judiciary. The
demonstrations must be peaceful expressions of the
people and must be regulated by law in terms of how
they are convened, how they unfold and how they are
brought to a conclusion, while also respecting the rights
of people who do not support them.

Although the human rights situation in Iran is on the
agenda of the Security Council, it does not in principle
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
Human rights issues must be addressed and discussed
in the competent forums set up by the United Nations
for that purpose, namely, the Human Rights Council
and the Third Committee of the General Assembly, and
they have been, and continue to be, taken up in those
bodies, and always with due respect for the principle of
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States, as set
forth in the United Nations Charter.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is convinced
that any dispute must be resolved through an ongoing
search for a peaceful solution through consultation
and dialogue, always in conformity with the principles
of international law and in accordance with absolute
respect for human rights. Equatorial Guinea therefore
believes that frank and inclusive dialogue is the only
way to resolve the situation in Iran and that, in that
regard, the Iranians themselves must be able to find
solutions to their problems as brothers by making use
of their legitimate democratically elected institutions,
with scrupulous respect for the rule of law.

Finally, we are grateful for the briefing by
Mr. Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, who has given us updated information on
how the situation of the demonstrations in the Islamic
Republic of Iran is evolving, and we are happy to
hear that those demonstrations are calming down. We
therefore express the desire for a way for intra-Iranian
dialogue to be opened up to internally resolve the
current situation in the country.

