Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I should like
to start by thanking Mr. Jan Kubis for having presented
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan and the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the
country (S/2013/350). We thank also Ambassador Tanin
for his statement.

In this second review of the situation in
Afghanistan for the current year, we note in the report
of the Secretary-General that the country remains in
the grip of violence and instability, notwithstanding
the fact that some progress has been noted. The
security situation remains of concern, as reflected in
the increased number of attacks against national and
international institutions in recent weeks; the latest,
on 18 June, targeted a Shiite deputy during the course
of an official ceremony marking the last phase of the
transfer of responsibility for security in the country to
Afghan forces.

Such attacks have resulted in many casualties
among the civilian population, including many children
recruited primarily to carry out attacks. The attacks
represent serious violations of the rights of children,
which Togo has unremittingly condemned, as it did
on 17 June during our debate on the plight of children
caught up in armed conflict (see S/PV.6980).

We commend the special country team for its
support for the Afghan Government in the context of
the implementation of the action plan for the prevention
of underage recruitment. However, that plan cannot be
implemented by just one party. It must also involve the
Taliban and other groups affiliated with Al-Qaida.

We also appreciate the efforts being made to
strengthen the protection of women. Discussions in
Parliament must be speeded up so that the amendments
aimed at strengthening provisions on women's rights
can be adopted. The role of UNESCO, which is working
tirelessly for the education of women and girls, must be

strengthened in that regard.

The combat against drug trafficking remains a
major challenge for the Afghan authorities inasmuch
as there has been an increase in poppy cultivation for
the third consecutive year. Regrettably, the Ministry of
Counter-Narcotics and the United Nations have noted
that there is a close relationship between insecurity,
lack of support for agriculture and poppy cultivation.
Nonetheless, we congratulate the Afghan Government
on the initiatives it has taken to combat the scourge
of narcotics in several provinces, which have made
it possible to eradicate more than 5,000 hectares of

poppies.

It goes without saying that drug trafficking finances
terrorism and fuels conflict. We therefore encourage
the United Nations to continue its efforts to finalize,
within the set time frame, a road map for the promotion
of more effective action on money laundering.

Afghanistan has started a political transition that
will culminate in the general elections in 2014. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report, the success of
this political transition will depend on the legitimacy
of those who will be taking the reins of power. Here it
is important that all Afghan parties undertake to use
compromise solutions and to reach an understanding
on a consultative mechanism for the appointment of
the members of the electoral bodies, in particular the
Chair of the Independent Election Commission. We
appreciate the continued support of the United Nations
Development Programme, UNAMA, the media and
civil society in that respect.

On the question of national dialogue, we hope that
the opening on June 18 last of a Taliban office in Doha
will give impetus to the national dialogue and the peace
process with a view to bringing about the stabilization
of the country.

However, Afghanistan will experience real stability
only if the States of the region and the international
community as a whole are willing to make sacrifices to
help it in its quest for peace and the exercise of its full
sovereignty. The support of UNAMA is vital in that
respect, and it is therefore key to provide it with the
appropriate resources.

To conclude, I reiterate the gratitude of my country
to the United Nations, to UNAMA and all of its staff,
and to United Nations funds and programmes for

their praiseworthy efforts to ensure a better future for
Afghanistan.

