Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation first wishes to thank you, Sir, for taking the
initiative of convening this open meeting on Somalia,
which comes just a few days after the meeting on the
Ethiopian-Eritrean conflict. That initiative was a most
eloquent demonstration of the interest that the Council,
through your presidency, attaches to the peaceful
resolution of conflicts in Africa. My delegation also
wishes to express its appreciation to the Secretary-
General for the wealth of detail and highly useful
contents of his latest report on the situation in Somalia.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Winston
Tubman as the Secretary-General's Representative for
Somalia, and we assure him of our cooperation. We
would also like to welcome the presence of Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia, and to thank him for his informative report
during our closed meeting.

The grave crisis affecting Somalia for over a
decade remains a matter of great concern. The way has
been prepared for national reconciliation. The Arta
peace process of 2000, which fostered reconciliation
among part of the Somali society and gave rise to the
establishment of transitional institutions, gives reason
for hope in this regard. My delegation believes that the
process, recognized by the international community as
the only viable foundation for a lasting and global
solution to the crisis, must be fully carried out.

In this regard, we consider it urgent and
imperative that all parties to the conflict, political
groups and factions be part of the current process. That
is one of the sine qua non conditions for a lasting
restoration of peace. National reconciliation and the
restoration of confidence cannot be achieved without
the effective participation of all socio-political
sensibilities in the country.

One welcomes the decision of the 9th Summit of
the lntergovernmental Authority on Development
(lGAD) to hold a reconciliation conference to include
the participation of all Somali political actors, in
Nairobi in April. It is to be hoped that all those who
have influence over the various actors use it to ensure
their effective participation.

There is no doubt that the results achieved are
derisory compared to the suffering endured by the
Somali population since 1991. Indeed, numerous
challenges are yet to be addressed, among them the
humanitarian and security problems. That is why it is
essential to reinforce the arms embargo in order put an
end to their proliferation. A demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration programme must be
implemented as well.

With regard to humanitarian concerns, my
delegation is concerned at the grave situation of food
shortages and appeals to the international community
to mobilize resources to alleviate the suffering of the
population.

It is understood that it is first and foremost up to
the Somalis themselves to demonstrate their wisdom by
finally putting an end to the fratricidal conflict, which
has gone on too long. However, it is also true that the
international community can provide the impetus and
continue the efforts made in this country since 1992.
For this reason, my delegation continues to believe that
the United Nations has a role in the recovery of
Somalia, taking into account, needless to say, the
security of its personnel. My delegation believes that in
the current international context, the implementation of
a peace-building mission in Somalia is indispensable.

Finally, my delegation is favourable to the idea of
creating a committee of friends of the Secretary-
General for Somalia.

