Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
welcome the presence among us of the Spanish
presidency and the Secretary-General and to convey
my delegation's gratitude for the detailed briefing on
the work carried out by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq, Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello. We have listened attentively to the briefings
made on the various aspects of the United Nations
participation in the reconstruction of Iraq and on the
general situation in the country.

The international community has much to
contribute to Iraq's development, without, however,
losing sight of the responsibility and the primordial
right of the country's people in the reconstruction of its
political future and the control of its territory and
natural resources. For that reason, my delegation fully
concurs with the statement by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on the need for
Iraq to recover its sovereignty as early as possible, on
the basis of a clear and specific timetable.

We believe that it is essential to instil a sense of
urgency for laying the foundation for a system of free,
democratic and representative Government in Iraq that
ensures equal opportunity among its citizens,
regardless of race, religion, sex or political beliefs; the
establishment of a new economic model that ensures
development, based on private initiative; an
independent, autonomous and competent judicial
system; and a legal regime ensuring the broadest
freedom of expression, among other important aspects.

We have taken due note of the establishment of
the Governing Council of Iraq and of the statement
made before the Council by Mr. Pachachi. We believe
that the establishment of the Governing Council in Iraq
is a step that should lead to the full restoration of
national sovereignty to the Iraqi people. We therefore
welcome the appointment of that new executive body,
which, although it has not received international
recognition, may serve as a tool for involving Iraqi
society in the responsibilities of Government and
represent a forum for political understanding among
the various sensibilities existing in the country. In that
regard, we would like to see growing levels of
participation in the process of national reconstruction.
We particularly welcome the participation of women in
the Governing Council; it is a clear sign of the new
space opening up for women to participate in the
modern Iraq of the twenty-first century.

We believe that a working group should be
established as soon as possible to draft the new
constitution. At the same time, it will be necessary to
make the preparations to draw up an electoral roll so
that the Iraqi people will be able to adopt, through a
referendum, their new constitution and subsequently to
elect the new national authorities.

My delegation is very concerned about the
humanitarian and security situation of the Iraqi people:
the ongoing lack of basic services, such as the
provision of electricity and fuel; the sense of insecurity
seen in the streets; and the violent acts by sectors that
still do not understand that the political situation in that
country has changed. Therefore, we would like to
emphasize this point, as well as the need for in-depth
restructuring of the national production system and
other pressing challenges that will require immediate
measures and time for their results to be seen.

The dramatic drop in national income is today
evident in that the population now receives one third of
the income it did a little more than a decade ago.
Furthermore, almost 80 per cent of the population lives
in poverty. For those reasons, the need to change the
inefficient system of production is clear. We thus
support the efforts being made in collaboration with the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the
United Nations Development Programme.

The human rights violations committed by the
past regime are a painful burden that must be
addressed. We appreciate and support the work of
United Nations in the field. The extensive and well
documented list of human rights violations does not
end with the 290,000 forced disappearances and the
growing number of mass graves that have begun to
emerge. Perhaps that is only the beginning. Those and
other situations will require a long investigative
process in the framework of the administration of
justice in Iraq.

Despite that, the new Iraqi political authorities
must be the ones to decide how to approach those and
other painful facts of the recent past. Responsibility for
the crimes committed by the previous regime must be
established, hopefully soon, within the framework of
due process, effectively and on the basis of
independent judgement.

To that end, we believe that, as part of its
activities in the field, United Nations support for the
reform and proper administration of the judicial system
will be a priority, along with support for the
establishment of national courts to promote and enforce
human rights. We note with satisfaction that the first
measures have already been adopted in that regard.

The matter of displaced persons under the past
regime, together with that of refugees, is particularly
complex. In that regard, it is necessary to develop clear
and timely policies in order to avoid future conflicts.
Here, the United Nations can make a valuable
contribution based on its broad experience.
Regarding the oil-for-food programme, which by
resolution 1483 (2003) was extended until 21
November 2003, after hearing the briefing, I think that
we must pay tribute once again to the Secretariat for
the work it is doing, which has made it possible to
avoid a major humanitarian disaster by providing the
necessary assistance. We also hail the work of United
Nations bodies to ensure the orderly and gradual
transfer of programme responsibilities to the Coalition
Provision Authorities.

Finally, almost daily the media are reporting
increasingly well organized incursions by armed
groups, which together with acts of sabotage and
vandalism are undermining the work of normalizing
national life in Iraq.

The stabilization process in Iraq is not taking
place with the speed that some perhaps anticipated
when resolution 1483 (2003) was adopted. It will thus
be necessary to continue with determination and
patience, always with the goal of contributing to
stabilizing and rebuilding Iraq, and even more
important, of striving to effectively enhance the well-
being of its suffering people and to help it gain its
aspirations to greater freedom and greater social and
economic progress.

