Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the pleasure to speak today in the Security Council on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

Let me start by expressing the Movement's
appreciation to the Council presidency of the Republic
of Korea for organizing this debate and to Minister Kim
Sung-hwan for his presence and for presiding over this
meeting earlier. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Director for International Law and Cooperation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
briefings to the Council today.

Current world events indicate that civilians are still
suffering in massive numbers around the globe. Despite
all the efforts at the international level for the protection
of civilians and the measures taken by the Security
Council and relevant humanitarian institutions, it
is regrettable that civilians still account for the vast
majority of casualties in armed conflict, and, as the
report of the Secretary-General points out, the situation
vis-a-vis the protection of civilians remains dreadful.
The situation endured by civilians in many of today's
conflicts therefore requires our particular attention and
action. It seems that the measures adopted so far fall
short of addressing the wider implications of attacks
against civilians and their effects on international peace
and security, as well as their humanitarian impacts.

The reports of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians, in particular the latest report
contained in document S/2012/376, issued in May
2012, highlight the ongoing and emerging concerns
regarding the situation. They include the proliferation
and fragmentation of non-State armed groups, the
displacement of civilians within and across borders,
the continued violence and hardships that women and
children face during armed conflict, and the continued
existence of a culture of impunity. The reports have
contributed to the advancement of the relevant debates
through the identification of five core challenges:
enhancing compliance by parties to conflict with
international law; enhancing compliance by non-State
armed groups; enhancing protection by United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions; improving
humanitarian access; and enhancing accountability for
violations. The reports of the Secretary-General take
stock of both the encouraging developments and the
ongoing concerns and challenges affecting civilians in
contemporary armed conflicts.

In that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement believes
that due priority should continue to be given to the
promotion of knowledge of, respect for and observance
by States of their obligations assumed under the Charter
of the United Nations, international law, including
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, in particular their obligations under
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977
Protocols.

We call upon all parties to armed conflicts to
redouble their efforts to comply with their legal
obligations by, inter alia, prohibiting the targeting of
civilianpopulations and civilian property and redoubling
their efforts to comply with their responsibilities to
ensure general protection against dangers arising from
military operations to civilian installations, hospitals
and relief materials and the means to transport and
distribute such relief materials.

The Movement reiterates its condemnation of
the increasing attacks on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel. It urges the Governments of
States Members of the United Nations to ensure respect
for the protection of the personnel of humanitarian
organizations, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of international law. In the meantime,
we reaffirm that humanitarian assistance personnel
should respect international humanitarian law and the
laws of the countries where they operate, the guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance set out in the
annex to General Assembly resolution 46/182, and
non-interference in the cultural, religious and other
values of the population in the countries where they are
active.

Furthermore,theNon-AlignedMovementemphasizes
that respect for the principles of the sovereign equality,
political independence and territorial integrity of all
States and of non-intervention must be upheld. The
consent of the host country is imperative to granting
access to its territory for humanitarian assistance
operations and for the continued work of their personnel
at all times.

United Nations peacekeeping missions constitute
one of the most significant means available to the
United Nations to protect civilians in situations of
armed conflict. Since 1999, the Security Council has
tasked United Nations peacekeeping missions with
protection mandates. Such protection mandates include
establishing effective early-warning mechanisms,
ensuring the provision of adequate resources to monitor,
prevent and respond to incidents, and supporting the
efforts of the host country's authorities to implement
their responsibility to protect civilians. In addition,
United Nations missions assist in creating protective
environments by supporting the establishment of
effective rule oflaw and security institutions.
The Non-Aligned Movement acknowledges that the
protection of civilians is currently mandated in a number
of United Nations peacekeeping missions. In that
context, it stresses that such peacekeeping operations,
in particular those with protection of civilian mandates,
should be guided by the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and should not be used as a means for
regime change or military intervention. The Movement
underlines the fact that the protection of civilians is
the primary responsibility of the host country and,
accordingly, emphasizes that relevant peacekeeping
missions with such a mandate should conduct their
tasks without prejudice to the primary responsibility of
the host Government to protect civilians.

United Nations efforts take place in support of and
not as a substitute for those of the national authorities.
We stress that the successful implementation of
tasks relating to the protection of civilians requires
integrated efforts at all levels and a holistic approach
that encompasses the provision of timely and adequate
resources, logistical support and the necessary
training, as well as clearly defined and achievable
mandates. In that regard, we again acknowledge the
importance of peacekeeping operations supporting and
building synergies and of their coordination with host
Governments, including at the local level, in protecting
the civilian population.

The development of strategies for the protection
of civilians in peacekeeping missions where it is
mandated is significant. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations should continue to discuss
the best ways to overcome the challenges that remain.
Those challenges include the operationalization of such
strategies in action on the ground, addressing the gap in
the resources needed to carry out that complex mandate
task and the legal aspects of categorizing civilians in
combat situations in accordance with international law.

Allow me to conclude by expressing the hope
that this open debate will provide an opportunity to
assess the ways and means to provide better protection
to civilians in armed conflict. We need to identify
not only the positive developments to date but the
challenges ahead. Here, I would like to reiterate
the Non-Aligned Movement's firm belief in the
importance of the protection of civilians in conflict
situations, in establishing accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law and in putting an end
to impunity.

