Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Jeffrey Feltman and Alexander
Hug for their briefings. I would also like to thank
Malaysia for having convened this meeting of the
Security Council involving the application of resolution
2202 (2015), in which we made a commitment to closely
follow up the situation in that area.

Unfortunately, in the past few days we have
seen events that have made this meeting necessary.
We have listened to the briefers talk about a serious
worsening of the situation. I believe that everyone here
agrees that the Minsk agreements are the only tool we
have. Promoted by France and Germany, they were
accepted by the parties and endorsed by the Security
Council. Consequently, we must give them our full
and unconditional support. However, during the past
weeks, there have been major violations, and we have
listened to very detailed explanations of the situation in
Marinka. In the end, what is happening?

What is happening is that those who must face
the consequences are always the civilian population.
The figures speak for themselves. We have heard the
figures of 1.3 million displaced persons, of 600,000
newly displaced in a relatively short period of time.
This occurred in a country, Ukraine, that previously
was not on the list of the internally displaced persons
but now unfortunately figures on the list of the top ten.
It is a tragic situation in Donbas, and there are major
difficulties in humanitarian access for both personnel
and supplies. The humanitarian response of the
international community has been insufficient.

Accordingly, Spain calls anew for an immediate
ceasefire and for the subsequent and also immediate
withdrawal of heavy weapons. We call upon Russia
to exercise all of its influence and to require from the
rebel groups the immediate and strict implementation
of what has been agreed, thus complying also with
its obligation as a signatory to the Minsk agreements.
We also call on Ukraine to continue to move forward
in complying with the commitments undertaken in
Minsk, including the non-military components of the
agreement. I trust that at the next meeting, on 10 June,
in the Normandy format, we will have seen progress
and be able to say that the Security Council meeting
today was useful in reaching that goal.

Like the Ambassador of New Zealand, I would also
like to refer to the disturbing situation regarding respect
for human rights and the serious violations that we have
seen. I trust that there will be no situation ofimpunity,
as has been the case in other parts of the globe.

With respect to the OSCE, I will make two brief
comments. Spain is concerned by the difficulties that
the OSCE Mission is encountering in complying with
its obligations, and we would like it to share, without
delay, the information that has been requested. Spain
also supports the extension of the OSCE mandate.
Hopefully, it will enjoy access to an area somewhat
larger than the 1 per cent to which the Ambassador of
Lithuania referred.

Lastly, any lasting and sustainable solution
necessarily involves respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine.

