The President: In accordance with Article 11 of
the Statute of the International Court of Justice, the
Security Council will now proceed to hold this sixth
meeting to elect a member of the International Court
of Justice by further ballot for the one seat that remains
to be filled.

May I take it that the Council is now ready to
proceed with the election of the one remaining member
of the International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

The Council will now proceed to a new ballot. I
request the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot
papers.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gombo
(Chad) and Mr. Cabezas (Chile) acted as tellers.

The President: Members of the Council should
place an "X" in the box next to the name of the one
candidate for whom they wish to vote. I remind members
of the Council that only those candidates whose names
appear on the ballot papers are eligible for election.
Ballots containing votes for more than one candidate
will be considered invalid.

***


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

***


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members
that, in accordance with the established practice, the
ballots will not be counted until it has been verified
that the ballot papers in the General Assembly have
also been collected. The Council will remain in session
pending the receipt of that information.

* >x< *

The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15

Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Ms. Susana Ruiz Cerutti 9
Mr. Patrick Lipton Robinson 6

Accordingly, Ms. Susana Ruiz Cerutti has received
the required majority of votes in the Security Council.
I have communicated the result of the voting to the
President of the General Assembly in writing.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received from the President of the General Assembly
the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
44th plenary meeting of the General Assembly, held
today for the purpose of electing the one remaining
seat of the five members of the International Court
of Justice, the following candidate obtained an
absolute majority of votes in the General Assembly:
Mr. Patrick Lipton Robinson."

Accordingly, no candidate has received the required
absolute majority of votes both in the Council and in
the General Assembly.

As no candidate has received the required absolute
majority of votes in both the Council and the General
Assembly, in accordance with Article 11 of the Statute
of the Court, the Council will proceed to hold a seventh
meeting to elect one candidate by further ballot for the
one seat remaining to be filled.

Accordingly, I shall adjourn this meeting of the
Security Council and I shall immediately call to order
the seventh meeting of the Security Council to elect one
candidate by further ballot, after a brief recess to allow
for the preparation of the new ballots.

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

