Mr. Erler (Germany): First, allow me to extend, on
behalf of Germany, my most sincere condolences to the
family, friends and colleagues of Ambassador Churkin
of the Russian Federation.

We are grateful to the Ukrainian presidency
for convening today's debate. To politicians of my
generation, the term "conflicts in Europe" is historically
charged. After all, the United Nations was founded as
a reaction to the Second World War, which started with
Germany's aggression against its neighbours in Europe.

The hopes the United Nations stood for were initially
not fulfilled in Europe. During the Cold War, Europe
was divided and the Security Council was paralysed
more often than not, when numerous conflicts persisted
all over the world. However, the faultlines in Europe
were frozen. But paradoxically, at the very moment the
Cold War ended, conflict returned to Europe, with wars
breaking out over the disintegration of Yugoslavia and
the Soviet Union.

Our initial reactions were too slow. We had to
relearn how to cope with refugee crises, humanitarian
challenges, war crimes, ethnic hatred and shifting lines
of conflict. In the Western Balkans, we eventually
began to achieve success, thanks to the coordinated
efforts of the international community, including the
European Union (EU), the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), NATO and, of
course, the United Nations, with its Security Council,
all working together. The region is now heading
towards a better future. And the United Nations and
regional organizations now have a much better toolbox
for dealing with crises of the kind.

However, in other parts of Europe, too many
conflicts persist: Ukraine, Georgia, Moldova and
NagornO Karabakh, and it is there that the United
Nations and the OSCE must be at the forefront of
conflict resolution.

Germany took on the chairmanship of the OSCE
in 2016, with a special focus on conflict resolution.
We sought to strengthen existing conflict-resolution
formats, to contribute to confidence-building and to
improve the lives of populations affected by conflict.
As a current member of the OSCE Troika, we will
continue to give our full support to the Austrian OSCE
chairmanship. And after one year at the helm of the
biggest regional arrangement under Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter, I can confirm - if proof
was needed - that the OSCE is particularly well
suited to support conflict resolution in Europe. But our
experience is also that we need to continue to develop
the OSCE's capacities throughout the entire conflict
cycle, granting the OSCE international legal status
and enabling it to fulfil its potential. We also need to
continue to deepen cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations.

The year 2014 accorded the term "conflicts in
Europe" a new quality, calling into question the
founding principles of the United Nations, in particular
the prohibition of the use of force against the territorial
integrity of States Members of the United Nations.
The territorial integrity of Ukraine is being violated,
most strikingly by the illegal annexation of Crimea.
In eastern Ukraine, numerous ceasefire violations
continue to take place on a daily basis. The Special
Monitoring Mission of the OSCE is on the ground,
but it faces many obstacles. It is essential that the
Mission enjoy full freedom of movement throughout its
mandated area of operation.

Last Saturday, within the framework of the Munich
Security Conference and together with our French,
Russian and Ukrainian friends and colleagues, we
met again in the Normandy format to discuss how
to advance the Minsk agenda. France and Germany
continue to be fully committed to their diplomatic
efforts and to supporting the process in the framework
of the Normandy format.

Despite all difficulties, the Minsk agreements
provide the only road map for a peaceful resolution
of the conflict. The ultimate aim is to reinstate
Ukraine's territorial integrity and return control of its
external borders to it, with full respect for the rights of
minorities. All sides need to adhere to the agreements,
and, most importantly, all sides have to commit to
military de-escalation.

Other conflicts in Europe - in Georgia, in Moldova
and Nagorno Karabakh - also need to be solved on
the basis of international law and OSCE commitments.
Especially in Georgia and Nagorno Karabakh, these
conflicts are not frozen but continue to destroy lives,
threaten our security and deny the affected populations
the benefits of peaceful development.

In particular, we fully respect and support the
undivided sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders.
We also encourage all stakeholders in the Geneva
International Discussions - a genuine effort at
team-playing by the OSCE, the EU and the United
Nations - to make concessions and raise the level of
trust through confidence-building measures. We must
not relent in our efforts to solve those crises. Germany
stands ready to contribute to this end.

I would like to conclude with three points. First,
when it comes to the hard and grinding work of
conflict prevention, stabilization and post-conflict
reconstruction, close cooperation of all actors, among
them the United Nations and regional organizations,
is of the essence. The OSCE, with its expertise and
credibility, is currently at the forefront of efforts to
resolve conflicts in Europe. Secondly, the Security
Council needs to work in the spirit of cooperation and
unity that is a prerequisite for its effective action and
that alone justifies the trust the United Nations Charter
places in it. Thirdly, we need to return to the founding
principles of the United Nations. Now more than ever,
in Europe and worldwide, we need to preserve and
strengthen the multilateral, rules-based international
order that the United Nations epitomizes. Germany will
continue to work tirelessly for these very values.

