The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
February, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Heraldo Munoz, Permanent Representative of Chile to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of January 2004. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Mufioz
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Cote d'Ivoire

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Cote d'Ivoire submitted
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1514
(2003) of 13 November 2003 (S/2004/3)

The President (spoke in Chinese): I Should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Cote d'Ivoire, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-Bi
(cote d'Ivoire), took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Cote d'Ivoire, document S/2004/3.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2004/82, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the Council's prior
consultations.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Brazil, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Pakistan, Philippines, Romania,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America


The President (spoke in Chinese): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1527 (2004).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 11.20 am.

