Mr. Edghill (Trinidad and Tobago): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and to wish you every
success during your tenure. The delegation of Trinidad
and Tobago would like to express its appreciation for
the Security Council's decision to hold this open debate
in a format that affords Member States the opportunity
to express their views on this important issue of
international law.

Since the reintroduction in 1989 by the former
President of Trinidad and Tobago of the item on the
establishment of an international criminal court on the
agenda of the United Nations, my country has
remained firmly committed to the International
Criminal Court and to the Rome Statute. We continue
to uphold the objectives of the Statute and are
concerned by any measure that would erode its
integrity. We also remain committed to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
continue to attach importance to international peace
and to the security of United Nations operations.

The international community, through a collective
effort over several years of painstaking negotiations,
created the International Criminal Court as an
independent, impartial and effective tool to bring to
justice the perpetrators of crimes that shock the
conscience of mankind: crimes of genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity.

The Court is also intended as an avenue of justice
for the victims of those crimes and for their families.
The clear message sent by the international community
upon the adoption of the Rome Statute was that
impunity for such horrendous crimes will no longer be
tolerated.

As a State Party to the Rome Statute, Trinidad
and Tobago views with concern the proposal to renew
resolution 1422 (2002) for a further period of 12
months, for various reasons. First, the resolution itself
is inconsistent with the provisions of the Rome Statute
since, by granting blanket immunity from prosecution
before the Court to a defined category of personnel of
non-States parties participating in United Nations-
authorized missions, it contradicts the true intent of
article 16 of the Rome Statute. It is not the purpose of
article 16 to grant immunity from prosecution by the
Court to any category of persons, including personnel
of non-States Parties. It was intended to be applied on a
case-by-case basis in Chapter VII situations. Since
article 16 was intended to be invoked on a short-term
basis only, any continuous renewal on an annual basis,
without establishing the necessary Chapter VII
situation contemplated by the drafters of the Statute,
would be incompatible with the objective of the
Statute: to bring to trial all persons accused of the
crimes within its jurisdiction.

Secondly, the Rome Statute is a package that
brings together the diverse interests and concerns of
Member States. It contains a comprehensive regime of
safeguards aimed at ensuring that prosecutions are fair
and warranted and are not politically motivated. The
very principle of complementarity obliges the Court to
defer to national prosecutions and places the primary
responsibility upon States to prosecute their nationals
responsible for crimes within the jurisdiction of the
Court. The Court will act only in very limited
circumstances and then only after observing the
numerous procedural safeguards in the Statute. In the
light of this, the exemption granted by the Council
through resolution 1422 (2002) to a certain category of
persons would appear to be unnecessary and
unwarranted.

Finally, with respect to the Council's intention, as
expressed in the resolution, to renew the request for
deferral of prosecution under the same conditions every
1 July for a further 12-month term for as long as may
be necessary, we consider its initial adoption - as we
do its proposed renewal at this time - to be contrary
to the United Nations Charter in that the Security
Council did not make then - nor has it made now - a
determination regarding the existence of a threat to the
peace, a breach of the peace or an act of aggression,
which would constitute the basis for invoking Chapter
VII of the Charter, as well as article 16 of the Rome
Statute.

As a small State committed to international law,
Trinidad and Tobago would encourage the members of
the Council in their consideration of the renewal of the
resolution to consider carefully the implications that its
continued application would have for international law
and international relations. We therefore urge Council
members in their deliberations to strive to uphold the
application of international law and the United Nations
Charter and to preserve the letter and the spirit of the
Rome Statute, which is designed and fully equipped to
complement the work of the Council in the pursuit and
preservation of international peace and security.

The International Criminal Court is a new
institution and is in the process of being consolidated.
It is an instrument whose goal is the promotion of
international peace, an objective that is common to all
members of the international community. We consider
that any action that threatens to undermine the integrity
of the Rome Statute at this time should be firmly
resisted. It is our hope that when the Court is fully
operational and when the international community has
been assured of its effectiveness and its independence
and has seen its successes, the Security Council will no
longer find it necessary to renew the resolution.

