Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President, we
welcome your efforts in convening this meeting late on
a Friday afternoon, which means that it is important for
the Council to deliberate on this question.

Angola abstained in the voting on resolution 2303
(2015) for the following reasons.

First, we welcome the active engagement of
the African Union in Burundi and the consent of
the Burundian authorities to the deployment of 200
human rights observers and military experts. We call
for their rapid deployment, for the cooperation of the
Government of Burundi, and for international support
for the attainment of this objective.

Secondly, we deem the coordination and
cooperation with the Burundian Government to be
essential to guaranteeing an engagement in the country
that will result in helping Burundi to return to peace.
Therefore, we are of the view that the establishment of
the United Nations police component in Burundi and its
progressive deployment should be done in consultation
with the Government of Burundi.

Thirdly, the resolution should make a tangible
contribution to urgently needed political dialogue,
which must be pursued fundamentally by strengthening
cooperation among the Government of Burundi, the
mediator, the East African Community facilitator and
the Special Advisers on the Responsibility to Protect
and on the Prevention of Genocide.

Fourthly, during the negotiations, in a joint effort
with other members of the Council, Angola made good-
faith proposals that were aimed at a widely accepted
compromise. We regret that these proposals have not
been sufficiently taken into account. We feel that with
regard to Burundi, the Council must send a clear and
united message. This clarity, unfortunately, has not
seemed to persist or prevail, particularly in connection
with the deployment of the police contingent.

Angola stands ready to continue to engage with
all members of the Council towards the achievement
of peace and security in Burundi and in the region at
large.

