Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for
his comprehensive analysis of the situation in
Afghanistan and the presentation of the report on the
situation in this country (S/2010/463).

It is with heightened attention that we listened to
the presentation of Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan.

Events have taken place in the past few months
which can be considered key in the history of
Afghanistan. The international conference in
Afghanistan in July launched the Kabul process and its
main elements of international assistance to Afghan
authorities in achieving independent control of issues
of security and development and the gradual taking on
of primary responsibilities in these fields.

The parliamentary elections of 18 September
allowed the Afghan people to turn a new page in the
strengthening of democratic governance in their
country. Their conduct alone in such a complex
military-political situation, despite intimidation and
destabilizing actions by extremists, was a test of
solidity of the Afghan Government and security
structures.

At the same time, the military and political
situation in the country remains tense, with a trend
towards deterioration, including in previously calm
northern regions. The report includes disturbing figures
on significant increase of 69 per cent in the number of
security incidents. The terrorist activity of the Taliban
10-55499
and Al-Qaida remains the main source of danger to the
security of Afghanistan and the region as a whole.

There has been a recent increase in the number of
incursions of groups of combatants from northern
Afghanistan into neighbouring countries of Central
Asia. Armed clashes in these countries, including
Tajikistan, are extremely disturbing to States of the
region, including Russia, that share what are in effect
open borders with Afghanistan. We believe that the
Afghan security sector and the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) need to bolster their actions to
counter the spread of instability in northern
Afghanistan and across its borders.

ISAF will in the near future have to resolve
complex issues in close cooperation with its Afghan
partners. Its withdrawal without prejudice to the
stability of Afghanistan and the entire region will be
possible only after multilateral training of the national
armed forces to make them able independently to fight
terrorism, banditism and drug trafficking. A
precondition for the termination of the ISAF mission in
Afghanistan is its fulfilment of the Security Council's
mandate.

A lengthy path remains to be traveled in
Afghanistan to implement the comprehensive strategy
for peace, security, reconstruction and integration. That
will require suppressing the terrorist threat, training
effective, combat-capable Afghan security structures,
suppressing drug trafficking, achieving national
reconciliation, creating effective mechanisms of State
authority, restoring economic potential and developing
democratic institutions. The international presence in
Afghanistan must assist in resolving these issues.

A very pressing issue on the agenda is the
intensification of international efforts to combat the
Afghan drug threat. Drug trafficking, which has fused
with terrorism, has become a threat to peace and
security. It is clear that measures undertaken in this
field are not yielding the expected results. The
alternative crops programme is important, but crime
will always be more profitable than legal trade. It is
immoral to claim that, without drug crops, Afghan
farmers will lose their livelihood. They are merely
being exploited by drug traffickers.

Steps to combat the drug industry in Afghanistan
must be comprehensive in nature and cover the entire
chain, from eradicating drug crops, destroying drug
infrastructure and marking precursors to arresting drug
9

lords and listing them on the Security Council
sanctions lists. We await relevant proposals from the
Government of Afghanistan and from those countries
whose contingents are present in the country, as well as
from the leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.

What is unexplainable in the fight against the
drug threat is the passivity of NATO, which for some
years now has failed to respond to eminently logical
proposals for forging cooperation in this field with the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO),
which is carrying out active counter-narcotics
activities. Indeed, the CSTO has just successfully
concluded the latest phase of the counter-narcotics
Operation Kanal, which was also linked to activities in
stabilizing the situation in southern Kyrgyzstan.

In order to achieve peace and security in the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, we support the
Afghan leadership's policy of national reconciliation,
and the reintegration into Afghan society of those
participants in illegal armed groups who are not tainted
by crimes and have renounced violence, ceased armed
combat, recognized the Constitution of Afghanistan
and broken with Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups.
We believe that former terrorists can be de-listed from
the United Nations sanctions list only on an individual
basis in line with established procedure.

We welcome the increased attention paid to the
development of effective regional cooperation to
promote assistance in solving Afghanistan's problems.
A contribution to these collective efforts is being made
by the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO),
within whose framework an SCO Afghanistan contact
group is active. This was also an item on the agenda of
August's meeting of the Presidents of Russia,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Tajikistan in Sochi. At its
conclusion, a joint declaration backing the Kabul
process and priority programmes in the field of
security, State governance, development of the
economy and infrastructure was adopted. The Russian
Federation will continue to step up its cooperation with
Afghanistan and a broad circle of international partners
for the successful post-conflict restoration of
Afghanistan.

We enable ISAF cargo and personnel to transit to
Afghanistan through Russian territory. We are working
with our partners on additional measures to equip
Afghanistan's army and police. We are expanding our
10

assistance in training personnel for Afghanistan's
security structures. We are contributing to the
reconstruction of the economy and major infrastructure
facilities in Afghanistan. This year, the Russian
Federation wrote off the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan's remaining debt of $891 million. The
total amount of debt forgiven is $12 billion. This is an
absolute record among Afghanistan's donors. We
continue to provide humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan. As part of our regular contribution to the
World Food Programme, we have started supplying
$5 million worth of wheat flour.

