Mr. Steiner: I thank you, Mr. President,
specifically for your warm words. Next week I will
leave Kosovo. When I arrived a year and a half ago,
there was no Government, despite successful general
elections. There were 153 prisoners from the war still
being held in Serbia. In the northern part of Mitrovica,
there was a legal vacuum and turbulence. More
members of minority communities were leaving
Kosovo than were returning. Pristina and Belgrade did
not talk.

Since then, we have put together a multi-ethnic
Government. We brought back the prisoners. Mitrovica
is still not a normal European town, but we installed
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) administration in the northern part,
where there are now regular police patrols. We
reversed the negative trend in returns. And both parties
have said that they are now ready for direct dialogue.

We have moved forward to establish the
framework for future progress. That framework is
embodied in the eight benchmark standards covering
the cornerstones of any functional democratic society.
Council members have seen the Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2003/675), which details Kosovo's
performance against each of the standards.

We have explained and fostered public support
for the standards through television, radio and
roundtable discussions throughout Kosovo. UNMIK's
new Strategy Coordinator will present my successor
with a plan to further operationalize those eight
standards. The European Commission's Tracking
Mechanism affirms that the standards also pave the
road to Europe.

Huge challenges remain. But, with a number of
new developments that I will describe, the groundwork
for Kosovo's future progress has now been laid.

Let us review Kosovo's progress towards the
standards.

First, with regard to functioning democratic
institutions, the Provisional Government and Kosovo's
other Institutions are not perfect, but they are
functioning and they are learning. The Kosovo Serb
members participate in the work of the Assembly.
Eighteen laws of the Assembly have now been put into
force, and we have an orderly process for completing
the transfer of non-reserved responsibilities to the
Government by the end of the year.

At the same time, the Provisional Institutions
continue to push the limits of their competencies. The
Assembly does not always respect the rights of
minorities. We must, of course, ensure compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework.

Regarding the rule of law, we have built a multi-
ethnic judiciary and a police force of 5,407 officers
from scratch. The UNMIK Police cooperate with their
counterparts in Belgrade, Skopje and Tirana. Our
record on crime is already better than many believe.
There were about 500 murders between June and
December of 1999. About 150 victims were Serb. In
2002, the number fell to 68, six of them Serbs. It was
UNMIK that supplied the evidence and witnesses that
convicted the German former head of Kosovo's
electricity company on corruption charges. That
demonstrated to people in Kosovo that when we say
"zero tolerance for corruption", we mean everyone.

Equipped with new technical and legal
instruments to use covert measures, the Kosovo
Organized Crime Bureau has mapped out the structures
of Kosovo's underworld. The judiciary, too, has been
active against organized crime. Notorious criminals
have been convicted and major trials are ongoing.
When a high-profile Kosovo Albanian was indicted by
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
he publicly declared his readiness to go to The Hague
voluntarily.

Without prejudging the outcome, the police are
doing all they can to catch those who perpetrated the
heinous triple murder of a Serb family in Obilic. All
key leaders of Kosovo condemned that crime.

I turn to the economy. Most Kosovans rank that
as their number one concern, and they are right to do
so. Unemployment is running at 57 per cent. But we
have laid the groundwork for a sustainable economy in
the future. The euro provides monetary stability. That
has been a huge success which has allowed us to create
an effective banking system. A billion marks
previously saved under mattresses are now saved as
500 million euro in banks, where they are available for
making loans.

Kosovo has a balanced budget that relies on a
functioning revenue collection service. We have a
modern legal framework in place to protect investment
and foster a market economy with laws on everything
from contracts to bankruptcy. Crucially, we have
launched the privatization process with the tendering of
the first socially owned enterprises.

But what we need now is investor confidence.
That will come only with a functioning society based
on the rule of law. That is what the standards are about.
Regarding multi-ethnicity and returns, to date we
have had over 7,000 returns of displaced persons.
There have been about 1,100 since March of this year.
Yes, that number is still far too small. But the
Framework for Returns, based on a bottom-up
approach, is now in place.

Multi-ethnicity has been gradually improving.
Members of the minority communities represent 15 per
cent of the Kosovo Police Service, which constitutes
positive discrimination. Half of the new officers of the
Police school's most recent graduating class are
Kosovo Serbs. Serbian can be heard in the streets of
Pristina and Prizren. On the night of the Summer
Solstice, hundreds of young people from both sides of
the river in Mitrovica participated in a techno party on
the town's famous bridge.

Yet, a lot more work is required for Kosovo to
become a truly multi-ethnic society. The slowness of
returns and integration remain our most serious
shortcomings. I am therefore delighted to inform the
Council about an open appeal published in Pristina
yesterday in the Albanian, Serbian and English
languages and signed by all non-Serb leaders of
Kosovo. The appeal urges the refugees and displaced
persons in Serbia, Montenegro and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to return to Kosovo
now. It states:

"It is time for you to come home We do
not 'invite' you to come back to your home,
because Kosovo is your home, and you have the
right to live here in peace. Kosovo is your home,
just as it is our home; we want, and work for, you
to come back to live in peace with us as
neighbors, in a spirit of mutual respect. It is truly
time to put the past behind us and to move on.

"We are ready and willing to provide for
your needs in health, public services and
education, on an equal basis with all the other
people of Kosovo. We cannot offer more than
that, but what we are able to offer, we do with
sincerity."

That is exactly the sort of concrete commitment by
leaders that we have worked for to reassure displaced
persons. Kosovo does not belong to Albanians or to
Serbs or to any other ethnic group. Kosovo belongs to
all its peoples. Internalizing that fact is key to
Kosovo's future.

I will speak of centrifugal forces, for despite the
progress we have made, the rhetoric has become more
adversarial. Both sides are pre-positioning themselves
on future status.

In Pristina, Kosovo Albanians try to infringe on
reserved powers, and they continue to push for rapid
independence. Belgrade continues to support parallel
structures with money hidden under car seats, and it
obstructs freedom of movement by refusing to
recognize United Nations number plates for Kosovo.
Some knowingly paint an entirely bleak picture of the
realities in Kosovo, effectively discouraging returns.

Leaders on both sides need to foster confidence.
If leaders are not leading their constituents forward,
they are leading them backward. For our part, we must
stay the course - not despite the criticism coming
from both sides, but because of it.

By keeping our eyes on the road ahead, we have
accomplished many things with regard to Kosovo's
European future. But one standard on which progress
long eluded us was direct dialogue with Belgrade on
practical issues.

Thessaloniki changed that. I had three goals for
the EU-Western Balkans Summit in Thessaloniki: first,
a further step towards the EU; secondly, to bring a
multi-ethnic delegation; and thirdly, to put direct
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade on practical
issues - the seventh benchmark - on the right road.
So what was achieved?

First, in the words of European Commission
President Prodi, integration of the Balkans, including
Kosovo, into the European Union "is now irreversible".
Secondly, my delegation was multi-ethnic. Thirdly,
direct dialogue on practical issues was put on track -
the very dialogue requested by the Security Council
mission after it visited Kosovo last December. Despite
all the rhetoric, the dialogue will now come.

What UNMIK has been doing in Kosovo is
something new, and we are still learning. Bosnia,
Afghanistan and Iraq all demonstrate how difficult it is
to win the peace, to build functioning institutions and
to start up the economy. Kosovo has the added burden
of its unresolved political status. This is now coming
slowly to the fore. No one should be surprised by this.

What is more surprising is how far we have come,
and from how far people have come to help get us to
where we are. Men and women from 119 countries
serve in UNMIK. KFOR, whose contribution in
providing a safe and secure environment is the
essential basis of all our work, itself draws forces from
37 countries. As the Russian contingent is leaving, I
thank them for four years of professional service.

Kosovo is now moving towards the standards that
will define its place in Europe. Who could have
imagined a year and a half ago that the European Union
would say that Kosovo was destined to be part of the
EU? Who would have thought that the President, the
Prime Minister and the Kosovo Serb Interministerial
Coordinator for Returns would have been welcomed
together as part of the UNMIK delegation at an EU
summit?

Who would have thought that the President of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia would invite
President Rugova to be part of an UNMIK delegation
visiting Skopje? Who would have thought that we
would put Pristina on track for direct dialogue with
Belgrade?

Who would have imagined, a year and a half ago,
all the leaders of Kosovo's majority community
formally urging all displaced persons to return to
Kosovo now?

My successor inherits many challenges. He or she
also inherits a team of dedicated and talented people. It
has been a pleasure and a privilege to lead this team in
such a unique United Nations mission, and an honour
to serve the people of Kosovo. The next Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and all the
staff of UNMIK will need the Council's continuing
support. In the meantime, I leave the mission in
Charles Brayshaw's capable hands.

Much remains to be done to complete Kosovo's
transformation into a society in which all its people can
live in security and in dignity. But with the help of
thousands of men and women from all communities in
Kosovo and from most countries in the world, I leave
behind a solid foundation.

From the oppression, humiliation and tragedy of
1999, Kosovo has embarked on the road towards a
liberated, functioning, democratic society. Participation
for all has not yet been achieved. The dream has not
yet been realized, but the groundwork has been laid.

