Mr. Douste-Blazy (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Greece for organizing this meeting
on a subject that has taken on growing importance for
the Security Council recently. I would also like to
underline the presence of the Secretary-General in
order to pay tribute to his efforts in strengthening
cooperation between his institution, the United
Nations, and regional organizations.

As we all know, most of the crises that the
Council takes up have been the focus of increasingly
active involvement by regional organizations both at
the political level and on the ground, with a growing
diversity of modalities. This involvement is, in most
cases, an essential condition for the success of our
action. I am thinking first, as a European, of the
growing affirmation of the European Union as a major
actor in the service of peace, as witnessed by its
commitment in the field in Bosnia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, its active involvement
alongside other actors in the peace efforts in the
Middle East or Darfur, and our support for action
carried out by other regional organizations. I am also
thinking of Africa, where regional and subregional
integration efforts by the countries of the continent
elicit respect and admiration.

Operating under extremely difficult conditions,
the soldiers of the African Union Mission in the
Sudan - to whom I wish to pay tribute - are in the
front line in Darfur. In Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia,
action by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) was decisive in stopping the
fighting. Finally, the political institutions of the
African Union, the Peace and Security Council and the
African Union Commission, are emerging as
indispensable instruments for peace in Africa.
In the light of those developments, I believe that
several lessons can be identified for the Council. The
first relates to the continued development of relations
between the Security Council and regional
organizations as the latter assert themselves as key
actors for peace. It is now common for the Council, in
most of the crises that come before it, to hear the
leaders of the regional organizations involved; close
contacts and operational cooperation are developing at
all levels between the United Nations and those
organizations. That is a very positive development.

The second lesson relates to the complementarity
that develops almost naturally, in the spirit of the
Charter, between Security Council action and that of
regional organizations. The Council needs the specific
expertise of those organizations and their intimate
knowledge of situations and, especially, of people. For
their part, regional actors cannot envision sustainable
and legitimate action without Security Council support
and without the authority and experience of the United
Nations.

Thus, the question is how we can go further and
strengthen that interaction, which is so necessary for
international peace and security. First, I believe that the
Council must continue to encourage efforts towards
regional and subregional integration, which are far
from having achieved the same level of progress in all
parts of the world. To be sure, the impetus for this can
come only from the countries and regions concerned,
but it is in our collective interest to support and assist
their efforts through action by all who can make a
contribution. Here I am thinking of Member States,
organizations - I have already discussed the European
Union role in that regard - and the Secretariat.

In particular, I have in mind the necessary
continuation of regional capacity-building, particularly
in regard to peacekeeping. Through its national
programmes and with the full cooperation of its
European partners, France is fully resolved on that
issue. I am thinking also of the increasingly diverse
and innovative forms of cooperation that have begun in
the field to strengthen our actions mutually: the
European Union-led peacekeeping force in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in support of the
United Nations; and the reinforcement, recently
decided upon by the Council, of United Nations
support to the African Union operation in Darfur.

06-5287}

Beyond that, it seems to me important that we
draw lessons from the growing diversity of
interventions in the field by regional organizations and
the specific skills they have acquired in certain areas:
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), in strengthening the rule of law; the
Organization of American States and the European
Union, in organizing electoral processes, and the
European Union again, in armed forces and police
reform, for example.

Let us encourage the exchange of experience and
expertise on those issues among such organizations,
and with the United Nations; where we can, let us
define best practices and common procedures; and let
us take care to ensure greater synergy and better
coordination among the actors in the increasingly
complex and multidimensional peacekeeping
operations we are mounting.

That last point brings me, finally, to the
Peacebuilding Commission. When the Secretary-
General proposed establishing that body, all States
understood the value of such a forum for enhancing the
effectiveness of international action in post-conflict
situations. Now, our common responsibility as Security
Council members is to do everything possible to ensure
the success of the Commission in the mission that our
heads of State or Government have assigned to it.

I want to emphasize the magnitude of the stakes
for our Council and, beyond that, for the United
Nations, because, in the final analysis, our action will
be judged by our capacity to resolve, in a lasting way,
the crises referred to us. It is precisely in that spirit that
the Commission was established. France therefore
hopes that it will quickly get down to work on specific
situations. My country will offer it every support.

