Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. We support his efforts
and his commitment to arriving at a political settlement
in Syria. I would also like to thank Ms. Rajaa Altalli.

I would like to speak on two points, the first
of which is the Constitutional Committee and
confidence-building measures. There seemed to be
new momentum on the Syrian political track after the
establishment of the Constitutional Committee. There
was hope that after nine years of conflict Syria would
take a first step towards peace. We regret that the
Committee in its second session was unable to reach
an agreement on the agenda. The Syrian Government
appears to have little interest in an inclusive process.
We hope that the parties will seize the opportunity of
the next session of the Constitutional Committee, to be
held in Geneva soon. The degree of good faith of the
Syrian authorities will be evaluated based on its results.

The fact is that the Committee's work can be a first
step in the political process only if the parties are fully
committed to it. We call on States with influence on
the Syrian authorities to bring it to bear. However, the
political process is not limited to the Constitutional
Committee. Belgium considers transitional justice
extremely important. It is the job of the various
stakeholders to arrive at a common understanding
of the facts in a transparent manner and on an equal
footing so as to ensure that reconciliation can take
place. Reconciliation is not an isolated process but the
culmination of a long and arduous path that the parties
will have to walk together, in a process where trust
must be established. Every month the Special Envoy
has reminded us of the importance of establishing those
confidence-building measures. Thousands of Syrians
are still being arrested and arbitrarily detained. We
once again call on Syria to take account of the crucial
importance of this dossier as a symbol of good faith.

Secondly, the reality of the situation on the
ground is bleak. In the north-east, thousands who
were displaced during the Turkish incursion are still
displaced. In the north-west, we are receiving reports
indicating the launch of a new offensive in Idlib this
very morning, after having previously been informed
of an escalation in the violence in early December. We
call on all the parties to establish a national ceasefire
as soon as possible, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). The Government has a special responsibility to
establish a safe, secure, stable and calm environment in
Syria and to guarantee an absence of armed conflict.
That also requires the protection of legal rights and
ensuring that no one is pursued, repressed or forcibly
conscripted into the army.

