The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Tunisia.

The Security Council's preoccupation with the
Great Lakes region is clear; it is attested to by the
many meetings scheduled this month to address the
situation there. I should like to single out in particular
the meeting with the Political Committee ofthe Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement to discuss the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We hope that these
meetings will have practical results that contribute to
reactivating the peace process and fulfilling the
aspirations of all the people to peace, security, stability
and progress.

The Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, which supports
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and provides for the
establishment of conditions conducive to security and
stability for neighbouring countries, remains the best
framework for arriving at a negotiated settlement to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
expect the parties to the Agreement to prove their
commitment to the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

We believe that circumstances are favourable for
giving a new impetus to the peace process. The
international community is called upon to encourage all
the parties concerned and to help them build the pillars
of lasting peace in the region, including by providing
assurances to the parties concerned about their security
and stability, thereby improving the opportunities for
conciliation, solidarity, cooperation and development in
the continent.

We look forward to the earliest possible
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. This
will translate into action the determination of the
international community to shoulder its responsibilities
with regard to the situation in the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo and the region as a whole.

We sense that there is a desire to move towards
peace. We expect the parties concerned to undertake
the practical steps necessary for the realization of that
objective. Tunisia supports and encourages each and
every initiative undertaken by Rwanda or any other
party aimed at dialogue, conciliation and cooperation
in the framework of mutual respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of each State in
the region.

We welcomed President Kagame's meeting last
week with President Joseph Kabila of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We hope that the dialogue will
continue and advance in the interest of the peoples of
Rwanda, of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
ofthe entire region, who yearn for a better tomorrow.

For years, Tunisia has been following
developments in the Great Lakes region. Notably
during its presidency of the Organization of African
Unity in 1994 and 1995, Tunisia contributed to African
efforts to ease tension in the Great Lakes region and to
bring about rapprochement among the States of that
region. President Ben Ali has taken numerous
initiatives to that end. Tunisia has consistently
supported all peace processes on the African continent,
and hopes that they will help strengthen peace,
security, stability, development and cooperation in the
region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on His Excellency Mr. Paul Kagame,
President of the Rwandese Republic, to respond to the
comments that have been made and the questions that
have been raised.

