Mr. Pascoe: I would like to begin by reading out
the statement by the Secretary-General that was
released fairly late last night; some members of the
Council may not have received it at this point. The
statement reads as follows:

"The Secretary-General is alarmed by the
escalation of hostilities in Georgia which have
resulted in large numbers of casualties and
massive destruction in South Ossetia and other
regions of Georgia. The Secretary-General is
particularly concerned about violence spreading
to areas outside the zone of the Georgian-
Ossetian conflict.

"The Secretary-General is profoundly
concerned over mounting tensions in the Abkhaz
zone of conflict, including the bombing of the
Upper Kodori Valley and the ongoing military
build-up along the security zone. In the context of
the announcement by the Abkhaz de facto
authorities of a military operation in the Upper
Kodori Valley which could be dangerously
destabilizing, he calls for the exercise of
maximum restraint by all concerned as well as the
guarantee of the safety and security of the
unarmed United Nations military observers.

"The Secretary-General urges all parties to
immediately end hostilities and to engage,
without delay, in negotiations to achieve a
peaceful settlement. In this regard, the Secretary-
General welcomes international efforts to assist
the parties in resolving the situation. The
Secretary-General believes that for the success of
this endeavour, all armed contingents which are
not authorized by respective agreements on South
Ossetia should leave the zone of conflict. The
Secretary-General urges all parties to respect the
principle of the territorial integrity of States
08-45578
enshrined in the Charter and to refrain from
actions that could undermine efforts to settle the
longstanding conflicts in Georgia. The Secretary-
General also calls for immediate steps to be
undertaken in order to address the humanitarian
cr1s1s.

"The Secretary-General strongly believes
that a lasting solution can only be found by
peaceful means."

Today, what I shall do is give a short briefing on
the general issues that builds on the briefing that
Assistant Secretary-General Mulet gave yesterday in
the Security Council's consultations, and then
Mr. Mulet will brief on the Abkhazia issue. That will
be our division of labour.

As Mr. Mulet noted yesterday, the United Nations
has no first-hand information from the area of the
conflict in South Ossetia and largely relies on media
reports. Since most of the Georgian Internet sites are
blocked, the information therefore comes mostly from
Russian media and other international sources.

Over the past few days, there has been a sharp
escalation of hostilities in Georgia, which has spread to
areas beyond the Georgian-Ossetian conflict.

The exact situation in Tskhinvali and other areas
in South Ossetia remains difficult to ascertain due to a
lack of United Nations or other international presence
on the ground. In the afternoon, Georgian officials
repeated an earlier announcement that Georgian troops
have withdrawn from most of South Ossetia, including
Tskhinvali. The Georgian side denied defeat and said it
had to address a humanitarian catastrophe. According
to news reports, the withdrawal was disputed by
Russian military sources, who said that there are still
Georgian military units and that sporadic fighting
continues. Russian military sources have also said that
there have been no contacts with Georgian military
officials.

The media report ongoing clashes south of
Tskhinvali. The Georgian authorities claimed that the
Russian troops were moving towards Gori in Georgia
proper, and Georgian troops started taking defensive
position around the city. Interlocutors from the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) informed United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) that approximately
2,000 ethnic Georgian internally displaced persons
08-45578

(IDPs) from South Ossetia have arrived in collective
centres near Tbilisi and Gori, and many others are
staying with relatives. The UNHCR expects up to
20,000 IDPs in the final analysis. The UNHCR
believes that 5,000 have crossed into North Ossetia-
Alania.

Today, early in the morning, Russian aircraft
resumed attacks on strategic and military targets
outside the zone of conflict, including a military
airport, which includes a military aircraft repair
factory, and a tank repair factory near Tbilisi, the port
of Poti and targets near Gori. The bombing of the
military airport situated 70 kilometres from Tbilisi has
been confirmed by UNOMIG. Russian military
officials confirmed the loss of two aircraft over Gori.

The United Nations Resident Coordinator has
recommended international staff to evacuate. At this
moment, however, no international staff members have
as yet left Georgia.

And in the past hour the Georgian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs reported that the Russian Embassy in
Tbilisi had been given a note verbale containing the
information that that Georgian forces are participating
in a ceasefire in South Ossetia; it also states that all
Georgian forces have left the zone of conflict, that they
have created a humanitarian corridor to allow the
evacuation of civilians and that they are ready for
immediate talks with the Russian Federation.

