Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): It is indeed a great
pleasure for my delegation to associate itself with
previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of July. We are confident that given your vast
experience and leadership we can be assured of
substantial progress in the work of the Council. Let me
pledge my delegation's full cooperation to you and your
delegation as you discharge your tasks. I should also like
to congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Nabil
Elaraby, and the delegation of Egypt, for their skillful
stewardship of the Council's activities last month.

We also wish to extend a sincere welcome to the
Vice-Minister without Portfolio of Angola, General
Higino Carneiro, and to express our appreciation for his
lucid statement on the situation in Angola.

Like others, the Indonesian delegation is most
grateful to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
and informative report on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) submitted pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1055 (1996) of 8 May
1996. My delegation is gratified to note that UNAVEM
III has greatly contributed to the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol and continues to play an exemplary role
not only in the realm of peace-keeping, but also in
peace-building and post-conflict management. In this
regard, we would like to pay tribute to the personnel of
UNAVEM. III for their highly commendable work under
difficult circumstances, as well as to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, for his dedication to furthering a
comprehensive and sustainable peace in the country.
Similarly, we welcome the efforts of the observer States
in promoting peace and security in Angola.
Substantial progress has been made towards the
establishment of a lasting peace in Angola, as is clearly
reflected in the various paragraphs of the draft resolution
now before us. We are pleased to note that steps are
being taken in accordance with the Lusaka Protocol. This
is reflected in the promulgation of the Amnesty Law, the
completion of the quartering of the rapid reaction police,

 

and the partial withdrawal of the Angolan Armed Forces
(FAA) to barracks. The agreement reached between the
President of Angola and the leader of UNITA on the
establishment of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation will capitalize on the positive achievements
made previously. Throughout this process, the presence of
UNAVEM. III has contributed significantly to advancing the
restoration of peace to Angola by a multitude of tasks: the
monitoring and verification of the cease-fire; the withdrawal
and quartering of troops and police; the guarding of
collected weapons; the patrolling of major routes; escorting
humanitarian convoys; and other essential tasks. It is
therefore clear that UNAVEM. III has had to devote as
much attention to alleviating the misery of the civilian
population as to efforts to control and resolve the conflict.

But given the considerable role UNAVEM. III plays in
Angola, my delegation feels that the task at hand is far
from complete and that much remains to be done. We are
seriously concerned at the slowness of the pace in the
implementation of some aspects of the Lusaka Protocol,
which has already fallen behind schedule. The quartering
and disarming of Uniao Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola (UNITA) troops constitute critical
components for the success of the peace process. The
Indonesian delegation urges the parties to capitalize on the
positive momentum of the peace process before a new
series of concerns emerges to confront the nascent Angolan
State. In this regard, we would like to remind both parties
that UNAVEM. III is expected to complete its mission by
February 1997. We therefore call on the parties to
accelerate the pace in the areas of the disarmament of the
civilian population and the incorporation of UNITA forces
into the FAA, and to complete the withdrawal of the FAA
from forward positions. It is also essential that the quality
of weapons handed over by UNITA be improved,
particularly the heavy weapons, and that a solution be
found to address the high desertion rate.

It is the view of my delegation that disarming the
population, building a national army and reintegrating the
ex-combatants are crucial steps for a lasting and
comprehensive peace in Angola. There are already alarming
indications regarding the breakdown of law and order. In
regions where UNITA troops are withdrawing, banditry,
looting and killing are threatening the return to normalcy.
Such a situation only highlights the need to extend State
administration throughout the country, as referred to in
paragraph 5 of the draft resolution. It is therefore essential
for the political leaders to achieve a Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation as soon as possible in order to
avoid any serious deterioration in Angola.

In this regard, my delegation underlines the
importance of paragraph 13 of the draft resolution, urging
the Government of Angola and UNITA to take all
necessary steps for all elected members of Parliament to
take their seats in the National Assembly. This will
generate the functioning of democratic mechanisms in the
country, which could bring about a climate conducive to
political stability and genuine peace. In this context, it is
clearly discernable that hostile propaganda broadcasts can
indeed adversely affect the spirit of national reconciliation
and reconstruction in Angola. My delegation therefore
calls upon the parties concerned to put an end to this
exercise, which not only hinders the implementation of
the peace process as a whole but also damages it.

The need for Angola to reconstruct its national fabric
is essential. This, in our opinion, is a multifaceted
endeavour. It is therefore imperative that the Lusaka
Protocol be implemented in full and in a timely manner,
which in turn will establish peace between the parties.
Moreover, we are aware of the threat that mine pollution
poses; hence, mine-clearance is fundamental if the
Angolan people are to return to the fields and move freely
in their own country. Needless to say, the reconstruction
of the country' s infrastructure will undoubtedly enable the
people of Angola to resume a semblance of normal life.
The many woes that confront Angola, compounded by the
deep economic crisis, can be solved only through the full
implementation of the Protocol. It is therefore necessary
for the international community to continue to respond
positively to the rehabilitation efforts of Angola, for this
would constitute a vital contribution to a durable peace.

None the less, it must be emphasized that genuine
peace can be attained only if the parties themselves show
greater readiness to implement their commitment and to
act in a spirit of flexibility and compromise. We look
forward to the meeting between President dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi in the territory of Angola, as this will
provide the opportunity for them to resolve all remaining
issues and to promote confidence-building between the
parties.

In the light of these considerations and given the
fundamental role UNAVEM. III plays in contributing to
the implementation of the peace process, my delegation
supports the extension of the Mission's mandate for
another three months, and therefore will vote in favour of
the draft resolution now before us. Not only will this
extension consolidate the gains achieved in the peace
process; it ought to be seen as an opportunity for the
parties faithfully to implement all relevant agreements

 

they themselves have entered into. It is our sincere hope
that during this period the parties will be afforded a
significant opportunity to demonstrate their willingness to
resolve their own problems and to respect the role of
international and regional organizations.

