I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 27 member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania align themselves with this statement. I want first to join others in thanking High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina Valentin Inzko and reiterating the European Union's continued support for his mission, and I wish to add my greetings to Valentin and my appreciation for his dedication, energy, independence and integrity, which have remained constant over the years. In December 2019, the Council of the European Union reiterated its unequivocal commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina's EU perspective as a single, united and sovereign country. We urged executive and legislative bodies at all levels of Government to start addressing the 14 key priorities identified in the EU Commission opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina's application for membership in the European Union, in line with the interests of all citizens to advance towards integration into the European Union. In the past months, Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities have taken some steps to address those priorities. We welcome the fact that, for the first time since 2008, local elections will also take place in the city of Mostar, on 20 December. Political leaders also reached an agreement on 17 June on further electoral reform. We call for an inclusive process of electoral reform, through genuine dialogue and in line with European standards, which would eliminate all forms of inequality and discrimination in the electoral process. In this regard, we underline that no legislative or political step should be taken that would make the implementation of the ruling in the Sejdic and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina case and related rulings of the European Court of Human Rights more challenging. We welcome the recent adoption of the revised national war-crimes strategy, and we call for its swift implementation, which will contribute to the wider goal of promoting an environment conducive to reconciliation. We call on the authorities of the country to build on this momentum and continue to engage in reforms, thereby giving tangible proof that Bosnia and Herzegovina is willing to do what it takes to become a member of the EU. Only by delivering on reforms will Bosnia and Herzegovina advance towards the EU. The European Union strongly underlines the need for the authorities to work towards strengthening the rule of law, in particular the independence and integrity of the judiciary, fighting corruption and organized crime, countering radicalization and guaranteeing the independence of the media and the safety of journalists, promoting youth employment and education and gender equality, and renewing their efforts towards socioeconomic reforms. This year marks both the twenty-fifth annual commemoration of the Srebrenica genocide and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords. We expect to see strong and concrete political acts from the political elites that show their deep commitment to promoting reconciliation in the country. Revisionism, in particular minimization or negationism in relation to the Srebrenica genocide, and the glorification of war criminals contradict EU values and are incompatible with the prospect of integration into the European Union. With local elections to be held on 15 November throughout the country and on 20 December in Mostar, we would like to remind all political actors of the importance of refraining from any provocative and divisive statements. We also expect the authorities to fully assume their responsibilities with regard to the migration situation, and in particular, to urgently create, with our support, the conditions for addressing humanitarian needs, including the accommodation of refugees and migrants, while working to strengthen the country's border-management capacities. Like the rest of Europe, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to be affected by the global coronavirus disease pandemic, a point that has been raised by many today. In these difficult times, the EU remains firmly engaged in assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina in addressing the immediate health needs as well as with the long- term social and economic impacts resulting from the pandemic. The European Commission's recent Economic and Investment Plan for the Western Balkans demonstrates once again the EU's strong commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina and all Western Balkans partners. Lastly, with regard to the political and security situation on the ground and the importance of maintaining a safe and secure environment, the European Union reiterates its firm support for the EU-led Operation Althea and to the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council.
