Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his informative
briefing and work. We also welcome First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacic', and thank him for
his statement. We are also grateful to Ms. Citaku for
her statement.

Bolivia calls for compliance with resolution
1244 (1999), including respect for the sovereignty,
the territorial integrity and the independence of the
Republic of Serbia. It is in that regard, and pursuant
to the resolution, that we call on all political actors
to work towards an agreement in this framework,
support initiatives of this kind and refrain from using
provocative rhetoric. Such language is nothing but
detrimental to a future agreement between Belgrade
and Pristina and erodes the efforts already undertaken
to build trust between the parties.

In the same vein, the creation of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, agreed
upon in the Brussels Agreement more than four years
ago, must be re-established in accordance with that
Agreement. Although progress was made in terms of
the draft statute, we are concerned that both parties
maintain opposing positions regarding the powers
and competencies of the association/community. We
regret that this situation continues, and we urge the
Kosovo authorities to respect the Agreement and to
move forward on this matter in order to ensure the
security and rights of Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija.
Similarly, we call on them to refrain from any attempt
to transform the Kosovo Security Force into an armed
force, as doing so would constitute an act contrary to
resolution 1244 (1999) and international law.

We also hope that the Kosovo authorities will
fulfil their responsibilities and obligations as concerns
the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Office of the
Specialist Prosecutor. We reiterate that the rule of law
and its impartial application is essential to combat
impunity. The persons responsible for the commission
ofwar crimes must be held accountable for their actions,
regardless of their status or background.

We also reiterate our concern about the slow
progress in the investigation into the assassination
of Mr. Oliver Ivanovie, leader of the Civic Initiative
"Freedom, Democracy, Justice". We call on the
competent authorities to work on the investigation of
the events that culminated in the killing of that Kosovo
Serb politician on 16 January.

Bolivia takes note of the efforts by the European
Union and the mediation of the High Representative of
the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to
make headway in the implementation of the existing
agreements. We commend her recent outreach to the
parties and we appreciate that they are willing to come
to a binding agreement in line with international law. It
is crucial that the parties comply with the commitments
entered into and, in this context, we call on the parties
to work for a peaceful solution through dialogue and in
line with the obligation to negotiate, as stipulated by
international law.

We appreciate the work carried out by UNMIK
in accordance with its mandate in the context of
resolution 1244 (1999), especially its efforts in fostering
intercommunity confidence-building, the rule of law
and human rights. Along the same lines, we welcome the
convening of the United Nations Kosovo Trust-Building
Forum in Ljubljana in May and hope that the resulting
recommendations will be implemented in line with the
commitments assumed by the Kosovo authorities.

We also commend the work that UNMIK continues
to conduct with respect to gender equality in accordance
with resolution 1325 (2000). We value its joint work
with the municipal authorities and representatives
of the province of Kosovo to protect communities'
rights, strengthen the rule of law and facilitate the
return of internally displaced persons, as well as its
work providing document certification services. We
encourage UNMIK to continue that work.

Finally, we are concerned about the lack of funding
from the trust fund established to carry out community
assistance projects for the benefit ofthe Roma, Egyptian
and Ashkali minority communities affected by lead
poisoning in Kosovo. We call on the international
community to join forces in order to support the fund.

