Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. It is truly a
pleasure to see you, Mr. Minister, personally presiding
over this important meeting. Your presence among us
clearly shows the importance that your friendly
country, as well as all countries members of the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole, attach to a discussion of the AIDS pandemic
and international peacekeeping operations. 1 should
also like to express our thanks and appreciation to
Mr. Peter Piot, the Executive Director of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
for his useful briefing on the important steps taken
since our previous meeting to implement this Council's
recommendations.

It must be recalled that the Security Council took
up the issue of AIDS in a comprehensive manner under
the presidency of the United States earlier this year. It
recalled the threat of this pandemic and the need to
implement a comprehensive international strategy to
combat AIDS through complementarity and
cooperation among all United Nations organizations
and agencies within their own competencies. In this
context, we must pay tribute to the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council for their lead role
in combating this pandemic. We note with satisfaction
the inclusion in the agenda of the General Assembly of
an item to review the problem of AIDS in all its
aspects.

The Security Council's consideration of the
pandemic is taking place with a clear understanding of
the growing threat of the pandemic and of its relation
to peace and stability, particularly in some African
countries. Furthermore, the fact that this meeting is
being held following the Durban Conference on AIDS
dictates that we take up the recommendations of that
Conference in order to render them practical and
implementable.

The international community is duty-bound to
devote its energies and exert maximum efforts to
contain the current situation and avoid further tragedies
through reliance on international solidarity. It is the
only lifeline, given the complexity and danger
surrounding this problem. Time is short. Furthermore,
international commitment must be heightened. All
States' efforts must be encouraged. States must be
urged to implement national plans within a
comprehensive international strategy. Scientific
research must be encouraged and placed with the reach
of all countries.

My delegation asserts the right of the whole of
mankind to benefit from scientific progress, free of
prejudice and discrimination. It is unacceptable that the
majority of humanity be denied the benefits of medical
progress or the necessary drugs merely because they
are developing countries. We believe that one of the
most important international duties is to ensure that
treatment and drugs be available at affordable prices.
Such ideas should be entrenched in an international
partnership among all actors against AIDS.

In this context, we must pay a tribute to France
for its practical proposals against AIDS, particularly
the creation of an international solidarity fund to
mobilize financial resources and for its call to hold an
international conference for all parties, including the
pharmaceutical industry. We believe that initiative
merits international attention.

We believe that disputes and crises are fertile
ground for the spread of AIDS. Therefore,
peacekeeping forces can play an important role in
awareness-raising and providing means of prevention
for themselves and others. That objective cannot be
accomplished without prior appropriate training of
these units. They must be prepared and equipped to
shoulder the responsibilities mandated to them.

In conclusion, I wish to express my delegation's
support for the draft resolution before the Security
Council, because of the initiative of the United States
of America. I also wish to express my deep
appreciation to Ambassador Holbrooke for his
unceasing efforts from the beginning of this year to
reach this stage of presenting the draft resolution to the
Council. It is an historic initiative. The Security
Council's concerns have thus expanded to include all
issues pertaining to international peace and security.

