Mr. Bujer (Denmark): 1 should like first to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your very timely
and important discussion paper prepared for today's
meeting of the Council. The paper addresses a
momentous and indeed crucial issue. How do we move
successfully from one phase of a peace operation,
which is peacekeeping, to the next, which is post-
conflict peace-building, thereby ensuring a long-term
perspective?

Taking as my point of departure the discussion
paper, I shall, first, discuss the criteria for successfully
bridging peacekeeping and the consolidation of peace,
and, secondly, comment more specifically on the
decision-making of the Security Council with regard to
mission closure or mission transition.

Denmark has increasingly placed its efforts for
the prevention of violent conflict in the context of our
comprehensive engagement in development
cooperation and assistance. As the Secretary-General
stated so eloquently in his millennium report:

"every step taken towards reducing poverty and

achieving broad-based economic growth is a
step towards conflict prevention." (A/54/2000, para. 202)

Several of our development cooperation
programmes and activities include specific measures
for conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction and peace-building. We address
conflicts between countries as well as within countries.
But, unfortunately, prevention often fails, conflict
erupts, and a need for peacekeeping and peace-building
presents itself. Denmark has been strongly and actively
engaged in United Nations peacekeeping since 1948.
Today, we remain among the largest per capita
providers of peacekeepers to United Nations-mandated
and United Nations-operated missions.

In her important report to the Council last week,
the outgoing High Commissioner for Refugees spoke
of the need to look at different options - not only
fully-fledged peacekeeping, but also, and especially,
measures intended to support local law-enforcement
capacity - working together, as opposed to
straightforward intervention. If we apply this concept,
which could perhaps be called a concept of
subsidiarity, at the start of an operation, then we might
induce local parties to maintain a greater part of
responsibility themselves. That, in turn, might improve
the chances of returning to a situation where the
intensity of the operation could again be reduced.

Any exit strategy should be based on the notion
of "local ownership" of the peace-building process;
responsibilities should be gradually handed over to
local authorities. Building local capacities should
therefore be an integral part of any exit strategy.

Peace operations, as we all know, are no longer
merely a question of keeping warring parties apart or
of monitoring ceasefires. Today's operations are
comprehensive and complex undertakings that may
involve the disarmament, demobilization and social
reintegration of combatants, the supervision of
elections, the monitoring of human rights, the training
of local police forces, and so on. The nexus between
peacekeeping and peace-building is often crucial, and
the achievement of a self-supporting post-conflict
situation will very much depend on the groundwork
laid out during the peacekeeping mission. The process
of moving from peacekeeping to the consolidation of
peace should be seen as a continuum, one that reaches
from pre-conflict preventive action, through the
conflict and peace operation phase, into the post-
conflict peace-building stage - that is, from peace to
peace.

We agree that an exit strategy should not refer
only to the withdrawal of the military component of a
United Nations operation, but rather to what the
discussion paper describes as

"a long-term plan designed to lead to a self-
sustaining peace in the conflict area"
(S/2000/1072, annex, para. 3).

But what should such a long-term plan take into
account? I should like to outline a number of elements
that Denmark considers to be essential in order to build
a solid bridge between peacekeeping and the long-term
consolidation of peace.

The withdrawal of peacekeeping troops from a
former conflict area should take place in a gradual
manner, as the situation becomes sufficiently stable.
The phasing out of a military presence will very often
be followed by an enhanced civilian presence, with a
view to accelerating the post-conflict peace-building
process.

In this regard, Denmark fully supports the
recommendations of the Brahimi report on United
Nations peace operations, and we welcome the
proposed shift towards the use of civilian police to
promote and safeguard the rule of law. Police, and also
judicial experts, are indispensable in order to rebuild
civil society and the economy, and their work must be
part of a solid peace-building strategy. Allow me to
draw attention to the European Union's initiative to
make a police force of 5,000 officers available to the
international community by 2003, a commitment
spurred by the foreign ministers of Denmark and the
Netherlands.

Another very important point is coordination with
the humanitarian and developmental agencies that are
already operating in the area. The leadership of a
peacekeeping mission should work closely with these
agencies. At the Headquarters level, the establishment,
as proposed, of integrated mission task forces could
prove to be an essential tool in bringing developmental
and humanitarian expertise into the planning and
execution of missions.

Landmines are a serious obstacle to post-conflict
development, and the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) should play an important and
integrated role in the planning of missions, where
relevant.

Another important task for missions to areas
where armed conflict has taken place is to ensure that
the small arms and light weapons used by the warring
parties are collected and destroyed.

Let me now conclude by returning to the essence
of our discussion today: what should the Security
Council do when preparing a decision on mission
closure or mission transition in order to ensure a long-
term perspective? One way of ensuring coherence
between peacekeeping, peace consolidation and
reconstruction efforts could be for the Council to
strengthen consultations with the Secretariat as well as
with the humanitarian and developmental agencies of
the United Nations family when formulating closure
mandates. Furthermore, a mandate must not
inappropriately limit the Secretary-General's ability to
shape and adjust the operation or mission to take
account of evolving circumstances.

To sum up, conflict prevention is essential, and
poverty reduction and economic growth - together
with respect for, and the achievement of, human
rights - are irreplaceable elements of conflict
prevention. When prevention fails, rapid but measured
and targeted action is called for. After an intervention
involving armed force, the tools that might have
prevented the conflict will still be needed, although
they might have to be supplemented by others, and the
task will be more difficult.

Just as speed is essential at the start of a peace
operation, it is of no less importance at the end in order
to avoid a gap between the peacekeeping operation -
with its accompanying emergency, short-term
humanitarian activities - and long-term reconstruction
and development programmes.

Peacekeepers and peace-builders are inseparable
partners. There is rarely an exit for peacekeepers
without the peace-builders' work. We urge the Security
Council to continue to recognize, and elaborate on, this
multidimensional and holistic approach to conflict
solution in playing its role as the primary guardian of
international peace and security.

