Mr. Acharya (Nepal): Let me begin by
congratulating Viet Nam on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this open
debate on the important subject of children and armed
conflict during Viet Nam's presidency.

Nepal appreciates the remarks made on the
subject this morning by the Secretary-General; his
Special Representative, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy;
the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Ann Veneman;
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Mulet.

Armed conflicts continue to have a gruelling
impact upon children. In most conflicts, children are
often recklessly recruited by armed groups and left
without much protection. In others, they are the ones
who bear the brunt of the worst effects of war,
including displacement. Sometimes they are also
affected by sexual abuse and exploitation.

The Security Council's resolutions, including
resolution 1612 (2005), and thematic debates have
contributed immensely to addressing the plight of
children in armed conflict. Although some progress has
been recorded in the past decade to improve the
protection and well-being of children in armed
conflicts, much still remains to be done.

Ending conflicts is, without any doubt, the best
way to protect children from them. Therefore, the issue
of children in armed conflict should be taken into
account in the light of the centrality of peace processes
wherever they exist. Nepal supports the concept of
including the protection of children in peace
agreements and United Nations peacekeeping missions,
as long as they contribute to the cause of protecting
children while ending the conflict.

Where a peace process does not exist, the
protection of children should be given paramount
importance in all situations of conflict. Nobody should
be spared from accountability for their actions against
children, and no culture of impunity should be
tolerated.

The welfare and protection of children in armed
conflict should be viewed from a comprehensive
perspective. Nepal subscribes to the approach of
finding a durable solution from the standpoint of rights
and development. In that context, the international
legal instruments for the protection of rights of
children should be rigorously applied in all
circumstances. A long-term strategy aimed at solving
the root causes of the involvement of children in armed
conflicts should be the way forward. In that regard, we
welcome the proposal of the Office of the Special
Representative to conduct research on root causes.
There also needs to be some work on addressing the
development perspective of children in armed conflict.

Nepal accords high priority to protecting and
promoting the rights of children who have been victims
of armed conflict. We are working closely with the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, and the Government and the political
parties in Nepal are fully committed to implementing
various recommendations of the Group, especially in
the context of the ongoing peace process. Among other
things, we are working with United Nations agencies
on the ground to prepare a rehabilitation plan for those
minors who will be released from the cantonments
soon, as per the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
signed on 21 November 2006.

The Government of Nepal is committed to ending
impunity for crimes committed against children under
any pretext. As a party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocol, Nepal is taking
measures to enact and implement the provisions of
those instruments.

We are confident that our efforts will result in
tangible achievements with the formation of a new

government in the near future, which is likely to be
headed by the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), as
the largest party in the Constituent Assembly that we
successfully elected on 10 April of this year. The
declaration of the Constituent Assembly to make Nepal
a federal democratic republic, ending the 240-year
monarchy in a peaceful manner, has heralded a new era
of political transformation. Those and other political
developments are likely to have a significant positive
impact on the protection and welfare of children
affected by the 10-year armed conflict that is coming to
an end in Nepal.

Nepal commends the initiatives taken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict in creating a synergy to
bridge the efforts of various agencies in addressing the
plight of children affected by armed conflict in various
parts of the world. The Government of Nepal looks
forward to her proposed visit to Nepal at a mutually
convenient time.

In conclusion, I wish to confirm that Nepal is
committed to working with the members of the Council
to create an effective framework for the protection and
promotion of the rights of children affected by armed
conflict and in finding a lasting solution to this grave
humanitarian problem.

