Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to express my
sincere gratitude to you, Sir, for having convened today's
meeting. I would also like to thank Mr. Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing. I am also grateful to Ambassador Mansour,
the Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine, and
Ambassador Prosor, Permanent Representative of
Israel, for their statements.

Today, I will touch on two issues: first, the Middle
East peace process and, secondly, the situation in Syria.

On the Middle East peace process, Japan has
been following recent developments with concern. We
would like to call on Israel and Palestine not to take any
unilateral actions that might negatively affect the peace
process. Japan reiterates its full support for the United
States mediation efforts and strongly requests both
parties to continue the peace negotiations persistently.
It is also important for the international community
to foster a proper environment that would allow both
parties to continue their talks.

Originally, today I would have liked to give the
Council a detailed update on two Japanese initiatives
aimed at mobilizing private sector investment in
Palestine, had both parties agreed to an extension of
their direct talks. The first initiative is a project called
the Corridor for Peace and Prosperity. Its flagship
project, the Jericho Agro-Industrial Park, is scheduled
to start operations this summer. The second is the
Conference on Cooperation among East Asian countries
for Palestinian Development. At the second ministerial
meeting of the Conference, held in Jakarta on 1 March,
Japanese Foreign Minister Kishida pledged a total of
$200 million for Palestinian assistance. As part of that
pledge, an aid package in the amount of $62 million
was already disbursed last month. Synergy effects
between the Japanese initiatives and the initiative for
the Palestinian economy announced on 24 April by
United States Secretary of State Kerry could result
in enormous gains. I would like to further elaborate
on those initiatives at an appropriate occasion in the
future.

Turning to the situation in Syria, we are deeply
concerned that no substantial improvements have been
witnessed on the humanitarian situation, even after
the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2139
(2014) in February. Japan demands that all parties, in
particular the Syrian authorities, immediately cease
all attacks against civilians in accordance with the
resolution. They must also ensure immediate, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all areas affected by
the conflict. Japan pledged an additional $120 million
for humanitarian assistance at the conference held in
Kuwait on 15 January. The entire amount has been
disbursed. That has brought our total humanitarian
assistance to $275 million.

Regarding the political process, unfortunately,
there is no concrete prospect for the resumption of
the second Geneva Conference on Syria. The Syrian
Government's refusal of Ambassador Brahimi's
proposal to hold parallel discussions on both terrorism
and the transitional governing body has made it even
harder to overcome the current impasse. The Speaker
of the Syrian Parliament recently announced that
presidential elections will take place on 3 June. In that
regard, I would like to recall that both the Secretary-
General and Ambassador Brahimi have repeatedly
warned that the holding of elections under the current
circumstances would damage the political process.
Japan strongly urges both the Syrian Government and
the opposition parties to come back to Geneva with
the political will to achieve a political transition in
accordance with the Geneva communique of the Action
Group for Syria (S/2012/522, annex).

As for the chemical weapons, about 8 per cent ofthe
chemicals still remain in Syria. They should be removed
swiftly in order to achieve the target of eliminating the
Syrian chemical weapon programme by the end of the
June. The Syrian Government must intensify its efforts
to expeditiously meet its elimination obligations set
by resolution 2118 (2013) and the relevant decisions
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). We, for our part, have disbursed a
total of $18 million to the trust funds established under
the OPCW and the United Nations. Japan would like
to renew its commitment to providing the greatest
possible cooperation in that regard.

