Ms. Freeland (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking France for organizing today's
open debate. Canada is proud to have co-sponsored
resolution 2462 (2019) adopted this morning. We believe
that it will contribute to strengthening our collective
efforts to combat terrorism in all its forms.

Today I would like to highlight one of the most
serious terrorist threats of our time: white supremacy.

(spoke in English)

White supremacism and Islamophobia are among
the gravest terrorist threats that the world is facing
today. We were all reminded of this tragic reality on
15 March, when a white-supremacist terrorist killed 50
Muslims gathered in two mosques for Friday prayers
in Christchurch, New Zealand. This attack was all too
familiar to me, a Canadian. Two years ago, a terrorist
killed six people in a Quebec City mosque.

Neo-Nazis, white supremacists, incels, nativists

and radical anti-globalists who resort to violent acts are
a threat to the stability of my country and countries
around the world. These attacks need to be at the top of
our agenda when we talk about confronting terrorism.
And when violence like this occurs in mosques,
churches, synagogues or on the streets of our major
cities, we must not be afraid to specifically condemn
it for what it is: neo-Nazism, white supremacism,
Islamophobia, anti-Semitism, terrorism.

We cannot hide behind euphemisms that distract
from truth. In fact, doing so puts our citizens,
especially those from religious minorities and
racialized communities, in greater danger. In the wake
of acts of terrorism carried out by Muslim extremists,
Western countries often call upon Muslim countries
and Muslim leaders to condemn those attacks in the
name of their people and their faith. It should follow
that, as the Foreign Minister of a majority white and
majority Christian country, I feel a specific and
personal responsibility to denounce white-supremacist
attacks in the same way. As my prime minister, Justin
Trudeau, said in our House of Commons following
the Christchurch attack, "[w]hen we fail to denounce
hatred with total conviction, we empower those people
and legitimize their violence".

Hatred, unfortunately, is eternal, but the ways in
which it spreads change. Today, hatred is increasingly
spread through the Internet - in online forums and on
social media. We must be aware of this and work to
stop it.

Our work cannot be undertaken in isolation. Each
of our countries will of course address this issue in
different ways, but we need to recognize that this is
ultimately an international problem, and we need to
act collectively to address it. The Internet and social
media know no borders, so we must work together to
find ways to address online radicalization.

And, on a final note, on behalf of Canada and
Canadians, I would like to offer our support and
compassion for the people of New Zealand. As fellow
members of the Commonwealth, Canada and New
Zealand have a close and historic relationship. We are
more than friends; we are family. And Canadians felt
great compassion and real pain following the terrible
attacks in Christchurch. In particular, I would like to
salute the moral leadership of Prime Minister Jacinda
Ardern, who has distinguished herself not only to the
people of New Zealand but to the whole world.

