Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first of all thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Commissioner
Cherguifortheircomprehensiveandinsightfulbriefings.

Let me start by commending the agreement signed
on 17 August and the establishment of the transitional
Government. We acknowledge and commend the
people of the Sudan for bringing about that peaceful
change. It is important that perpetrators should be
held accountable for the violence against peaceful
protesters and be brought to justice. What we are now
witnessing in Khartoum are central steps towards
achieving a peaceful future for the Sudan. That is good
news, which the Security Council also underlined in
its press statement (SC/13927) last week. It is indeed a
unique opportunity.

The new Government and the people of the Sudan
now need the substantial support of the international
community to ensure a successful transition. We intend
to use the opportunity of the upcoming ministerial
week of the General Assembly for an in-depth exchange
on how the international community can support the
transition process in Khartoum.

Germany has been actively engaged in the past and
present through the friends of the Sudan on mediation
and other stabilization efforts as well as in the field
of humanitarian assistance. There is no question that
we will continue to support the Sudan in these times
of change. It is in that spirit that the German Foreign
Minister, Mr. Heiko Maas, will travel to the Sudan
next week.

There are huge challenges ahead for the new
Government in Khartoum regarding the unresolved
conflicts in Darfur and the two Areas. There is no
automatic peace dividend for Darfur emanating from
the political changes in Khartoum. Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix and Commissioner Chergui have just
reminded us of the pending security challenges in
Darfur. A comprehensive peace deal for Darfur is still
missing. Hence it is important to recall and welcome
the commitments of the new Government to conduct
peace talks with armed groups. Peace in Khartoum
must be extended also to Darfur. We fully agree with
Commissioner Chergui's analysis that overall peace
in the Sudan does not automatically lead to peace in
Darfur but that the goal to achieve lasting peace also in
Darfur needs additional efforts.

That is why, among the many economic and political
priorities with which the authorities in Khartoum are
confronted, securing lasting peace in Darfur must not
be an afterthought but at the core of the Government's
agenda. The history of the Sudan has shown that the
marginalization, exclusion and discontent on the
peripheries lead to instability in the whole of the
country. For that reason, from our point of view, it is
crucial that the new Government take up the challenge
and regain the trust of all Darfuris.

Let me turn to the African Union (AU)-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
The United Nations and the African Union, through
UNAMID, are partners for the new Government to
secure lasting peace in Darfur. UNAMID continues to
play an important role in protecting civilians, fostering
the rule of law and tackling the root causes of the
conflict. Crucially, it has a strong mediation capacity.
UNAMID could be an important partner for peace for
the new Government. The Security Council now needs
to consider how the international community could best
support peace in Darfur in the light of the new realities
in the Sudan. As the Council, we must look into options
to provide the necessary international support for the
Sudan beyond the lifespan of UNAMID.

Germany is therefore very interested in hearing
from the United Nations and the AU in the joint report
requested by the Council for October the nature of
such support. In our view, one possible option could
be a special political mission, jointly led by the United
Nations and the AU with a strong focus on peacebuilding
and mediation. We now need to think strategically
regarding the way ahead. The withdrawal of UNAMID
must not be rushed but conducted in a responsible
and sustainable manner in order to avoid a security
vacuum and, most importantly, a possible relapse into
conflict. The conditions on the ground must be right
and international and national capacities must be in
place first before the transition. It must be ensured that
the UNAMID tasks are taken care of and that we do
not leave a vacuum that provides a new opportunity for
tension and conflict.

