The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Morocco.

At the outset, I would like to extend my sincere
thanks to Ambassador Nestor Osorio, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), for his final periodic report. I
would like to take this opportunity to put on record our
appreciation for Ambassador Osorio and his team, as
well as for the excellent manner in which he chaired the
work of the Committee. It does honour to him and to
Colombia, which he represents at the United Nations.

I would also like to thank the Panel of
Experts established pursuant to paragraph 29 of
resolution 1929 (2010), and to encourage it to continue,
under the guidance of the Committee, its participation
in meetings and workshops relevant to the Committee's
mandate, particularly through its dialogue with Member
States during visits to the countries concerned.

As the Committee continues to consider all the
issues referred to it, we hope that it will also continue
to seek the cooperation of Member States and to benefit
from the professionalism and objectivity of the Panel of
Experts. We call on it to continue to consider all reports
of non-implementation, in view of their importance for
fulfilling the relevant Security Council resolutions, as
well as the recommendations in the last report of the
Panel of Experts (S/2012/395/annex).

The most recent report (GOV/2012/55) submitted
by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), on
16 November, concluded that pending issues relevant to
the Iranian nuclear programme had not yet been settled.
We hope that the Agency will receive full cooperation
so as to allay concerns and make tangible progress on
pending issues. As the IAEA is the only agency with
competence relating to safeguards, it should receive
full cooperation at all times, including the necessary
information on sites and facilities.

Proceeding from our conviction that dialogue
and diplomacy are the only ways to settle this issue
peacefully, we believe that continuing negotiations
between the five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany (P5+l) and Iran is extremely
important. However, the success of such a dialogue
requires continued and sustainable commitment and
good faith in the negotiations, as well as a willingness
to refrain from taking any positions or making any
announcements that could complicate matters. First
and foremost, Security Council resolutions must be
respected, as must requests by the IAEA, in View of
Iran's international commitments.

We would like to stress the importance of preventing
any weakening of the non-proliferation regime and
of providing every possible assistance to States in
helping them abide by their safeguards agreements.
Without this, the denuclearization of our world, which
is exceedingly important to us, will not be achievable;
nor will it promote the voluntary nature of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. However, in
the same vein, we would like to emphasize the right of
all States to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The
non-proliferation regime is based on a delicate balance
between the rights and obligations of States, a balance
that all should maintain and respect.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.20 pm.
