Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China wishes to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer, and the Chair of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, President
Mogae, for their respective briefings.

Since the beginning of the year, the Transitional
Government in South Sudan has been committed to
the resolution of the issue of South Sudan. The national
dialogue launched by the South Sudanese Transitional
Government and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) is preparing to hold the South
Sudan high-level revitalization forum. During the
previous session of the General Assembly, the United
Nations, the African Union (AU) and IGAD held a
high-level meeting on South Sudan. The AU Peace and
Securiy Council also had a ministerial meeting on the
South Sudan issue.

Parties attending those meetings enhanced
communication and reached consensus. China
welcomes such a development. At the same time, we
also note that the situation in South Sudan is very
fragile: there is continued armed conflict, slow political
progress, a dire humanitarian situation and a severe
economic recession. South Sudan needs the continued
assistance of the international community.

First and foremost, it is imperative that we encourage
all parties to the conflict to return to the political
track in order to achieve a cessation of hostilities and
a ceasefire. China supports the national dialogue and
the high-level revitalization forum on the South Sudan
peace agreement, which is an important opportunity
for South Sudan to achieve political reconciliation
and implement the Agreement. In that connection,
the international community should enhance its
level of support. At the same time, the parties must
enhance coordination and synergy in order to reach a
political settlement.

The AU, IGAD and other regional countries
and organizations must seize this opportunity for
greater involvement in the mediation process, while
coordinating and cooperating in order to fully utilize
their respective strengths and advantages. In that
connection, the Security Council should play a
coordinating role so as to ensure that the AU and IGAD
can assume leadership roles in the mediation process.

Secondly, the leadership role of the South Sudanese
Government must be fully respected in terms of
dealing with internal affairs. To ultimately address
this issue, efforts must be made by the South Sudanese
Transitional Government and its own people. Only
by mobilizing this initiative on the part of the South
Sudanese Transitional Government can assistance
from the international community be much more
productive and efficient. Before proposing solutions,
the international community should engage with the
South Sudanese Government in full consultation in
order to avoid forcefully imposing any solutions.

Thirdly, the matter of economic assistance merits
attention in order to address the root causes of the
South Sudanese crises. The severe economic recession
and people living in hardship are important root causes
of the South Sudanese question. On 23 September, the
First Vice-President of South Sudan, Mr. Taban Deng
Gai, delivered a speech at the General Assembly (see A/72/PV.19) in which he expressed the hope that there
would be increased support from the international
community for South Sudan in order to enhance social
cohesion and allow the South Sudanese people to
engage in post-war construction.

While the international community is providing
support to South Sudan - for example, in conducting
blood transfusions - there must be greater input into
economic foundations such as agriculture, energy and
infrastructure. That will make South Sudan far more
self-reliant, including in being able to ensure its own
blood supply.

The Chinese Government has consistently supported
the South Sudanese peace process through both bilateral
and multilateral channels, including the Security
Council, to promote development in South Sudan.
To date, there are over a 1,000 Chinese peacekeepers
working in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
Since the beginning of the year, China has provided
$5 million in humanitarian assistance through the
World Food Programme and has also donated through
its bilateral channel 8,550 tons of food aid to the country.
China is willing to continue to play its constructive role
in helping South Sudan achieve lasting peace, stability
and sustainable development.

