Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First and
foremost, on behalf of Panama, allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, and Ambassador Jurica and the
delegation of Croatia for providing us this important
opportunity to consider and debate on the most
effective manner to combat the scourge of terrorism.
We welcome the presence of the Secretary-General in
this debate, which demonstrates his personal
commitment in the fight against terrorism.

For the most part - but with a few significant
deviations such as the two world wars and their causes
and consequences - in the modern world human
beings have been able to live more or less
harmoniously, among themselves and with their
environment, in accordance with what the French
philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau called the social
contract.

However, today we are experiencing new forms
of social divisions that are having an impact on the
peaceful coexistence between human beings, which
forces us to reflect in a profound way. I should like to
begin with the most violent of all, namely, the growing
disregard for our environment that, if unabated, will
radically transform life on the planet. I could also
mention acts of genocide and ethnic cleansing, ongoing
violence against women and children and the effects of
excessive sales of small arms and light weapons and
terrorism.

Panama believes that terrorism is defined by the
carrying out of acts of violence that indiscriminately
injure or kill innocent civilians on the pretext of a
greater good. Panama condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, regardless of who commits
it, including Governments and where and for what
purpose it is committed, including to combat foreign
occupation.

The Security Council has contributed
meaningfully to the efforts of the Organization to
combat terrorism. Nevertheless, the level of planning
and sophistication of the recent terrorist attacks in
Mumbai, which were an attack on all of India and on
the entire international community, illustrate that our
efforts and precautions are still not enough. That
obliges us to more effectively use all the means at our
disposal to eliminate terrorism. Above and beyond the
use of force, economic and financial measures and the
exchange of information and intelligence, combating
terrorism also requires that the international community
understand and combat the conditions that give rise to
terrorism, while fully respecting human rights.

In that connection, Panama would like to reiterate
the need to establish national and international norms
to make it possible to prosecute and punish, by way of
example, all those who are in any way linked to the
commission of terrorist acts. We should do so while
observing the principles enshrined in international
humanitarian law and international human rights and
development instruments. Doing otherwise would be
tantamount to legitimizing the methods used by
terrorism to weaken democracy, the rule of law and the
full enjoyment of human rights. In other words, it
would mean violating the same rights we employ to
justify combating terrorism.

