Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having scheduled today's debate on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
I wish also to thank Jan Kubis, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing, and
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his statement.

This debate gives us an opportunity to reflect
on the progress made towards a stable transition in
Afghanistan, be it in the political, security or economic
areas. Despite a number of challenges in the transition
process, mainly related to insecurity and to the usual
post-conflict reconstruction challenges, Rwanda
recognizes the tremendous progress achieved so far in
Afghanistan. It is important to note that Afghanistan
has an effective Government over the territory that is
geared towards national unity, reconciliation and the
promotion of democracy.

My delegation attaches great importance to the idea
of dialogue and political settlements in nation-building.
It is in that context that we welcome the endeavours of the
Afghan Government to reach out to opposition groups,
including the Taliban. Any peaceful engagement should
be inclusive and transparent and should be accompanied
by early confidence-building measures. In that regard,
Rwanda reiterates its full support for the Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace and national reconciliation
processes. We also acknowledge the progress made
by the Government of Afghanistan in preparing for
the presidential and provincial elections scheduled for
next April. We welcome the adoption of the electoral
legislation, the legal framework for the Independent
Election Commission and for the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission. Those institutions represent
the foundation of a vigorous electoral architecture
under mutually agreed rules by which the forthcoming
vote can be contested should the need arise.

We hope that all Afghans will participate in
that democratic exercise and that the Government
of Afghanistan will make every effort to ensure that
women participate in that electoral process and are
adequately represented in elected bodies.

My delegation expresses its deep concern over the
increasing attacks against officials and civilians in
Afghanistan, particularly attacks against prominent
women, as attested by the assassination by the Taliban
of Lieutenant Nigara, a senior officer in the Afghan
police. We also condemn the assassination of the head
of the Independent Election Commission in Kunduz
province. We hope that the Afghan Government will
ensure that the perpetrators of those crimes are held
accountable, and we call on the international and
regional partners to support the Afghans in averting
such heinous crimes. Rwanda reiterates its appeal to
the international community to equip the Afghan forces
commensurate with the regional realities and existing
security threats.

Afghanistan's long-term stability and economic
development will also depend on its neighbours
and the role played by the region as a whole. We
welcome the continued efforts of President Hamid
Karzai to strengthen cooperation with neighbouring
countries, as demonstrated by his recent official visit
to Islamabad and Tehran. Rwanda expresses its support
for constructive engagement and cooperation between
countries of the region, which are essential in building
and reinforcing long-term stability. We attach great
importance to the general mutual commitment made at
the Tokyo Conference in July 2012, which should guide
the cooperation between the donor community and the
Afghan Government. We encourage the Government to
honour its commitments in all fields, as stated in the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.

In conclusion, let me express Rwanda's deep
appreciation for the role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I also strongly
believe that as the International Security Assistance
Force plans to draw down by the end of 2014, the
United Nations will continue playing its crucial role
by supporting Afghan Government institutions as they
take on a greater share of the responsibility for the
socioeconomic development of their country.

