As both Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, I am pleased to present the national statement of Australia to the Security Council on this important milestone: the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). We welcome the Secretary-General's call to action on the women and peace and security agenda. We thank Russia for hosting this debate. Calls by women activists to end conflict were pivotal to the development of the agenda, with the recognition of women's critical role in negotiating, building and sustaining peace. The women and peace and security agenda remains as relevant now as it was 20 years ago. We commend the critical role women are playing as front-line responders as we work together against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). However, we cannot overlook the negative and significant impacts on women during this crisis. Growing levels of hostility against women, including political violence, conflict- related sexual violence and intimate partner violence, have devastating effects on victims and survivors. These are not just attacks on women; they are attacks on good governance and democracy. They undermine communities' resilience to conflict and to extremism. As we look towards building back better, we must draw on the capabilities of all, particularly women. Nationally, we are committed to improving the number and influence of women in national security services, including by meeting the United Nations uniformed gender parity targets and funding the Elsie Initiative to increase the meaningful participation of uniformed women. We commend the United Nations Force in Cyprus for the strong representation of women in its leadership team, including Australia's Major General Cheryl Pearce as Force Commander. In our region, we strongly value our women and peace and security partnership with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), including supporting Viet Nam's hosting of the Global Conference on Women and Peace and Security and co-hosting the second ASEAN-Australia Women and peace and Security Dialogue. Internationally, as a top-ten donor to UN-Women, we have renewed our support for the Global Facility and the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund to advance women's participation, academic partnerships and women-led grassroots organizations pivoting towards COVID-19. Australia has played a key role in mainstreaming gender into the countering violent extremism policy, including by co-chairing with Indonesia the Global Counter-terrorism Forum Countering Violent Extremism Working Group, and developing a policy toolkit to guide gender-sensitive implementation. We are pleased to have supported the PeaceFem App through the Towards Inclusive Peace project, an innovative digital tool to share strategies on gender- sensitive peace processes with practitioners. Australia also continues to use its voice on the global stage. As a member of the Human Rights Council, we have consistently promoted and protected women's rights and gender equality in our work. As the Secretary-General concludes in his report (S/2020/946), we must go beyond plans and numbers to address the root causes of gender inequality and conflict, including harmful norms and inequitable structures. We must promote and protect women's rights, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, and commit to women's meaningful participation in peacebuilding and crisis response and prevention. As we adjust to the realities of COVID-19, Australia gives its assurances to all that we remain committed to implementing fully the women and peace and security agenda.
