Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): It
has been more than three years since the beginning of
the oil for food programme for Iraq, a programme that
has contributed to easing the humanitarian suffering of
Iraqi civilians. Since the sanctions against Iraq have
not yet been lifted or suspended, the extension of the
programme will help improve the humanitarian
situation in Iraq. For that reason, we have adopted a
positive position with respect to that extension. It was
in that spirit that the Chinese delegation took an active
part in the consultations on the draft resolution and
proposed a number of revisions, some of which are
reflected in the text. The Chinese delegation also made
some compromises in order to achieve consensus.

We are not, however, entirely satisfied with the
resolution that the Council has just adopted, especially
with paragraph 18, because it does not fully reflect an
important element favoured by most States members of
the Council, including China: a request that the
Secretary-General conduct an assessment of the impact
of the 10 years of sanctions against Iraq, and to submit
to the Security Council a objective and comprehensive
consolidated report. We believe that the humanitarian
suffering of Iraqi civilians is, principally, a
consequence of the 10 years of sanctions against Iraq.

The present text invites the Secretary-General to
appoint independent experts to prepare a report; the
Chinese delegation is in favour of that. But the text is
evasive on the key issue of whether the report should
focus on an assessment of the impact of the sanctions,
and it is rather vague about the mandate of the experts.
That is deeply regrettable.

The Chinese delegation voted in favour of the
draft resolution, but our position remains unchanged.
We still believe that the United Nations should as early
as possible conduct a comprehensive assessment of the
impact of the sanctions on the humanitarian situation in
Iraq. I am confident that the group of experts to be
appointed by the Secretary-General will give full
consideration to those elements in their work.

