Mr. Grainger (United Kingdom): My delegation
is very grateful to the Legal Counsel for his briefing
and for the very thorough briefing notes which he
circulated previously. We commend the continuing
efforts of the Organization, through the efforts of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Secretariat, to address the threat of international
terrorism.

Terrorists continue to kill, injure and intimidate
innocent people around the world. Terrorist acts not
only constitute a challenge to the authority of those
States on whose territory they are committed, but in a
number of cases also constitute a threat to international
peace and security. That link has been recognized by
the Security Council, including in resolution 1269
(1999), adopted under your presidency, Sir, October
1999. It is therefore vital that the United Nations
continue to act resolutely in response to this threat and
to sent a strong message that the international
community will not tolerate the use of terrorist
methods.

The United Kingdom fully supports the measures
taken by the Organization to address terrorist threats,
including, in appropriate cases, the imposition of
measures by the Council against those who fail to bring
to justice those responsible for terrorist acts.

The United Kingdom commends the latest United
Nations conventions, to which Mr. Corell referred
today: the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism. We urge States which have not
signed them, or other conventions aimed at combating
terrorism, to do so at the earliest opportunity. The
United Kingdom expects to ratify both of these
conventions early next year.

The United Kingdom also supports the work
proposed by India to draft a comprehensive convention
on terrorism and the ongoing efforts to complete a draft
international convention for the suppression of acts of
nuclear terrorism, which was proposed by your own
delegation, Mr. President. We hope that both of those
proposals can be brought to completion as soon as
possible.

The United Kingdom knows only too well the
grim effects of terrorism, the need to be resolute in
condemning it and the importance of finding practical
ways to combat the continuing threats it represents. We
are determined to continue our support of international
efforts to fight terrorism, while upholding the United
Nations Charter and other rules of international law,
including those principles that defend human rights.

