The President (spoke in Arabic): The Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya began its term of office as an elected
member of the Security Council on 1 January 2008.
During the first month of our membership, we assumed
the presidency of this important organ of the United
Nations. We promise to carry out this singular
responsibility with a renewed commitment to the
indispensable work of the United Nations and the
ideals of the Charter.

At the same time, in presiding over the Council's
first formal meeting in 2008, I am pleased to welcome
the other new members: Burkina Faso, Costa Rica,
Croatia and Viet Nam. We all look forward with
confidence to their participation in the work of the
Council. Their experience and wisdom will be of
invaluable assistance in the discharge of the Council's
enormous responsibilities.

I will also take this opportunity to express the
Council's deep gratitude to the outgoing members of
the Council - Congo, Ghana, Peru, Qatar and
Slovakia - for their important contributions to the
business of the Council.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President (spoke in Arabic): I would also
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to Mr. Marcello Spatafora, Permanent
Representative of Italy, for his service as President of
the Security Council for the month of December 2007.
I am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Spatafora
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

Report of the Secretary-General on the
deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2007/759)


The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
2

consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of
the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
document S/2007/759.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations. I now
give him the floor.


