Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming your
role as President of the Security Council, following
a very successful Council field trip to Colombia. We
look forward to a productive presidency this month. I
also want to thank our American colleagues for a very
effective presidency last month.

Kazakhstan expresses its appreciation to the
European Union High Representative, Ms. Mogherini,
for her substantial briefing. The European Union (EU)
is the major player in the maintenance of peace and
security and the largest financial contributor to the
United Nations, not only to the regular budget but also
to official development assistance and peacekeeping
missions. The many areas in which the United Nations
and the EU cooperate include conflict prevention,
counter-terrorism, maritime security, organized
crime - including the smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in human beings - and irregular migration.
The two organizations work together to promote human
rights, gender equality, access to energy, cybersecurity,
space security and mitigation of climate-change impact.
Their collaboration must increase as we jointly seek to
address the complex threats and transnational crises.

The EU also collaborates with key regional
stakeholders, such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the African Union (AU),
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the League
of Arab States and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, as well as other strategic partners, including
Kazakhstan and Central Asia.

The regional tensions intensifying in the Middle
East, Africa and other parts of the world will require
greater interlinkages between the EU and regional and
subregional organizations, as well as international and
regional financial institutions. In addition to providing
soldiers and police for United Nations peacekeeping
missions, the EU cooperates effectively with global
and regional organizations by fielding its own missions
and operations within the framework of the Global
Strategy for Foreign and Security Policy - in Africa,
for example.

The United Nations and the EU work successfully
in peacekeeping missions in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Sahel, Mali and Somalia. That is
significant in the light of present-day geopolitical
tensions and protracted conflicts in the Great Lakes
region, the Lake Chad basin and the Horn of Africa.
Additionally, through its African Peace Facility, the
EU has provided funds since 2004 to the African Union
for peace missions and the development of an African
Security Architecture. We believe that strength should
be further developed.

We support the j oint communication to the European
Parliament, the European Council and the Council on
migration on the central Mediterranean route, adopted
on 25 January 2017, which identified priorities to be
addressed through the mobilization of €200 million,
under the North Africa window of the EU Emergency
Trust Fund for Africa in 2017. The priority focus of
the Fund is on migration-related projects in Libya
and North Africa, implemented with the cooperation
of the International Organization for Migration, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme
and UNICEF.

We welcome the EU-organized Conference on
Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, held on
4 and 5 April in Brussels. As a contribution to the joint
efforts of the international community in addressing the
urgent humanitarian and resilience needs inside Syria
and supporting the efforts of neighbouring countries in
hosting the refugees, that could be considered as a best
practice to mobilize support for other humanitarian
crises as well.

As part of the EU's commitment to the principles of
multilateralism and in the light of the 2016 EU Global
Strategy for Foreign and Security Policy, we encourage
the EU's engagement with regional and subregional
organizations in Eurasia, which could serve as an
additional instrument to respond more effectively to
emerging threats to peace and security in our continent.

Kazakhstan represents the Central Asian region,
a region which is represented in the Security Council
for the first time. We actively work together bilaterally
and multilaterally in the EU Central Asia format. We
strongly believe that joint efforts and the contribution
of the United Nations and the European Union in
making Central Asia a zone of peace, cooperation and
security are thoroughly important to the maintenance
of global stability. In that regard, the EU strategy
for a new partnership for Central Asia is a platform
for cooperation in Central Asia, given the unique
geostrategic position of the region, linking the East and
West together.

As mentioned in the EU Global Strategy, peace and
stability in Asia are a prerequisite for EU prosperity. In
that regard, we consider the situation in Afghanistan
vital to the security and stability of Central Asia. We
have a genuine interest in the political settlement,
socioeconomic development and recovery of that
country, while emphasizing the importance of the
security-development nexus through a holistic regional
approach. It is our desire to create a template model
in our part of the world of successful collaboration
and connectivity, in line with the preventive agenda
of Secretary-General Guterres and applicable for
other regions.

Another important part of the cooperation
between the United Nations and the EU is the counter-
terrorism agenda. It is crucial to strengthen the EU's
interaction with countries of Eurasia, the Western
Balkans, West Africa, the Sahara-Sahel region, the
Great Lakes region, the Horn of Africa, North Africa,
the Middle East and Asia - together with global
and regional intergovernmental organizations and
non-governmental organizations, including the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum. We believe that in the years
to come the EU will continue its efforts to foster global
peace, security and development.

Before concluding, I would like to congratulate
our European colleagues on the sixtieth anniversary
of Europe Day. Today also marks the seventy-second
anniversary of victory in the Second World War, and
I would like to pay tribute to the war's victims and to
all who fought for our lives and freedom. I would like
to congratulate war veterans on this important day and
to express the hope that we will never see another such
tragedy in the future.

