Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): Mr. President,
allow me to join the others who have expressed
appreciation to you for holding this open meeting of
the Council, and also to Sir Kieran Prendergast for the
very comprehensive and, in our view, very accurate
reflection of the situation on the ground in
Bougainville.

My delegation is, of course, associated with the
statement made by the delegation of Fiji. This is, as has
been noted, a process in which we and other members
of the region have now been involved for a number of
years. As our colleague from Papua New Guinea has
said, the process has slowed a little due to a number of
factors, but we nevertheless remain very encouraged by
the progress which has been made. More remains to be
done, but things are certainly heading very much in the
right direction. This reflects a great deal of input from
the Government of Papua New Guinea, assisted by
others within the region over the years.

In our own assessment, we see the peace process
now entering its final stages. We think that there is, in
fact, a reasonable prospect of a general completion of
stage II of weapons disposal by 24 December this year.
We also think that there is a good prospect that stage
III can be completed by the middle of next year, thus
paving the way for elections for an autonomous
Bougainville government.

We very much agree with the view that has been
expressed - unanimously expressed, I think - that
the Peace Monitoring Group has a vital role to play
until the peace process is firmly bedded in. We
appreciated the expressions of support from members
of the Council for an extension of the mandate of the
Peace Monitoring Group for a further 12 months. We
note this is also the period being sought by Papua New
Guinea. We believe this 12-month period,
recommended by the Secretary-General and requested
by Papua New Guinea, has gained wide support within
the Council. It is, in fact, the correct and appropriate
period for an extension, and we would ask the Council
to proceed accordingly on that basis.

Thank you again, Sir, for convening this meeting.
It is a very useful opportunity for those of us from the
region to participate in what is for us a crucial debate
on a hugely important issue, not only for Papua New
Guinea, but also for the rest of us from the region.

