Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): As for the debate on the invited briefer, I think it is time for us all to take a deep breath. In truth, it is our responsibility as the Security Council to make a greater investment in finding consensus than in deepening divisions, particularly on a long-standing issue on which it is urgent to reflect with regard to both the significant progress made and the importance of maintaining the reputation of the Council and its ability to find solutions. We thank the Under-Secretary-General for the valuable information she provided this afternoon. Above all, the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to the total and definitive elimination of chemical weapons in all parts of the world. The use of these weapons is a flagrant violation of international law, including international humanitarian law, and a threat to international peace and security. We therefore condemn in the strongest terms any use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere. At the same time, we reiterate our support for and confidence in the objective work of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and its team of professionals in their difficult task of consigning the use of chemical weapons to the past, through the various activities of comprehensive monitoring and surveillance to prevent the development and use of these weapons as well as the efforts of the OPCW's Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) to identify and hold accountable perpetrators of attacks using toxic chemicals. We cannot fail to stress that it is vital that the Syrian Arab Republic cooperate with the OPCW in resolving this issue and thereby ensure the total elimination of chemical weapons on Syrian territory and prevent their use, in accordance with resolution 2118 (2013). In that regard, and with regard to the updates contained in the eighty-fourth monthly report of the OPCW (S/2020/961, annex), which we are discussing this afternoon, we are pleased to see that the Syrian authorities have provided information on 8 of the 22 outstanding issues, including two amendments to the initial declaration. We hope that this information can contribute significantly to clarifying the gaps and inconsistencies in that declaration, among others, and that this exchange of information between the Syrian authorities and the OPCW will continue and improve so that a viable solution to all long-standing issues pursuant to the plan of action proposed by the Director General can be reached. In addition, we encourage Syria to seek the assistance of the Technical Secretariat in working on arrangements to satisfy the requirements of the decision of the OPCW Executive Council of 9 July, based on the worrisome findings of the first IIT report. We also believe that it is of great importance for the international community to make every effort to promote accountability for the use of chemical weapons. We cannot tolerate impunity for the perpetrators of these crimes. They must be held accountable and brought to justice, whether they are State or non-State actors. Moreover, the integrity and authority of the OPCW must be preserved in order to achieve our primary objective, as it is the implementing body of the Convention. To that end, the unity of the Security Council is essential. It is imperative that we return to consensus on this issue and work with a constructive approach to reflect the progress needed overall. In conclusion, the Syrian people have been suffering the ravages of a long and terrible conflict that has spawned gross violations of human rights, including the indiscriminate use of chemical weapons, resulting in severe injuries and the deaths of men, women and children. We must therefore resolutely iron out our differences and try to achieve a compromise solution so that chemical weapons are completely eradicated from the Syrian territory and there are no more victims of this atrocious crime.
