Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank the Chinese presidency for organizing this
open debate on the important issue ofenhancing African
capacities in the area of peace and security. I would
also thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace
and Security for their contributions to this important
public debate. Finally, we thank you, Mr. President,
for the concept note drafted in preparation for this
meeting (S/2017/574, annex), which again demonstrates
the importance that your country attaches to the
African continent.

Djibouti aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the Movement of Non Aligned Countries.

The African continent alone accounts for 70 per
cent of the world's current crises and two thirds of the
Security Council's deliberations. As rightly pointed out
in the concept note and taken up by several delegations
in the Chamber today, Africa remains fragile in the
face of multiple and multifaceted crises. Terrorist
organizations - such as Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram and
others - remain a threat to the security of our continent.

The deployment of peacekeepers, made up
of 50 per cent Africans in several peacekeeping
theatres - notably in Darfur, the Central African
Republic, Mali and Somalia - clearly illustrates the
commitment of African States and the African Union
and its regional entities to contributing, alongside the
United Nations, to collective security as provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations. Each of our debates
contributes to improving the overall performance of
peacekeeping missions. It is therefore vital for the
security of the continent and for international peace
and security that long-term solutions be identified.

In that regard, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to the second Chiefs of Defense Conference,
which took place in New York on 7 July. The theme of
the meeting was how to improve the overall performance
of United Nations peacekeeping missions. Almost 100
countries were represented by their Chiefs of Staff.
That clearly demonstrates the great importance our
respective countries attach to peacekeeping operations.

The African Union has consistently demonstrated
its political will in recent years and has undertaken
major changes such as the restructuring of the
African Union Commission with a view to adapting
it to Agenda 2063. At the most recent African Union
Summit, member States highlighted the message set
out in the Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence
the Guns by 2020, so as to reduce armed conflict in the
continent. There can be no peace without development
nor development without peace.

One of the strengths of the African Union is its
subregional organizations, which have devoted a great
deal of effort and resources to identifying emerging
crises and to adopting collective measures to prevent
conflicts. We welcome the efforts of those organizations
to reduce the tragic crises in Africa. In addition, United
Nations support for conflict management in Africa has
also increased over the past 25 years. The Peace and
Security Council of the African Union has proved to be
a reliable partner. Through that partnership, the level
of inter-organizational cooperation should inevitably
lead to the development of common strategies through
joint assessments, robust decision-making mechanisms
based on consultation and information sharing, and
monitoring mechanisms that facilitate planning and
operational cooperation throughout the conflict
cycle. Only a productive partnership can improve
collective security.

(spoke in English)

Since the adoption of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations report (see S/2015/446),
almost two years ago, we have noticed some positive
changes benefiting the two organization - the adoption
of resolution 2320 (2016); the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, signed under the auspices of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union; resolution 2359 (2017); and the reports of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/454) and the African Union
Commission Chairperson. Those are a few concrete
illustrations of support for autonomous African Union
peace operations, which are crucial to addressing the
challenges of peace and security.

(spoke in French)

There is an urgent need for more synergy, for a
harmonious African Union-United Nations partnership
in the prevention, mediation and management of violent
conflicts and for an increase injoint efforts to mobilize
more resources. In that regard, greater flexibility in
the interpretation of Chapter VIII of the Charter would
significantly reduce missteps in the area of peace and
international security.

In conclusion, on the occasion of the Nelson
Mandela International Day yesterday, Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres, called for honouring the
legacy of the former South African President - not
by making statements or holding ceremonies, but by
making our world better.

