Mr. Lal (India): In the interest of brevity, I will
limit my remarks. Our full statement will be available
for circulation.

The protection of civilians is an integral part of the
duties of all professional militaries that are raised in
defence of peace and security for their people. In fact,
military professionals are trained to save lives even in
peacetime, in the event natural disasters or other man-
made crises. We therefore believe that all peacekeeping
operations are undertaken inherently to help protect
civilians from being harmed.

While the protection of civilians has always been an
important objective of all United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the issue has raised increasing concern
in recent times. That is due to the changing nature of
conflict, which is moving away from inter-State armed
conflicts to civil wars and the involvement of non-State
actors, which have led to large-scale devastation in the
lives of civilian populations. It is a matter of concern
that most of those situations are proving too difficult to
be resolved completely, often due to the breakdown of
national governance structures within the country, as
well as the inability of the international community and
the Security Council to facilitate sustainable political
solutions to such conflict situations.

The responsibility for the protection of civilians
lies with the national Governments. However, in
situations involving the complete breakdown of
national governance structures, it is important to see
how to prevent such uncontrolled conflicts.

The implementation of robust mandates is a
complex task with serious inherent risks and less than
certain outcomes. The clarity of mandates required
for a more offensive operation is difficult to achieve.
The inherent subjectivity involved in the timing of an
offensive operation, in anticipation of imminent danger,
can impact the perceived impartiality of the United
Nations. Such operations would have to be based on
unimpeachable information, which is hard to ensure.
The adequacy of military assets and other resources is
another crucial aspect.

Any direct offensive action against a particular
group is fraught with the possibility of retaliatory
attacks, a trend that is being witnessed increasingly.
Protecing civilians in camps for internally displaced
persons and refugees is even more complex and
requires careful attention. In that context, the need for
regular consultations between the Council, the troop-
contributing nations and the Secretariat for improved
mandate-designing and implementation has been well
recognized. It needs to be pursued with the seriousness
it deserves.

Conflicts are about struggle for political power.
Conflict resolution and peacekeeping therefore have
to be primarily a political activity. Increasingly, the
focus of peacekeeping is on a robust approach and
technological aspects, and often it appears to lose focus
on the ultimate goal of seeking a political solution to the
conflict. Therefore, not only the deployment of armed
forces but other efforts of a robust political nature also
need to be given due attention. Political interventions
need diligence, skill and sustained diplomacy.

Peace and security issues today are vastly different
from seven decades ago, when the primary concern
of the Council was to prevent a recurrence of conflict
between former colonial Powers. Today, the issues of
peace and security cannot be seen in isolation from the
wider development-related issues that are dealt with
outside the Council. A more holistic approach towards
gender equality and empowerment, access to health
care, education, employment, and the strengthening of
democratic institutions and processes are all important
aspects of a holistic approach to prevent conflict.

While there seems to be general agreement about
the need for greater focus on peacebuilding to prevent
conflicts, as was witnessed in the identical resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly and the Security
Council recently (resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016), respectively) , the budget allocation for
peacebuilding does not even reach 1 per cent of that for
peacekeeping operations.

The long-standing and ongoing contribution by
India to United Nations peacekeeping, dating back
six decades, is a testimony to the dedication and
professionalism brought by the Indian peacekeepers
to their peacekeeping duties. Half a century ago,
when there was no distinct concept of the protection
of civilians, an Indian army captain in the Congo was
awarded India's highest award for paying the ultimate
sacrifice in defence of civilians. India lost a large
number of peacekeepers in a mission in 1962, the
largest such loss for one country in any mission.

As the largest cumulative troop-contributor,
and having participated in nearly 50 of the almost
70 peacekeeping missions mandated by the Council,
India is deeply conscious of the complexities involved in
the response of the international community to conflict
situations. Our recent agreement to participate in the
United Nations Force Intervention Brigade in Congo
has assisted in more flexible and timely interventions
for the protection of civilians.

India stands ready to contribute in all possible ways
to secure sustained peace and security that leads to the
protection of civilians.

