Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand): Allow me to pay
tribute to you, Sir, and to China for presiding over the
Security Council this month. I join others before me in
thanking Ambassador Guterres for his statement and
Ambassador Sharma, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his useful briefing on the
development and progress achieved in the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste.

We are encouraged by positive developments in
Timor-Leste, as highlighted in the Secretary-General's
report. Despite resource constraints, the Timor-Leste
leadership should be commended for its unwavering
determination in consolidating and strengthening the
country's foundations within a short span of time since
independence. We also commend the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) for its
continued assistance to the Government of Timor-Leste
and its close cooperation with the donor communities,
intergovernmental agencies and other United Nations
agencies in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1410 (2002).

We fully agree with the Secretary-General that
the continued engagement of the international
community in securing a solid foundation for the long-
term stability of Timor-Leste is vital. We therefore urge
the donor community to help narrow the resource gaps
in such priority areas as public administration and the
justice and finance systems, and in other areas as
foreseen in the National Development Plan of Timor-
Leste.

On the maintenance of peace and security,
training assistance for Timorese police and military
personnel is still much needed.

We wish to reiterate what we have stressed on
many occasions, that the support of the United Nations
and the international community in capacity-building is
of the highest priority if the Timorese are to attain self-
sustainability in the political, economic, social and
cultural development of the country.

The downsizing of UNMISET, with a view to a
smooth transition to traditional development assistance,
must be commensurate with the progress in the
development sector, including in the area of
employment generation.

For our part, Thailand is willing to render support
to the Timorese people in their development effort. Just
recently, Thailand sponsored a training course in local
administration for a group of Timorese leaders. Various
academic institutions in Thailand have now offered
scholarships and training programmes to Timorese
students. The Department of Technical and Economic
Cooperation of the Thai Foreign Ministry has just
announced 10 scholarships for Timorese students in the
areas of agriculture and health. In that connection, at
the end of this month, the director-general of that
department will lead a delegation to Dili comprising
both the Government and the private sector to discuss
further bilateral cooperation and assess the needs of the
Timorese in order to formulate a long-term assistance
plan. It is envisaged that the plan will primarily focus
on education, agriculture and health, and that it could
later be expanded to other areas.

Thailand will continue to support the work of
UNMISET through its contribution of police and
military personnel and through economic assistance.
We hope that such contributions, in conjunction with
the various assistance programmes, will help foster
capacity-building at the grass-roots level for the
population of Timor-Leste so that, over time, they can
participate in the regional and global economies on an
equal footing.

