Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria): Allow me first of all, Mr.
President, to join the previous speakers in extending to
you and to the entire team of the delegation of
Colombia our warmest congratulations on your able
guidance of the work of the Security Council during
the month of December. You have coped with the
challenging tasks before the Council in a remarkable
manner, in spite of the fact that the Council's
programme during the month was a truly busy one.

This wrap-up session of the Council has, in a
way, a unique and symbolic character, since it is being
held at the end of the year, when the time is most
appropriate to look retrospectively at what has been
achieved and what has not during the past year. In
addition, it is time to listen to the views of those non-
permanent members that are leaving the Council. These
views are truly valuable, since they give a succinct
review of a two-year experience, on which the Council
could build in its future activities. Since the previous
speakers have already covered most of the areas
relevant for this discussion, I would like to focus
briefly on several issues that we deem important.

With regard to the programme of work, we share
the View that during the past year the Council has dealt
on a continuous basis with a series of complex political
and security situations, achieving positive results on a
number of cases. The most convincing of these are the
progress achieved in East Timor, the excellent work on
Afghanistan, the improvement of the situation in Sierra
Leone, and the progress in the Balkans in the context
of the successful completion of the United Nations
missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Prevlaka.

The enormous amount of work done by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Committee
established under resolution 1267 (1999) aimed at
insuring the necessary conditions for full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) also definitely deserves a positive assessment.
The biggest portion of the Council's work was devoted
to conflicts on the African continent, although with
mixed results.

Significant progress was achieved in the
resolution of the conflict in the Great Lakes region,
which is probably the most complex of all conflicts in
Africa. This is a conflict where the Security Council
can make a difference. The Council remained,
throughout the year, in constant contact with the
parties. The mission to the region in May, and the high-
level meeting with the parties in September in New
York, were positive contributions to the coordinated
efforts of the international community to bring peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
as a whole. In 2003, we have to continue to be
proactive on this issue in order to consolidate the peace
process.

While the situation in Sierra Leone in 2002 has
considerably improved, thanks to the action of the
Council, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Sierra Leone and the commendable efforts of the
United Kingdom, the Council will have to follow
closely the unstable situation in neighbouring Liberia.
Considerable strides were made in the peace process in
Angola. The United Nations peacekeeping efforts with
regard to Ethiopia/Eritrea are encouraging too. We
have to continue to work hard on all these issues next
yean

Despite the achievements of the "facilitation and
the regional" initiative, the situation in Burundi still
demands close monitoring by the Council. We also
have to closely follow the developments in Cote
d'Ivoire.

The commencement of the second phase of the
Somalia reconciliation process is a significant step
forward. The Council should continue to attach priority
attention to the situation in this country with a view to
finding the appropriate means to reverse the process of
sliding into turmoil in that part of Africa.

On the activities of the sanctions committees, we
listened carefully to the briefings of the outgoing
chairmen only yesterday. The views expressed, the
lessons learned and the recommendations on possible
improvement of the methods of work should definitely
be taken into consideration in the Council's future
activities. Important contributions in this direction
could be made in the working group on sanctions,
which has resumed its work but still has not achieved
real progress on the recommendations made.

With regard to its working methods, the Council
should definitely continue to build on the positive
results already achieved, namely in the area of more
openness and transparency, as well as in its interaction
with the media. Strengthened cooperation with the
other United Nations organs and bodies on the basis of
a comparative advantage and adherence to the
respective mandates should also be commended. In this
regard we consider that the positive experience of the
work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Africa and its
interaction with the Economic and Social Council
could be explored further.

Finally, on the issue of conflict management, we
support more focused attention on the Council's future
activities on the connections between conflict
prevention and conflict resolution and the work to
promote sustainable development. In this context
devising appropriate exit strategies is of critical
importance for the successful post-conflict
reconstruction and development.

In conclusion, I would like to use the words of
Mrs. d'Achon of France delivered last year at the
4445th meeting, on the same occasion, when Bulgaria
was sitting at the side bench and preparing for
membership in the Council:

"This is a time for saying au revoir -
though certainly not adieu - to the five non-
permanent members that are leaving the Council;
of course, we will continue to work with them
outside the Security Council and use to the
maximum their experience and expertise."

