Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Netherlands
for convening this meeting today to discuss the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as for shedding light on the human
suffering there. To that end, the Dutch Minister for
Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation made a
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
order to see at first hand the humanitarian situation on
the ground. We also appreciate the briefings delivered
by Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affair; Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati,
Coordinator of the Encadrement des Femmes Indigenes
et des Menages Vulnerables and Abbe Donatien Nshole,
Secretary-General of the Conference Episcopale
Nationale du Congo.

This meeting is important for us in terms of our
priorities because of the scale of the humanitarian
disaster that we are facing. We constantly stress that
of all the topics on the Security Council agenda, the
most critical are those directly related to the extent of
human suffering. Most of that suffering is the result
of a political tug-of-war, the repercussions of which
usually endanger the lives of civilians, lead to severe
shortages in food and medical supplies and cause low
levels of security.

There is no doubt that prevarication in the
implementation by the relevant parties of the political
agreement that was signed on 31 December 2016, has led
to the absence of security and stability and the severe
deterioration in the humanitarian situation that we see
today. The ongoing struggle among the armed groups in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has intensified
over the past two years, particularly in the northern
parts of the country, and has reached concerning levels.
That has directly contributed to the escalation of the
humanitarian crisis to catastrophic levels in some areas
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as described
in reports issued by international organizations.

Some 13 million citizens of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo rely on humanitarian aid as a
main source of sustenance and survival, a 50 per cent
increase compared to 2017. Furthermore, 7.7 million
people suffer from severe food insecurity, a 30 per cent
increase in just one year. More than 2 million children
are suffering from acute malnutrition. Therefore, it is
no surprise that the humanitarian situation is being
described as catastrophic.

If we go back to recent times in 2017, we would
note that nearly 2.2 million new internally displaced
persons (IDPs) were scattered throughout the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The total number
of IDPs has risen to 4.5 million, the largest internally
displaced persons on the African continent. Moreover,
approximately 680,000 citizens of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have sought refuge in
neighbouring countries, which unfortunately has led to
some clear violations of human rights. In this regard,
we look forward to the outcome of the high-level
humanitarian conference that will be hosted by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and co-organized by the Netherlands, the United
Arab Emirates and the European Civil Protection and
Humanitarian Aid Operations in Geneva, in order to
raise funds to respond to the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The conference
will take place on 13 April.

We fully believe that the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo can be resolved
only through a comprehensive political solution, with
continued efforts to enhance confidence-building
measures, the timely holding of the presidential
elections and bringing perpetrators of human rights
Violations to justice. In this connection, we would like
to welcome the measures and actions currently being
undertaken by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to prepare for holding the three
elections - presidential, legislative and municipal - on
23 December 2018, in accordance with the elections
calendar. However, we hope that we do not have to
wait until then to see alleviation in the suffering of the
Congolese people, especially since the humanitarian
situation is being classified by relief organizations as
one of the worst in the world.

In closing, and with regard to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the mandate of which is due to
expire at the end of the month, we would like to reaffirm
the need to extend that mandate for an additional year.
We support the efforts of those working in the Mission
because it is an important contribution to the efforts of
the Government in preparing for the upcoming political
phase. We also note the importance of the continued
coordination between the Government and international
and regional organizations to support political stability,
which is the main component in the alleviation of the
suffering of the Congolese people.

