Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council and
to thank you for holding this important meeting, which
coincides with a number of significant international
developments concerning stability in the Middle
East region.

Those developments required the League of
Arab States to convene a number of extraordinary
meetings at the summit and ministerial levels, while
the Security Council is still incapable of effectively
dealing with them although they are directly linked to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

There are many hotbeds of tension throughout
the Arab world. However, the Palestinian question
remains at the heart of such tension. The League of
Arab States is extremely concerned about the electoral
crisis in Israel, which means that there is currently no
recognized partner in the peace process. Nevertheless,
we underscore once again the unchanging principles
and international parameters underpinning the peace
process, most importantly the two-State solution, the
establishment of a Palestinian State within the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and the
need for negotiations to include the five key issues of
the final status: settlements, water, refugees, security
and Jerusalem. The League reiterates its rejection of
any unilateral decision that would undermine the
Palestinian negotiating position in any final peace
negotiations. We also reiterate our refusal to change the
status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

We call for effectively countering the Israeli
settlements brutal attacks against Palestinian
territories. The defenceless Palestinian people must
be protected against Israeli attacks. The Security
Council must consider the alternatives proposed by the
Secretary-General in his report (A/73/346), following
the resumption of the tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly on 13 June 2018.

We also underscore the importance of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and its role
in assisting Palestinian refugees and meeting their
humanitarian needs until they are allowed to enjoy the
right to return in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1948 and until a comprehensive
andjust solution to the Palestinian question is reached.

The League hopes that peace negotiations on all
issues between the Palestinian and Israeli parties will
begin as soon as the new Israeli Government is formed,
based on the internationally agreed parameters, the
Oslo Accords, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative. We are convinced that the international
actors, especially the Security Council, will provide
their support for a comprehensive and just solution to
the Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli conflict
in its entirety.

Meanwhile, we commend all the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Coordinator,
Mr. Mladenov. We welcome the reports on illegitimate
Israeli settlement activities, which are provided pursuant
to resolution 2334 (2016), which is and will remain a
milestone in the work of the Council and a cornerstone
ofinternational legitimacy that must be respected.

Iran's flagrant interference in the internal affairs
of Arab countries continues. Iran is supporting
terrorist organizations and cells that are opposed to
the Governments of Arab countries, which is a source
of deep concern for the League of Arab States and the
international community. That is why the Arab Summit,
held in Mecca in May, dealt with that issue and issued
the Mecca communique, reaffirming the declaration
issued at the previous Arab Summit held in Tunisia.
The recent Arab ministerial meetings held in Cairo in
September and the ministerial coordination meeting
held at the beginning of the seventy-fourth session of
the General Assembly adopted declarations confirming
the firm and unequivocal position of the Arab League,
including the need for the Security Council to counter
these threats.

Although we have communicated all of those
statements to the Secretary-General to be circulated
to the Security Council and the General Assembly as
official documents, I will focus only on their most
salient points.

First, we condemn Iranian interference in the
domestic affairs of Arab States, in particular in the
Arabian Gulf region. We condemn military actions
carried out and supported by Iran against the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and in the
Gulf of Oman.

Secondly, all countries ofthe League of Arab States
stand in full solidarity with the States of the Arabian
Gulf in countering threats and acts of aggression. We
urge the Security Council and various international
and regional Powers to redouble their international
cooperation to ensure international and regional peace
and security while forcefully and decisively confronting
attempts to threaten energy security, safety of maritime
facilities in the Arabian Gulf and other waterways
whether by Iran or its followers.

Thirdly, Arab States are committed to meeting all
challenges and countering flagrant Iranian interference
under international law, international legitimacy and
the Charter of the United Nations, while compelling
Iran to meet its obligations as a State Member of the
United Nations and as a neighbouring country of the
Arab States in the Arabian Gulf. That will also avoid
any military confrontation in our region.

Our region has seen other developments with
regard to the issue of Syria. While we were expecting a
de-escalated situation thanks to the efforts ofthe Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, leading to
the establishment of the Constitutional Committee,
we were surprised by the withdrawal of United States
forces from the north-eastern part of Syria, which
enabled Turkey to launch a military offensive in Syria
with a view to establish a buffer zone.
Although Syria is a suspended member of the
League of Arab States, on 12 October the Council
of Ministers of the League adopted resolution
8454, condemning fully the Turkish act of military
aggression and explicitly calling on the Security
Council to intervene to stop it. We commend the efforts
undertaken by the United States and Russia, which have
led to successive agreements with Turkey, including
ambiguous arrangements on Arab Syrian territory. The
League nevertheless reiterates the need to stop Turkey's
military aggression in Syria and the withdrawal of all
Turkish aggressive forces from Syria.

We call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities and ensure the prevention of any
provisional agreement that would undermine the
territorial integrity and unity of Syria or have a
negative impact on the international efforts under way
that have enabled the eradication of Da'esh in Iraq and
countered its activities in Syria, the latest of which was

the targeting the leader of Da'esh in the north-western
part of Syria, which was announced yesterday.

In that regard, the League of Arab States reiterates
the contents of the outcome document of the regular
Arab Summit held in Tunisia, which refused to
recognize Israel's sovereignty over the occupied Syrian
Arab Golan. We also stress Syria's sovereignty over the
Golan, in accordance with resolution 497 (1981), which
was adopted unanimously. We also reiterate that we are
ready to officially refer the issue to the Security Council
and the International Court of Justice, notwithstanding
the fact that Syria's membership in the League is still
suspended. We are undertaking consultations in that
regard with the parties concerned, in coordination with
the Arab member in the Security Council.

In conclusion, the League of Arab States will
continue to play its key role, together with the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union, in
support of the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, Ghassan Salame, to bring
about comprehensive peace. We will spare no effort
to support the work done in Yemen by Mr. Griffiths
in his capacity as the Special Envoy. We will continue
our support for the stabilization efforts under way in
Algeria, the Sudan, Somalia, Iraq and other Arab States.
We hope to step up our cooperation and joint action
with the United Nations and with all other regional
and political organization in order to bring peace and
security to the Middle East.

