Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We are grateful
to you, Mr. President, for scheduling this briefing by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This follows the logic of the
meeting we had in March on the humanitarian situation
in Iraq. Today's meeting also represents the first
follow-up to the provision made in resolution
1327 (2000) for humanitarian briefings on conflict
situations. We appreciate the very useful briefing given
by Ms. Carolyn McAskie. We also thank her for
sharing with us a nicely bound and very informative
folder.

The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has continued to deteriorate; the
number of displaced persons has increased; more
people are being driven from their hearth and home;
more people are being forced out of the country; there
is renewed fighting in Kisangani or the Kivus or
Equateur; there are casualties; there are gross
violations of humanitarian laws and human rights;
belligerent parties continue to recruit children and send
them to the front line for combat; the situation is grave,
but humanitarian access in many areas remains
difficult. That has in essence been the substance of the
quarterly reports of the Secretary-General and the
periodic briefings given by the Secretariat over the
year. The situation, as Ms. McAskie has informed us
today, has not improved in any of these areas.
It is appalling that 16 million people, or 33 per
cent of the country's population, remain in critical need
of food, and that a large number of people suffer
epidemic outbreaks of cholera, meningitis, dysentery,
malaria and haemorrhagic fever. Women and children
are most affected by this crisis.

The recent leadership wrangles in the Congolese
Rally for Democracy-Liberation Movement (RCD-ML)
has claimed at least 40 lives in Bunia and has forced
about 1,000 people out of the country. Such fratricidal
wars must stop. We call upon the parties to
immediately halt all military action and open
humanitarian corridors for these people. We also urge
members of the United Nations with influence on the
parties to secure necessary humanitarian access to
these areas.

It is unfortunate that all actors- internal and
external - continue to justify the war by insisting that
they have their stakes. As the war is fought at the
expense of the Congolese people, it would seem, from
the behaviour of the belligerents, that the people alone
have no stakes or that their lives or their right to peace
and prosperity have no place in the belligerents' minds.
It is this point that High Commissioner Sadako Ogata
tried to impress upon the leaders during her June visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, when she
said,

"Don't forget the people and, as you negotiate,
don't ignore the human cost of the war."

The failure to recognize the human cost of the war is
demonstrated by the continued ceasefire violations by
all parties. The recent ceasefire violations in the north
of Katanga are deeply deplorable. The RCD's recapture
of the town of Pepa complicates the situation and
challenges the role the United Nations could play there.

The dire humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as in other conflict zones, is the
direct consequence of conflicts. The long-term solution
of the humanitarian crisis lies in a political settlement.
Humanitarian assistance cannot be an alternative to a
political settlement. The Council had extended the
mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) by
two months to allow for political and diplomatic
initiatives for the full deployment of the United
Nations mission.

The Council will have to take a serious decision
on continued engagement by the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as the mandate of
MONUC comes to an end after the technical roll-over.
The progress that we expected from the different
diplomatic initiatives has proved elusive so far. This is
certainly a source of serious concern. We, however,
continue to believe that the United Nations must
remain engaged in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo while efforts continue in order to create
conditions for the full deployment of MONUC. We
hold the view that the existence of a peace agreement
should not be an obstacle to a peace settlement. If need
be, while maintaining commitment to the Lusaka
Agreement, the parties could, in order to move
forward, agree to additional provisions like the
Kampala disengagement plan.

The United Nations, like the parties to the
conflict, cannot ignore the regional dimension of the
conflict. It has been repeatedly mentioned here that
there is no military solution to the crisis. Lusaka
represents a package. The United Nations has
welcomed it and remains committed to help in its
implementation. If the parties so require, we would, in
principle, have no problem with a Lusaka-II or Lusaka-
III. We should support all serious efforts that advance
the prospects of peace. It should be recognized by all
parties that an inclusive political process is a
prerequisite to any credible disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme.

It is regrettable that the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions remain without
compliance, although they are mandatory for the
concerned parties. The key to the resolution of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to comprehensive peace in the Great Lakes region lies
in the full implementation of the relevant Council
resolutions. That should take place without any further
delay.

I would conclude by recalling the wise advice of
President Mandela. Speaking about the rebel groups in
Burundi, he said that surrender of weapons by rebels
cannot be realistically expected until they can become
fully involved in the peace process. He mentioned that
the African National Congress did not give up arms
until it was allowed to be fully engaged in the political
process. There should be useful wisdom in the words of
an elder statesman for the authorities in Kinshasa and
other, neighbouring capitals.

