Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation is grateful
to Special Coordinator Mladenov and Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for their briefings.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of Kuwait
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

As this is Malaysia's final quarterly open
debate on the Middle East in our capacity as a
non-permanent member of the Council, I would like
to take this opportunity to make several observations
on the Council's approach to the issue of the
Palestinian question.

First of all, despite persistent warnings by the
Secretary-General and the Special Envoy on the
unsustainable situation on the ground and the ever-
increasing threats to the two-State solution, it is
regrettable that the Council has not been able to offer
either effective or even symbolic responses to address
the situation. For many years, Council progress on the
issue of Palestine was practically nonexistent, which
belies the worsening situation on the ground. Mainly
this is due to the inability to muster enough political
will, or the familiar excuse that the time is not right
for the Council to act. Today we expect to hear yet
again repeated calls from States Members of the United
Nations for the Council not to shirk its responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations and to take
urgent action to salvage the two-State solution. As we
speak, more homes are being destroyed, more deaths
and despair inflicted.

Secondly, there is a tendency for the Council to
accord equal treatment to both the occupying Power and
the occupied people when, in reality, no such balance or
equality exists. On the one side we have an occupying
Power with great military might, which has been
occupying a defenceless civilian population for almost
half a century. On the other side we have the occupied
Palestinians, who live under repressive occupation and
a brutal blockade, who face discriminatory treatment
and violations of their basic human rights on a daily
basis and who are dispossessed of their homes and
lands, deprived of natural resources and economic
development and restricted in their movement. All of
this is inflicting enormous hardship and suffering. It is
misleading for us to assume that the occupying Power
and the occupied people have the same level of legal,
political and moral obligations and responsibilities.
Under international law, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention, substantial obligations are clearly imposed
on the occupying Powers to protect the general welfare
of the inhabitants of an occupied territory. That includes
protection from forcible transfer and protection for
their property. All of that has been violated. Indeed,
the international community did not try to be balanced
when we condemned and sanctioned apartheid in South
Africa, just as it should not try to be balanced when
discussing the Holocaust. What is wrong cannot be
right. The sooner we realize this, the clearer our focus
on the issue will be.

Thirdly, the Council tends to focus on symptoms of
the conflict and conveniently ignores its root causes. It
is much easier and more palatable to condemn sporadic
attacks and acts of violence than to address the bigger
question of what creates, fuels and breeds such anger,
frustration and despair in the first place, which has
given rise to desperate, albeit violent, responses.

The Secretary-General earlier this year said,

4:

as oppressed peoples have demonstrated
throughout the ages, it is human nature to react to
occupation" (S/PV. 7610, 2).

He also said that:
"[n]o one can deny that the everyday reality of
occupation provokes anger and despair, which
are major drivers of violence and extremism and
undermine any hope of a negotiated two-state
solution."

That statement should prompt us to think, reflect
and act. It brings a humanistic angle to the conflict
that the Palestinians should no longer be denied their
fundamental right to self-determination and their quest
for statehood. Therefore, unless and until we deal with
the root cause of the problem, which is the prolonged
and repressive military occupation, the endless cycle
of violence will continue and feed into the political
narrative of those who thrive on it.

Last Friday, Malaysia, together with Egypt,
Senegal, Angola and Venezuela, organized an Arria
Formula meeting of the Council on the issue of illegal
Israeli settlements. We listened to various experts who
provided factual analyses on the worrying developments
relating to settlement expansion in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Their summation was decidedly
clear: the settlement expansion and repression must
stop. The politics of yore have no place amid the world's
hunger for peace.

I listened carefully to the statement by the Israeli
Permanent Representative. Not a single sentence
addressed the issue of settlement expansion, which is
a top-most concern of the international community. In
the coming weeks, we hope to see effective Council
action to use the various tools at its disposal to address
the issue of settlements. The settlements are not only
illegal under international law, they also constitute
the most tangible and visible threat to the two-State
solution, and therefore to peace in the region.

Clearly, habitual verbal condemnations in the
past decades have done nothing to halt or deter illegal
settlements activities. Instead, the occupying Power
is further emboldened by our inaction and has further
sought to legalize outposts and seize more private
Palestinian land.

With the recent announcement by Israel to build
new settlement units in the occupied West Bank, the
ball is now in the Council's court to act urgently, enforce
its own resolutions, uphold the rule of law and prove its
commitment to the two-State solution. Similarly, the
international community should also pursue all legal,
political and economic channels to step up its pressure
on the Israeli Government to make it too costly for
Israel to continue with its illegal settlement policy.

I wish to highlight a recent attempt by a group of
15 women on board a freedom flotilla that sailed from
Barcelona and headed for the Gaza Strip last week to
highlight the ongoing illegal blockade of Gaza and
deliver humanitarian aid. Among them were Northern
Ireland's 1976 Nobel Peace Prize winner and Dr.
Fauziah Hassan, a female Malaysian doctor. Although
their attempt was successfully blocked by Israel, their
courageous non-violent resistance managed to raise
awareness of the ongoing violations of international law,
international human rights law and Security Council
resolutions by Israel. It also provided a glimmer of
hope for the Palestinians in Gaza, fostered solidarity
and conveyed to them that the world had not abandoned
or forgotten about them.

We urge civil society worldwide to continue its
struggle to call for accountability and to highlight gross
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Its role is especially important
in shaping public opinion and providing pressure from
the bottom up, in view of the collective failure by
Governments and world leaders to take effective action
to resolve the conflict. This is not about demonizing
Israel. It is about seeking justice and ending the
occupation and its repressive nature. It is about seeking
a political shift and attitudinal change. It is about
creating the enablers and conditions for lasting peace.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Malaysia's request
that a briefing on the humanitarian situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, be
made a permanent feature of the Council's meetings on
the issue. We believe that the humanitarian situation
on the ground demands particular attention and a
separate briefing by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

Although this is our last intervention as a Council
member in the quarterly open debate, Malaysia
remains committed to pushing for the establishment
of an independent, democratic, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel.

