Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala,
Mr. Harold Caballeros, for presiding over today's
meeting. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Judge Sang-Hyun Song, President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), and the representative of
the Prosecutor, Mr. Phakiso Mochochoko, for their
statements. I would like to make the following points
on the question of the achievement of peace and justice.

First, peace and justice are two fundamental
values of human society. Without justice there cannot
be sustainable peace, and without peace there can be
no justice to speak of. Peace and justice reinforce and
complement each other. However, if handled improperly
the two may clash. China believes that justice cannot
be pursued at the expense of peaceful processes, nor
should it impede the process of national reconciliation.

Secondly, the Charter of the United Nations and its
purposes and principles constitute the backbone of the
rule of law at the international level. The promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security must be guided by the
purposes of the Charter and the fundamental principles
of respect for national sovereignty and non-interference
in the internal affairs of States. The ICC, as an integral
part of the international system of the rule of law, must
abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter and
play a positive role in maintaining international peace
and security. It must not be reduced to a tool available
to certain countries in pursuing their individual goals
and interests. Since the Charter entrusts the Security
Council with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
hope that the ICC will exercise caution in carrying
out its functions and avoid impeding the work of the
Security Council by seeking political settlements to
international and regional conflicts.

Thirdly, States bear the primary responsibility
to punish international crimes, eliminate impunity
and achieve justice. The ICC can supplement but not
replace national jurisdiction. We believe that the ICC
should respect the judicial traditions and requirements
of the various realities existing in different countries
and regions, including their choice of the timing and
modality of seeking to enforce justice. China supports
the national efforts of countries to build capacities and
to exercise jurisdiction in matters of grave international
crimes.

China supports all efforts to establish a just and
peaceful world. Therefore, we need not only to eliminate
impunity but also to establish political processes,
facilitate national reconciliation, promote economic
and social development and eradicate the root causes
of conflicts.

