Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Peru on assuming
the Council presidency for the month of July. I also
express my appreciation for Kuwait's presidency of the
Council over the past month.
My country appreciates your selection, Sir, of
the important topic of linkages between international
terrorism and organized crime for today's open
debate. I also express my appreciation for all the
valuable briefings that we heard at the beginning of
today's meeting.

Egypt has always called for the adoption of a
comprehensive approach to addressing the phenomenon
ofterrorism, its driving forces, impact and interlinkages
in order to find the most effective solutions to tackle
this dangerous criminal phenomenon. The relationship
between terrorism and organized crime is well
established at the conceptual and theoretical levels.
This is made clear in General Assembly resolution
55/25 of 2000, which concerns the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
acknowledges that relationship in many of its provisions.
Practical experience has also shown in more than one
case the interlinking interests between terrorist groups
and transnational organized crime networks.

Egypt has the honour to currently chair the African
Union for the year 2019. In this connection, allow me
to share Egypt's view of the security situation on the
ground in the Sahel and its impact on consolidating the
linkage between the terrorist groups in that region and
transnational organized crime networks. Egypt will
also share its recommendations and suggestions on how
to address this illegitimate union between terrorism
and organized crime, of which there are many examples
in various regions of our world.

The African Sahel region has long suffered
from the activities of transnational organized crime
groups, be they connected to drugs or arms or human
traffickers. Increasing terrorist activity is a result of
weak law enforcement agencies in many of the States
concerned, and the large area in which these groups
have proliferated. The deteriorating security situation
in sisterly Libya exacerbated the situation as huge
quantities of weapons became available, in addition
to the large number of mercenaries who enhanced the
capabilities of these criminal groups in the region to
confront the law enforcement agencies of the States
concerned. Terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram in the
West or terrorist groups affiliated with Da'esh in the
Sahel, took advantage of the fragile security situation
to share mutual benefits in that region with organized
crime groups. The outcome has been deplorable. Day
in and day out, we have seen incidents of abduction,
violence, the targeting of civilians, particularly
women, the fuelling of intercommunal fighting within
the States of the region, trafficking in humans and
illegal migration.

Egypt believes that the best way to address
the activities of terrorist groups in these hotbeds,
where they are able to collaborate more easily with
transnational organized crime networks, as is the case
in the Sahel, is through the support of the international
community to the authorities of these States and their
capabilities, as well as their national institutions, along
with strengthening their law enforcement agencies.
Egypt therefore provided, for example, technical
support to the sisterly countries of the Sahel by offering
them 1,000 training grants in the military sphere, as
well as capacity-building programmes in various
fields, through the Egyptian Agency of Partnership for
Development. The training courses cover the areas of
security, law enforcement and justice.

In addition, Egypt recently opened the Sahel-
Saharan Anti-Terrorism Centre. We greatly hope that
the Centre will contribute to the capacity-building
of institutions in the Sahel-Saharan countries and
strengthen the pillars of the nation States in the region,
restricting the space for the activities of terrorist
groups and transnational organized groups. We call
on the international community and our partners to
cooperate with us in that regard, since cooperation will
benefit not only our dear African continent but also our
northern neighbours in Europe, which also suffer the
repercussions of organized crime and the activities of
terrorist groups in the Sahel.

In conclusion, I have given just a few realistic
examples. Egypt and many sisterly African countries
have also suffered from the linkage between terrorist
and organized crime groups. We have shared our
views and practical suggestions on addressing this
phenomenon by strengthening the pillars of the nation
State and building the capacities of national institutions.
We believe that this is crucial in order to fill the gaps
exploited by organized crime groups and affiliated
terrorist groups.

