Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Let me
thank you, Madame, for convening today's important
debate, and all those who have spoken.

Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement to be made on behalf of the European Union,
and that of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Children and Armed Conflict.

Twenty years ago, in August 1996, Graca Machel
published her report on the impact of armed conflict on
children (see A/51/306). Since then, we have collectively
developed, step by step, a child protection mechanism
that is among the unquestionable successes of the United
Nations. We have done so in consensus, united in the
conviction that children represent that which is most
sacred to each nation. Through this mechanism, with
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
and the monitoring and reporting mechanism at its
core, tens of thousands of children have been rescued,
freed from armed ranks, reintegrated into their families
and returned to school.

All countries whose national security forces are
listed in the annexes the Secretary-General's annual
reports have now signed an action plan with the United
Nations to end grave violations against children.
This owes much to the increased mobilization for
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign launched by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF in 2014. We
welcome the fact that the Sudan made that commitment
by signing an action plan on 27 March, in the presence
of Ms. Leila Zerrougui. It is now time to build on that
political resolve to arrive at the full implementation of
the action plan as soon as possible.

In addition to the Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
other progress made over the course of the past year
should be noted, such as the intensification of dialogue
between the Special Representative and non-State
armed groups, which, as we know, constitute the
majority of parties to conflict mentioned in the
annexes to the reports of the Secretary-General. That
has already produced results for Colombia. We also
welcome the decision by the Secretary-General to
suspend all participation in peace operations of troop-
or police-police contributing countries that are listed in
the annexes to his annual reports.

While progress has been made, however, much
remains to be done. The annual report of the Secretary-
General indeed paints a bleak picture of the situation
in 2015.

In Afghanistan, children are disproportionately
affected by the upsurge in attacks. Last year, one in
four civilian casualties was a child. In Syria, the mass
recruitment and use of children by Da'esh continued,
as did attacks carried out by the Government against
schools and hospitals, owing in large part to the
increased use of air strikes and explosive weapons in
populated areas. Cases of child abduction remain all
too common in Iraq, the Central African Republic and
South Sudan, where they have increased yet again. In
Yemen, the number of children killed or maimed during
the year 2015 increased six-fold.

Given that, we reiterate our unequivocal support
for the mandate of the Special Representative, who
is working tirelessly to protect children in armed
conflict. The independence of her work should not
be questioned. We count on everyone to respect it.
We reaffirm our unwavering confidence in protection
instruments, including the monitoring and reporting
mechanism set up by the Council to verify the accuracy
of all information included in the annual reports and
their annexes. The report is the result of extensive
consultations among the concerned Member States
within the United Nations system - at Headquarters
and on the ground.

We reiterate our desire to see child protection
advisers continue to exercise their specific mandate
in the missions concerned. That is why we continue
as well to concretely support the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Similarly, we
have decided to support a research project of the United
Nations University being carried out in partnership
with UNICEF, which must help develop tools to better
guide the work of United Nations personnel on the
ground to prevent children from coming into harm's
way and protect and extract them from situations of
extreme violence.

While this year marks the twentieth anniversary
of the children and armed conflict agenda, we must
redouble our efforts to strengthen the protection of
children. If determination falters, we will be judged
harshly by history.

