Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to welcome here the Minister for External Relations
of Angola, Mr. De Miranda, and Minister Peter Hain of
the United Kingdom. We are also pleased to see some
members of the Panel here, particularly the Chairman,
Ambassador Mollander.

Thank you, Mr. President, for putting the situation
in Angola on the Council's agenda today. The people of
Angola have been suffering for too long from really
devastating humanitarian consequences of a conflict
which has gone on for far too long.

Today, for the first time we are considering the
report submitted by the Panel of Experts just introduced
by Ambassador Fowler. I have three comments I wish to
make on the report introduced by the Ambassador of
Canada.

My first comment is that the report highlights a wide
variety of kinds of actors who are involved in varying
degrees in relations with UNITA. The experts mention
Governments, but also companies, individuals, various
traffickers, arms suppliers, airlines, mercenary groups and
diamond firms. The information also concerns very
different regions: Africa, Europe and North America. The
first impression one gets from the Panel report is that
there is a great variety of actors and situations, and we
should bear in mind this variety. The report cannot be

 

reduced to three or four names, but rather describes a
complex reality.

My second comment is that the report stresses the
consequences of sanctions busting, namely continued
fighting in Angola, for which UNITA is primarily
responsible. So the consequences are really disastrous for
the people of Angola as a whole. The report also describes
how UNITA continues military activities outside of Angola.
This is particularly the case with information about
UNITA's military support for rebels and for some
belligerent States in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The report indicates that in exchange for that support, those
belligerent States and rebel groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have helped UNITA get fuel or
trade diamonds. Thus, the report rightly shows that there is
a serious effect of contagion of fighting and an increase in
regional instability, which is particularly disturbing, as
Ambassador Fowler has just told us in his introductory
comments.

My third comment is that the report describes how
sanctions busting has evolved over time. Some information
is more historical, for example, ties between UNITA and
Zaire before 1997, with Congo-Brazzaville before 1998, or
some facts that go back to 1993 or 1995. Other information
is more recent and deserves very close scrutiny. In several
cases, the report shows that the sanctions regime has
become more effective. Much of this is because of the
development of the military situation in Angola and efforts
made by the Government of Angola. But also, gradually,
measures have been taken by the countries and in the
professions concerned. For example, there were decisions
by the diamond industry last October, six months after the
Panel of Experts was established to implement resolution
1173 (1998) of June 1998. Establishing the Panel of
Experts has obviously had some impact in encouraging
people to do something, but we have to analyze the actual
steps taken, especially by the De Beers company. In any
case, such decisions, such an evolution, should be
encouraged.

It is now for the Security Council to look closely at
the information provided and the recommendations made by
the Experts. As I have just said, the experts' report
describes a complex reality. That information deserves
detailed scrutiny by the members of the Council. I should
like to ask some questions in this regard.

With regard to the question of dates, in some cases the
experts were rather imprecise about the dates of alleged
incidents. For example, it is often not indicated exactly
when some incidents took place. Sometimes the year is
given but the day or month is not indicated; sometimes
there is no exactitude at all. It would therefore be
desirable to have more precise information on the dates so
that we can better determine - particularly with regard
to the economic sanctions imposed in 1998, concerning
diamonds in particular - whether the events described by
the experts occurred before or after the imposition of
those sanctions.

There is also the question of the sources of
information. Quite often those are not spelled out, thereby
raising questions. Sometimes the experts indicate that they
have obtained information from "a source close to
Savimbi". It is true that one cannot include all the names
in a public report. But some of these matters can be
detailed later.

There are also questions as to UNIT A's
representation abroad. The report mentions that persons
regarded as being linked to UNITA have been present in
or have visited certain countries. But the experts do not
say whether those persons are or are not on the list drawn
up by the sanctions Committee. One could therefore ask
whether it is really a case of violations of sanctions when
the persons mentioned are not on that list. In this
connection, we should also make the proper distinctions
in order to better understand what steps need to be
taken - particularly with regard to those proposed by the
Panel - to update the sanctions Committee list.

We also have some questions about the scope of the
violations that have taken place. We regret that the report
still does not give an overall estimate of UNITA's
revenue - what it has raised from diamond trafficking or
the total amounts spent on arms and fuel purchases. I
know it is not always easy to get reliable estimates, but
we believe that even a rough estimate would help us
estimate the relative importance of the various supply
networks being used by UNITA, for example, for arms
and fuel. If one could compare the orders of magnitude in
figures, then we would better be able to assess the facts
cited by the experts. That would help us determine what
steps need to be taken to ensure better respect for
sanctions.

For example, more precise information is needed
about the network for the sale of rough diamonds. The
report mentions the measures announced by the main
companies in the diamond market, particularly those by
the De Beers company in October 1999. But the report
does not indicate whether measures were taken before

 

then to implement the sanctions enacted by the Security
Council in 1998. The report gives us quite a lot of
information about diamonds, but only as to certain
European markets, particularly the Antwerp market, but
very little, and in some cases none, about other diamond
markets in Europe or elsewhere. Without question, more
detail would also be useful in this connection.

On all of these points it will be necessary to get
explanations from the countries mentioned in the experts'
report. States cited by the experts, either because of deeds
committed by the Governments themselves or because of
deeds committed by their nationals or from their territories,
should be permitted to make their views known.
Ambassador Fowler's report directly accuses certain
Governments. Those are serious accusations. They were
published just yesterday without the States concerned being
able to make their views known simultaneously. In fact, we
do not even know whether those States had an opportunity
to respond to the experts during the time the report was
being prepared or whether they were specifically informed
about the accusations against them before the issuance of
the report.

It is for these reasons that my delegation would like
members of the Council to consider thoroughly the
information in the report and the explanations that will be
provided by the countries concerned. One way to do this
could be to turn this task over to the competent sanctions
Committee, under the direction of its Chairman,
Ambassador Fowler. The Committee could question the
Chairman of the Panel, Mr. Mollander, in greater detail. It
could also receive communications from States cited in the
report that wish to make their views known. The
Committee could then transmit its own conclusions to the
Security Council. It will ultimately be up to the Council to
consider, on the basis of the sanctions Committee's
conclusions, what follow-up action to take on the
recommendations of the experts.

I would note that some of those recommendations are
general in nature - for example, those on arms production
registers - and should be dealt with in the competent
forum. Other recommendations, particularly those dealing
with the imposition of new sanctions on third States, could
result in problems regarding the effectiveness of that kind
of step and the multiplication of sanctions regimes. These
questions go beyond the framework of sanctions against
UNITA and will require some thought at the appropriate
time by the entire Council on sanctions in general.

The Panel of Experts, under the leadership of the
Ambassador of Canada, has gathered a lot of information.
It has made a major effort that France has supported. My
country was one of the first to make a voluntary
contribution to the Panel. It is now up to the Security
Council to consider closely the information and
recommendations of the experts and draw its own
conclusions. Efforts to implement sanctions should be
pursued in order to make UNITA respect its obligations.

