The Deputy Secretary-General: Recent debates,
including those at the Millennium Summit and the
Security Council summit last September, have shown
wide agreement on the need to make conflict
prevention a central pillar of our collective security
system in the twenty-first century. I therefore welcome
this opportunity to present the first report on this
subject, which the Secretary-General has submitted to
both the Security Council and the General Assembly.

If this report has one message, it is that we must
intensify our efforts to move from a culture of reaction
to one of prevention. Drawing on the lessons we have
learned, the Secretary-General proposes the following
10 principles which, in his View, should guide our
future approach to conflict prevention.

First, conflict prevention is one of the primary
obligations of Member States set forth in the Charter
and our efforts in conflict prevention must be in
conformity with the purposes and principles of the
Charter.

Second, conflict prevention must begin with
national Governments and local actors. Otherwise, it is
unlikely to succeed. They have the primary
responsibility. The United Nations and the international
community should support their efforts and assist them
in building national capacities.

Third, the most useful instruments of prevention
are those described in Chapter VI of the Charter, which
deals with the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Measures under Chapter VII are normally taken only
after a conflict has broken out, though they may still
have a preventive effect by deterring other potential
conflicts. There may also be cases where certain
measures under Chapter VII, such as economic
sanctions, can be used preventively.

Fourth, to be most effective, preventive actions
should be initiated as early as possible. The sooner a
dispute or problem that might lead to conflict can be
identified and addressed successfully, the less likely it
is that it will deteriorate into violent conflict.

Fifth, the primary focus of prevention should be
the multidimensional root causes of conflict. The
proximate cause of conflict may be an outbreak of
public disorder or a protest over a particular incident,
but the root causes are more likely to be found in
socio-economic inequities, systematic ethnic
discrimination, denial of human rights, disputes over
political participation or longstanding grievances over
the allocation of land, water and other resources.

Sixth, an effective preventive strategy requires a
comprehensive approach that encompasses both short-
term and long-term political, development,
humanitarian and human rights programmes.

Seventh, conflict prevention and sustainable
development reinforce each other. An investment in
prevention should be seen as a simultaneous
investment in sustainable development, since it is
obvious that the latter is more likely to happen in a
peaceful environment.

Eighth, there is therefore a case for looking at
United Nations development programmes and activities
from a conflict-prevention perspective. This in turn
requires greater coherence and coordination in the
United Nations system, with a specific focus on
conflict prevention.

Ninth, the United Nations is not the only actor in
prevention and may not always be the actor best suited
to take the lead. Member States, international and
regional organizations, the private sector, non-
governmental organizations and other civil society
actors also have very important roles to play.

Tenth and finally, effective preventive action by
the United Nations requires sustained political will on
the part of Member States. This includes, first and
foremost, a readiness to provide the United Nations
with the necessary political support and resources for
undertaking effective preventive action and developing
its institutional capacity in this field.

Now, how can this Council, which has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, enhance its role in
conflict prevention? The Secretary-General proposes a
number of means to help identify and capitalize more
easily on windows of opportunity for preventive action.
One is the practice, which the Secretary-General
intends to initiate, of providing periodic regional or
subregional reports to the Council on disputes with a
potential to threaten international peace and security.
Another is the proposition that the Council consider the
establishment of new mechanisms, such as an ad hoc
informal working group, another subsidiary organ or
some other informal technical arrangement for
discussing prevention cases in a more sustained and
structured way. The Council may also wish to consider
sending fact-finding missions with multidisciplinary
expert support to potential conflict areas, with the aim
of working out comprehensive prevention strategies.

The report calls on the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council to play a more active
role in conflict prevention and to enhance their
interaction with the Security Council in this field. One
of the recommendations made to the General Assembly
is that it authorize the Secretary-General and other
United Nations organs to take advantage of the
advisory competence of the International Court of
Justice. Needless to say, Member States themselves are
also urged to resort to the Court earlier and more often
to settle their disputes.

As to his own preventive role, the Secretary-
General thinks that it could be enhanced by increasing
the use of interdisciplinary fact-finding and
confidence-building missions to volatile areas; by
developing regional prevention strategies with regional
partners and the relevant United Nations organs and
agencies; by establishing an informal network of
eminent persons; and by improving the capacity and
resource base for preventive action in the Secretariat.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to
two other recommendations in the report. One is that
Member States support the follow-up processes
launched by the last two high-level meetings between
the United Nations and regional organizations, which
dealt with conflict prevention and peace-building,
respectively, and provide increased resources for the
development of regional capacities in these fields.

The other is that donor States should increase the
flow of official development assistance, which has
dropped to alarmingly low levels in recent years.
Development assistance cannot by itself prevent or end
conflict, but it does facilitate the creation of
opportunities and the political, economic and social
environment within which national actors can build a
peaceful, equitable and just society.

All that being said, let me emphasize that
effective conflict prevention requires action beyond
what is recommended in this report and, indeed,
beyond any institutional mechanism. The international
community has a moral responsibility to ensure that
vulnerable peoples are protected. On at least two
occasions in the recent past, in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia, we failed to live up to this responsibility.

The question remains, why is effective conflict
prevention still so seldom practised, and why do we so
often fail when there is a clear potential for a
preventive strategy to succeed? Past experience offers
two main answers to this question. First, if the
Government concerned refuses to admit that it has a
problem which could lead to violent conflict and
rejects offers of assistance, there often is very little that
outside actors, including the United Nations, can do.
Secondly, the international community, including the
Security Council and the Member States of the United
Nations, all too often lacks the political will to take
effective action in time.

But such attitudes are not the only obstacle to
effective preventive action. No less significant are the
ways in which the Member States define their national
interests in any given crisis. As the world has changed
in profound ways since the end of the cold war, our
conceptions of national interest have failed to follow
suit. A new, broader, more widely conceived definition
of national interest in the new century would induce
States to find far greater unity in the pursuit of the
fundamental goals of the Charter. As the Secretary-
General has stressed, in the growing number of
challenges facing humanity, the collective interest is
the national interest.

Preventive strategies are not easy to implement.
The costs of prevention have to be paid in the present,
while its benefits lie in the future. In addition, the
benefits are often not tangible. When prevention
succeeds, little happens that is visible. Yet the report
clearly demonstrates that conflict prevention is the
most desirable and cost-effective approach for
promoting the peaceful and just international order
envisaged in the Charter.

According to a study by the Carnegie
Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict, the
international community spent about $200 billion on
the seven major interventions of the 1990s - in
Bosnia, Somalia, Rwanda, Haiti, the Persian Gulf,
Cambodia and El Salvador, exclusive of Kosovo and
East Timor. Such calculations do not, of course, reflect
the human costs of war - death, injury, destruction,
displacement, and their repercussions for families,
communities, local and national institutions and
economies, and neighbouring countries.

The message is clear: Governments which
peacefully resolve a situation that might deteriorate
into a violent conflict and call for preventive assistance
as soon as it is needed provide the best protection for
their citizens against unwelcome outside interference.
Used in this way, international preventive action can
significantly strengthen the capacity of Member States
to preserve and exercise their national sovereignty.

It is my hope and the Secretary-General's hope
that the United Nations system and Member States will
be able to work together towards the implementation of
the recommendations contained in this report. The
constructive stance that the Security Council has
already taken in the three open debates and subsequent
presidential statements on this subject over the past
two years is heartening. But the time has come to
translate the rhetoric of conflict prevention into
concrete action.

