Mr. Arias (spoke in Spanish): I speak today as
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
in order to brief you on the status of its work, and to
submit to you the ninth work programme for the
months of October to December 2003.

On 4 October, I completed six months as
Chairman of the Committee. It has been a period in
which a great deal of serious work has been done on
our task of monitoring the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). There is no need to reiterate here the
importance of the Security Council's work in the
international community's fight against the threat to
peace and security represented by terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, but I believe it is appropriate
to emphasize that our Committee represents the
consensus shared by all Members of the United Nations
that affirms that it is necessary to struggle, by all
means, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, against acts of terrorism.

Before presenting a brief summary of the content
of the ninth work programme, I shall refer briefly to
the implementation of what was agreed to in the eighth
programme. With regard to the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), the Committee has continued
reviewing the reports submitted by States in response
to the letters addressed to them by the Committee. It
should be noted that the rate of review has slowed
down somewhat compared to previous periods because
we are gradually entering a more complex phase of our
work.

As States move from stage A, which basically
relates to verifying that adequate anti-terrorist
legislation is in place, to stage B, which focuses on the
actual implementation of these measures, the
Committee has taken more time to review reports and
draft letters.

It has become necessary to find a balance
between the amount of attention given to stage A and
stage B States. For that purpose, we have prepared a
working paper on the criteria for the drafting of letters
and the need to give attention to all States in line with
the principle of equal treatment, while providing the
essential flexibility that will allow the Committee to
maintain the proper follow-up of States' efforts to
implement the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001).

In our work ensuring that all States become
parties as soon as possible to the relevant international
conventions and protocols relating to terrorism, the
CTC considered specifically the issue at one of its
meetings, during which its team of experts presented a
report on the status of State participation and of the
positive impact of resolution 1373 (2001) and of the
work of the Committee itself.
Secondly, on the working methods of the
Committee, we have continued our efforts to apply the
criteria of coordination, transparency and equality of
treatment to the circumstances of each case.

Thirdly, in the field of technical assistance, we
are still working to ensure that the Committee takes an
increasingly active approach to its collaboration with
those States which, although they have a real political
will to implement resolution 1373 (2001), are
nonetheless facing difficulties in doing so.

Fourthly, with regard to transparency, the
Committee's web page has been completely redesigned
so as to be consulted as easily and quickly as possible.
The English version is now fully operative and in the
next few days the French and Spanish will also be
ready. Lastly, the web page will also be available soon
in Arabic, Chinese and Russian.

Fifthly and lastly, in the context of cooperation
with international, regional and subregional
organizations, ties have been strengthened between the
Committee and those who are working more directly in
the fight against terrorism.

On 7 October 2003, a second meeting was held
with such organizations at the headquarters of the
Organization of American States, in Washington, DC,
at which a great deal of information was exchanged.
The Committee is pleased to have initiated this
coordination process between international
organizations and notes with satisfaction that it will
continue in the future, since the next meeting has
already been scheduled for March 2004 in Vienna.

We have also taken steps to assure proper
coordination between the CTC and the Committee
established under Security Council resolution 1267
(1999). Both chairs have conducted a meeting with our
respective experts, in which it was agreed that there
will be periodic meetings to ensure better coordination
between these two bodies.

Now I would like to address the general outlines
of the ninth report, which run from October to
December 2003. By 30 September 2003, the committee
had received 419 reports from Member States and
others. This includes 191 initial reports from Member
States and five from others, 100 second reports from
Member States and 2 from others and 71 third reports
from Member States. It is important to note that to
date, all Member States of the United Nations have
submitted their initial reports.

Nevertheless, by 30 September 2003, 48 States
were late in submitting their reports. In accordance
with the obligation of transparency in our work, the
Committee has agreed that the Chairman will submit to
the Security Council, no later than 31 October 2003, a
list of States which have not yet submitted their reports
on time as of that date. I therefore take this opportunity
to reiterate to the representatives of States that are late
that they should submit their reports as soon as
possible. In any case, it should be remembered that the
focus of the Counter-Terrorism Committee is on
cooperation. We are therefore at the disposal of those
States, not only to assist them in the submission of
their reports but also to work with them in overcoming
any problems responsible for the delay. I repeat that
our team of experts will address any questions they
deem it appropriate to address.

With regard to the Committee's work, we will
continue to follow closely the development of the flow
of information exchanges with States through, among
other means, letters and reports. Technical assistance
will continue to be one of the main priorities of our
work, as will ensuring adequate coordination of
counter-terrorism efforts by international and regional
organizations in combating terrorism.

With regard to transparency, reference has
already been made to progress in revamping the
Committee's Web site. I am grateful for the work done
in that regard by the Secretariat team, the Department
of Public Information and the translation services of
the United Nations.

I conclude by noting that the chairmanship of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee is aware of its
responsibility to do all it can to ensure that the
Committee works at an appropriate pace and functions
effectively. Here I draw attention to paragraph 21 of
the ninth work programme, which provides that the
chairmanship shall submit to the Committee, for
subsequent evaluation by the Security Council, a report
on problems being encountered by States in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and on
difficulties being experienced in the same regard under
the present structure and functioning of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee itself. The purpose of that report
will be to identify major issues in order eventually to
debate possible measures to be taken by both the
Committee and the Security Council to solve them. All
that will be done in order to ensure that the obligations
contained in resolution 1373 (2001) are met as fully
and rapidly as possible by all Member States.

