Archbishop Auza (Holy See): Some heinous acts
have of late plunged some areas of the Middle East
further into violent chaos and new lows of barbarism.
The recent use of chemical agents in Syria once
again constitutes a gross violation of international
humanitarian law and the Chemical Weapons
Convention. The Palm Sunday terrorist bombings
in Egypt and the attack on fleeing refugees were
abominable attacks against innocent civilians gathered
in prayer in sacred places or trying to escape violence
and, as such, were attacks against the very foundation
of human dignity and rights. My delegation extends
its sincere condolences to the families of those whose
loved ones have been slaughtered and offers prayerful
good wishes to those who survived the attacks and
their families.

Lebanon is heroically bearing the burden of hosting
millions of refugees from neighbouring countries and
territories in conflict. In addition to the impacts of this
heavy burden, its stability is also threatened by armed
groups. In order to stabilize Lebanon, the Security
Council adopted several resolutions calling for the
disarming of all armed non-State actors. Yet militias
and groups armed and funded by outside sources remain
active beyond the control of the Lebanese authorities.

Parallel situations exist in neighbouring territories
and countries, where terrorist groups and other
armed non-State actors operate, plunging the region
deeper into ungovernability, persecuting ethnic and
religious minority groups and trampling fundamental
human rights.

Since 1947, the Holy See has consistently supported
a two-State solution for the State of Israel and a
Palestinian State to exist side by side in peace. The
peace process between the Israelis and Palestinians can
move forward only if it is directly negotiated between
the parties, with the strong and effective support of
the international community. Leaders and citizens
on both sides must have the foresight and courage to
make fair concessions, because no agreement can be
reached as long as mutually exclusive and impossible
demands remain.

Pope Francis calls on both parties to listen to the
voices of dialogue, show goodwill and extend gestures
of encounter to give their peoples the peace for which
their hearts have yearned for so long now.

Twisted religious claims mixed with irredentist
ideologies contribute to the bloodshed in the region.
Unimaginably barbaric acts are being perpetrated
supposedly in the name of God or religion. Ethnic
and religious minority groups that for millennia
have peacefully coexisted with the Muslim-majority
communities have been targeted by extremists. Their
cultural and historical patrimony has been destroyed,
threatening to annihilate every trace of their long-
standing presence in the region. The Holy See urges the
international community, through the Security Council,
not to forget them and to intensify efforts to spare them
from the genocidal scourge of violent terrorist groups.

The Holy See urges religious leaders to speak out
forcefully against such terror and to act to control
effectively their followers who are reprehensibly
claiming to act in God's name by means of terror. No
religious leader should tolerate the use of religion as a
pretext for actions against human dignity and against
the fundamental rights of every man and woman,
above all, the right to life and the right of everyone to
religious freedom. In this regard, in February this year
Al-Azhar and the Holy See held a discussion in Cairo
on countering the phenomena of fanaticism, extremism
and violence in the name of religion.
Moreover, the Holy See calls upon arms suppliers
to act in accord with internationally agreed upon norms
for weapons sales. The blood of innocent civilians is
a testament to the need to end the unchecked flow of
arms into the region.

My delegation wishes to close its remarks with the
prayer of Pope Francis after recent attacks in Egypt
and Syria:

"May the Lord convert the hearts of the people who
are sowing terror, violence and death"

and

"may He grant the leaders of nations the courage
they need to prevent the spread of conflicts and to
put a halt to the arms trade".

Pope Francis's scheduled visit to Egypt on 28 and
29 April will be an opportunity for him to stress once
again that there is no greater antidote to violence and
hatred than dialogue and encounter.

