Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Nigerian presidency of the Council
for this month for organizing this meeting on the Ebola
epidemic, which affected three West African countries
so severely from December 2013 and whose effects
continue to trouble some of them today. I would also
like to thank today's briefers, Dr. Margaret Chan, Dr.
David Nabarro, Ambassador Tete Antonio, Mr. Per
Thoresson and Dr. Mosoka Fallah, for their statements.

The very particular attention given to the Ebola
epidemic by the United Nations and the rest of the
international community is testament to the degree to
which our planet remains vulnerable in some areas,
and to which the international solidarity, demonstrated
by the multifarious efforts that it brought together,
is what is required to create an adequate response
for combating the negative effects of this plague and
similar natural disasters. As is clearly highlighted in
today's concept note (S/2015/600, annex), it was not
only Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone that suffered so
severely from its effects, with thousands of deaths, but
other countries in the same subregion as well, if to a
lesser degree, that saw the disease's effects, including
Nigeria, Senegal and Mali. Even countries outside the
African continent were affected.

The Ebola epidemic spread so fast that it was
considered a threat to international peace and security.
We should recall that on 18 September the epidemic was
the subject of an emergency meeting of the Security
Council (see S/PV.7268), which generally is not called
on to discuss public health issues. In View of the scale
of Ebola and the threat it posed to international peace
and security, resolution 2177 (2014), proposed by the
United States, was sponsored by 134 States Members
of the United Nations and adopted unanimously by the
members of the Council. The resolution demonstrated
the ability of the international community to mobilize
in the face of this extraordinary crisis. We commend
the reaction of the international community, led by
the Security Council, in its collective grasp of the
seriousness of the situation, particularly through the
adoption of the resolution and its call for international
aid to be mobilized in combating this scourge.

The deaths caused by Ebola, the precariousness of
basic social health services and the chaos among their
existing structures, including the closure of hospitals
in some countries, were both a result and the visible
symptoms of the weakness of the health systems of
the countries most affected. We also saw how slowly
international aid was deployed, despite the fact that
it was available, as well as the stigmatization of the
entire African continent and the excessive and insulting
protective measures taken by several countries - the
practices ofquarantine, isolation and even tacit embargo
are still deplorable even considering the right of States
to defend and ensure their own security, including as it
relates to health issues. That state of affairs was broad
justification for the appeal on 29 August 2014 to the
Secretary-General by the leaders of the three countries
most affected pleading for the aforementioned measures
to be lifted. For its part, the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, at its sixth extraordinary meeting
in Addis Ababa on 8 September, made a similar urgent
appeal aimed at ensuring that those countries were not
isolated.

As the Secretary-General has emphasized, Ebola
was not merely a public-health crisis. Its humanitarian,
social and economic consequences are serious and
could threaten the political stability of the countries
involved. Ebola has had an negative effect on various
socioeconomic sectors in Liberia and all the countries
affected in the region. We have seen, for example,
measures taken by some international transport
companies to restrict international shipping access to
the countries most affected by Ebola, which had an
immediate negative impact on their economies. The
effects caused a collapse in the countries' various
socioeconomic sectors and dealt a further blow to the
living conditions of the populations.

We recognize that Liberia - a country emerging
from a long civil war - has experienced delays with
regard to peacebuilding and the process of gradually
withdrawing the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
Nevertheless, we welcome the surge in solidarity on a
bilateral basis prompted by Ebola. In that connection,
we commend the efforts of individuals of the countries

that deployed medical teams and military personnel on
the ground. In the epidemic of Ebola, we saw the full
support among international organizations, regional
and subregional organizations, such as the Mano River
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, Medecins Sans Frontieres and the United
Nations Development Programme - and above all
the resolve of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, which, for the first time in its history, decided,
at its meeting in Nairobi on 19 August 2014, to send a
civilian-military medical team to Liberia.

We note the statement made by the Deputy Director-
Geneal of the World Health Organization that

"It is possible to contain and minimize the spread
of an Ebola epidemic as long as the international
community acts rapidly and effectively. In that
fight, priority attention must particularly be given
to children, women and other vulnerable categories
of people."
That assertion retains its validity today in the
ongoing fight against the epidemic in Sierra Leone and
Guinea. But vigilance must be maintained given the
emergence ofisolated cases in Liberia, which had been
declared Ebola-free. We hope that the international
community will draw on the lessons learned from these
cases by adopting an early warning system so that we
can react in a more timely manner to future outbreaks
of that nature.

I would like to conclude by paying homage to the
victims, including those in the medical corps who
honoured the Hippocratic oath by not abandoning those
who were ill and by giving their best, even at the cost
of their own lives, in treating them. Among them there
were eminent epidemiologists and foreign physicians.
I also pay homage to the United Nations contingent on
the ground, who did not waver in the exercise of their
mission.

