Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on an issue of great
importance. I should also like to join others in thanking
Mr. Mike Smith, Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for his valuable
briefing to the Security Council. We have every
confidence in his competence and shall continue to
support his efforts. We also appreciate the efforts of
Ambassador Jurica of Croatia, Chairman of the CTC.

We welcome the CTC's adoption of the revised
organizational plan for CTED, which was submitted in
accordance with resolution 1787 (2007), including the
proposals and amendments it suggests. The new
priorities contained in the organizational plan are not
just intended to support CTED's role as a diplomatic
mission of the CTC. They also serve to enhance the
fight against terrorism through all the organs and
agencies of the United Nations. Given that they are
intended to bolster national capacities in the area of
counter-terrorism and help to implement the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy - adopted
through General Assembly resolution 60/288 - and
also taking into account the obligations established by
international law in all its branches, it is our hope that
all those steps will pave the way towards eradicating
the root causes of terrorism and punishing its
perpetrators.

The rationale for developing a counter-terrorism
mechanism that includes the entire United Nations
system, since the time of the adoption of the original
organizational plan for CTED, has evolved into a new
reality that the CTC and CTED cannot ignore. The
work of the General Assembly to develop the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the efforts
to put in place a comprehensive convention on
terrorism, and the calls for establishing a clear
definition of terrorism should all lead to an
internationally agreed transparent and balanced
definition of terrorism that ensures the success of
counter-terrorism efforts at all levels.

The international community's efforts to combat
terrorism - which constitutes the worst and most
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
as well as of the principal tenets, beliefs and moral
values of the world's main religions - would be more
effective if they were more comprehensive and
transparent. We cannot reach this objective through
selective measures and procedures. If it is not possible
to justify terrorism in any way then we should not
confuse its justifications and its causes. Our consensus
in excluding justifications should not lead us to ignore
the causes of terrorism or adjust them to agree with the
pretexts of self-defence according to some, or with
terrorism according to others.

The diagnosis or objective treatment of the causes
of terrorism is at the core of any serious efforts to deal
with this disease or scourge. The fact that there is no
balanced and transparent diagnosis and treatment of the
causes of this disease, makes our meetings and
documents no more than mere condemnations and
briefings about such repeated human tragedies.

Occupation and its injustices and terrorist
aspects; disregard for human rights and the rights of
peoples; accusations against cultures and civilizations;
ignoring the legitimate objectives of resistance against
occupation; and double standards in international
legitimacy do not simply represent hatred in a moral
sense, but rather contravene all heavenly religions and
beliefs. These are all symptoms of frustration, hatred
and despair that manifest themselves in many parts of
the world in violent acts.

My country, Libya, which has been the victim of
terrorist activities in different manifestations and acts,
has adopted, within the framework of the United
Nations and the geographic groups, various regional
and international conventions, agreements and
protocols. It condemns all forms of terrorism, including
direct and indirect State terrorism. We continue to
support international activities that aim at ending this
scourge and eliminating its symptoms and causes.
Within that context, my delegation supports the
extension of the mandate of CTED and would like to
express its appreciation of the continuation of its
efforts and others' efforts to bring about the objectives
of the international community, namely, to eliminate
terrorism. All societies, without exception, suffer from
that scourge, and we support any efforts to achieve a
world in which security and peace prevail.
