Miss Durrant (Jamaica): First of all, I want to
associate my delegation with the condolences expressed
by the Foreign Minister of Namibia and President of the
General Assembly to the families of the Victims of the
Kenyan aircraft crash.
We also wish to join in thanking the President of
Zambia and the Foreign Ministers of South Africa and
Namibia for having addressed the Council this morning,
and also the Permanent Representative of Algeria in his
capacity as representive of the chairmanship of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). They have
provided a framework for action by the Council on
African issues under our purview. While we may not
have covered all the issues, we all agree that this month's
focus on Africa has been historic. We therefore wish to
commend the United States presidency for its initiative.

We all agree that we have been sensitized to the
varying needs of Africa, but this month has also brought
to the fore issues that previously received piecemeal
treatment. Now we have been forewarned, and therefore
forearmed, to act decisively and swiftly. We have
discussed at length various conflict situations, particularly
the intra-State conflicts in the Great Lakes region, which
have implications for international peace and security, and
the linkages that can be associated with the AIDS
pandemic and the flow of refugees and internally
displaced persons in Africa.

The Security Council must move from words of
sympathy to action. The international community,
particularly Africa, is waiting to see our lofty pledges
fulfilled. My delegation was heartened by the renewed
attention on the conflicts in Angola, Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The participation in
our debates of so many heads of State, Ministers of
Government and the Secretary-General of the OAU
helped stress the gravity of the situation, as well as the
fervent desire in all of the countries involved to bring an
end to the conflicts.

 

The facilitators of the Arusha and Lusaka processes,
former Presidents Mandela and Masire, and the leaders of
the countries concerned must be able to count on the moral
and financial support of the international community. The
Council also needs to act speedily on the expansion of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the eventual deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping force.

There are some common threads in our debates on
Africa to which my delegation wishes to draw attention.
One of the most compelling messages that has emerged is
the inextricable link between peace, sustainable economic
growth and sustainable development. We heard the Foreign
Minister of South Africa emphasize this relationship. My
delegation firmly believes that the root causes of conflict
often lie in socio-economic conditions that are the natural
breeding grounds for conflict.

The question for the Council is how to prevent such
conflicts in the first place and how to assist in curbing the
cycle of Violence. The signing of peace agreements can be
but a first step towards peace. We need to move beyond
this stage to ensure that effective measures are in place to
provide a smooth transition from a culture of war to a
culture of peace. The international community must, as a
first step, stop the flow of illegal arms to conflict situations
and stop the plundering of Africa's natural resources to
purchase these arms. Without buyers there can be no
sellers. The links exposed by Ambassador Fowler in his
capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee on
Angola have pointed us in the right direction.

Another common thread in all our discussions this
month has been the plight of civilians, particularly children,
as victims of war. We have all recited the refrain that
"children are our future". Yet in many parts of Africa, we
run the risk of losing an entire generation. The high
incidence of children among refugees and internally
displaced persons as victims and orphans of the AIDS
pandemic, of landmines and of malnutrition, the use of
children as child soldiers and forced labour - all of these
have exposed a generation of children to untold suffering
and have robbed them of their innocence and childhood.
We must restore peace to the war-torn communities, so that
the children of the future can be provided with an
environment conducive to their mental, moral, physical,
social and economic development.

It is important for the Council to work closely with the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
Again, Mr. President, in this connection we wish to thank
you for the letters that have been presented for our
consideration, as it is only by addressing the problems in
a holistic manner that there will be any lasting solutions.

Various recommendations for action have been
presented by the African leaders, by the United Nations
Secretary-General, by the Secretary-General of the OAU,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
head of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS and by Council members, among others.
Implementation of these recommendations will require the
further commitment of human and financial resources. I
want to thank Sir Jeremy Greenstock for his proposal for
an ad hoc working group of the Council on Africa, and
for having set the stage during his presidency last
December for our focus on Africa this month.

The actions that we take in the future will signal our
seriousness, not only in speaking on African issues, but
also in taking concrete actions in support of peace,
security and development on the continent.

