Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): Nigeria is pleased to
participate in today's Council debate on children and
armed conflict. We are delighted to see Jamaica
presiding over yet another open debate of the Security
Council on the well-being of children during and after
armed conflict. My delegation appreciates the efforts of
the Council in keeping the issue of children on its
agenda. Let me also recall with appreciation, Madam
President, your role as Chairperson of the Preparatory
Committee for the Special Session of the General
Assembly on Children: the lO-year review of the
outcome of the World Summit for Children.

The story that Alhaji Babah Sawaneh told the
Council this morning was a graphic presentation of the
challenges facing child soldiers during and after
conflicts, especially in the African region. But the story
also pointed to the urgency of remedial action by the
international community to translate into action the
shared commitment to protect children in armed
conflict. In that regard, we thank the Secretary-General
for his statement and for his report (S/2001/852). We
also welcome the detailed statement to the Council of
the Special Representative of the Secretary General,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, whose clear advocacy and concern
for children caught in conflict are shared by the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol Bellamy. We thank them
all for their engagement on this issue.

We are gratified to note that today's debate is the
fourth the Council has had on the issue of children and
armed conflict. That is pursuant to resolutions 1261
(1999) and 1314 (2000), and it underscores the
Council's commitment and its resolve to address the
issue of children in conflict on account of its relevance
to international peace and security.

The need for action cannot be overemphasized.
Children who are traumatized by the experience of war
are scarred for life, both physically and
psychologically. Because they are made to serve as
child soldiers, they may grow up to embrace violence
unless they are properly rehabilitated. The case of girls
is even worse, as they are vulnerable to sexual abuse,
rape and addiction; they are also exposed to HIV/AIDS
and other infectious diseases.
The international community therefore cannot
afford to stand aloof in the face of this deplorable
situation. A conducive atmosphere in which children
can develop must be created. In our region, a number
of initiatives have been taken to address the problem,
as part of a broad commitment to enhancing the social,
economic and cultural well-being of women and
children. These include the establishment of a child
protection unit within the Economic Community of
West African States last April to protect and enhance
the rights of children caught in conflict situations in the
West African subregion.

Undoubtedly, the Convention on the Rights of the
Child provides us with the most comprehensive
instrument for strengthening the rights of children
affected by armed conflict. It is noteworthy that, as we
learned from the statement of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Optional
Protocol to the Convention will enter into force next
February. However, ratifications of the Convention and
of the Protocol are not enough; they should be backed
by concrete action. Nigeria is committed to the
implementation of those and other relevant
instruments.

We welcome the increased level of cooperation
and partnerships among Governments, non-
governmental organizations and civil society to provide
education, training and humanitarian relief to affected
children. It is imperative that the rehabilitation of war-
affected children be sustained and properly completed
so as to facilitate their integration into society. There is
also a need to ensure the provision of adequate
resources for ongoing United Nations peacekeeping
missions to enable them to carry out demobilization
and rehabilitation programmes. We also encourage the
establishment of child protection units and the
inclusion of monitoring provisions in United Nations
peacekeeping and peace-building mandates.

Finally, it is our hope that war-affected children
throughout the world - and especially in Rwanda,
Sierra Leone and Angola - will find in the draft
resolution on which the Council will be taking action at
the end of this debate the support and sustenance they
deserve.

