Mr. Thordarson (Iceland): I would like to thank
the Peruvian presidency of the Security Council for
convening today's open debate on youth and peace and
security. I also thank the briefers for their excellent
statements. The independent progress study on
youth and peace and security (see 8/2018/86) is very
informative, and Mr. Simpson and his team have clearly
consulted widely.

The study highlights the fact that most young
people hold a responsible and sophisticated view of the
world. The 1.8 billion young people in our world are
better connected than ever before. They know what is
going on locally, regionally and globally in a way their
parents and grandparents never have. That means they
can compare what is occurring in various parts of the
world. They see where Government and democracy is
working but they also see how deprivation, human rights
abuses and inequality undermine peace and prosperity.

Young people know that if societies are to be
peaceful and secure, they will need more than just the
absence of violence. They want to safeguard the planet
and are aware of climate change as a potential cause of
conflict for future generations. Nevertheless, the study
reveals that Governments tend to treat young people
as a problem rather than partners for peace. Yet, most
young people are peaceful. They want to take action and
lead but often feel excluded from the political process.
Education has a powerful role in peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, but getting it right is complex. The
media gives a misleading View of young people, in
particular young men, and certain political forces seek
to manipulate them for political ends.

Societies that allow young people to participate in
public life are less likely to experience violence. For
example, the brutal repression of young demonstrators
and political activists by the Syrian authorities
contributed to igniting the seven-year long conflict.
Those and other elements in the study should concern
us deeply.

The study makes useful recommendations that the
United Nations and the Security Council could consider
more closely. We would support recommendations
that keep youth and peace and security on the agenda.
When the Security Council is designing peacekeeping
operations, the impact on youth should be considered.
Inclusive processes for peace and security have been
shown to give greater results. Thus, the participation of
young people in efforts to prevent conflict is not only
right; it is essential for success.

The Security Council and the General Assembly
must work together to make the youth and peace and
security agenda operational. I welcome the Council's
expected draft resolution on youth, peace and security
and the decision by the President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, to host a Youth
Dialogue on 30 May.

