Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): The
situation in Burundi is difficult. Mr. Fall's statement was
instructive. We should like to thank him for his account of
the situation, which, once again, was as precise as it was
rigorous.

The death of the Facilitator of the Arusha peace
process, Julius Nyerere, has brought about a period of
uncertainty. The increased violence on the part of armed
rebel groups, in particular around Bujumbura, has
heightened tension. Like those that have already spoken, the
French delegation is concerned about these developments.
We condemn the attacks by the rebel groups against
civilians and humanitarian organizations. We deplore the
human rights violations that are accompanying this increase
in tension.

Despite these difficulties, the reconciliation process,
both internal and external, must resume and must make
progress. The international community must help the people
of Burundi achieve reconciliation. We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative of this debate,
which provides the Security Council with the opportunity
to consider what part the United Nations can play in this
regard.

I should like to contribute by offering several
suggestions that may be able to guide the Council's actions.
These are ideas that resulted from the recent visit to the
Great Lakes region, including Burundi, of Mr. Charles
J osselin, the Minister of Cooperation and La Francophonie.

First, it is essential that the reconciliation process be
based on what has already been achieved within the context
of the Arusha negotiations. France pays tribute to the
work carried out by Julius Nyerere. We hope that
mediation will resume as soon as possible. We support
the efforts made by the Secretary-General, through the
dispatch of an envoy, Sir Kieran Prendergast, to help to
put the external process back on track.

It is also essential for all the parties, especially the
armed rebel groups, to participate in the negotiations with
a view to finding a settlement. Halting the fighting is, of
course, a priority.

Finally, the resumption and continuation of the
process must be supported by the international community
in concrete and material terms. Burundi is experiencing a
situation of tension that is being aggravated by economic
difficulties, as the representative of Burundi has
emphasized. It must break out of the vicious circle. The
delegation of France would like to emphasize here that
progress in the peace process must be accompanied by
international assistance for reconciliation, reconstruction
and democratization.

In conclusion, the Council must bear in mind the
linkage with the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The implementation of the Lusaka Agreement
is necessary if the full and complete recovery of Burundi
is to be achieved. In the coming weeks, the Council must
therefore consider the connection between the
implementation of the Lusaka process and the resumption
of the process that began with the Arusha negotiations.

I should like to thank the representative of Argentina
for his support for what might be considered a reasonable
goal for the international community: the holding of a
conference on the Great Lakes, sponsored jointly by the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity.

