Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his detailed briefing. I also
thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine for his
remarks.
Since Israel's decision not to renew the
settlement moratorium in September 2010, the
construction of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories has gained considerable pace. This is not
only illegal, but also undermines the peace process,
poisons the political environment and potentially
exposes Israeli settlers to danger as tensions rise.

From a strategic point of View, the greatest
danger is that the accelerating pace of construction
risks rendering the two-State solution politically very
difficult to implement, if not impossible. It is true that,
in the past, Israeli populations have been withdrawn
from occupied land as part of agreements or unilateral
decisions by Israel. It is also true, however, that the
construction that has taken place in the occupied
territories in recent years tends to alter the very
demographic and social realities on the ground -
including in Jerusalem - and is therefore much more
difficult to reverse. Settlement activity must therefore
cease immediately and completely. We once again
reiterate our call on Israel to heed the unanimous call
of the international community in this regard.

We continue to support the efforts led by the
United States Administration and regional actors to
restore the peace process. We call on both parties, in
particular Israel, not to miss any opportunity to make
strides towards the resumption of substantive and
action-oriented negotiations. We know that requires a
great deal of political courage, as peacemaking quite
often involves high risks. There is, however, greater
risk and suffering in accepting a state of permanent
conflict or tension. The present hour demands nothing
less than Statesmanship. We fully concur with the
Secretary-General that peace and Palestinian Statehood
cannot be delayed further.

It was precisely with that in mind - that is, the
urgent need for fair and balanced negotiations - that
Brazil decided to recognize the State of Palestine based
on the 1967 borders. The decision does not represent a
loss of faith in a negotiated solution, and it should not
be construed as such, much less as an incentive to
unilateral moves. To the contrary, we all know that the
effective establishment of a functioning Palestinian
State cannot come about but through negotiations.
Brazil's decision is therefore to be taken as a
contribution to a fair and balanced settlement between
the parties, one that can achieve the international
community's common goal of two States living side by
side in peace and security within internationally
recognized borders. The Council has a key role to play
in that effort.

Brazil remains ready and willing to consider
ideas and initiatives to that end. One of them is the
draft resolution on the Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories that was put forward yesterday,
which has so far been sponsored by more than 120
delegations, including mine. Such a measure would
send the right signal to the parties that the Council and
the international community stand by fundamental
decisions and are serious in their attempt to help ensure
the long-term feasibility of the two-State solution.

We welcome the measures taken by Israel to ease
the blockade on the Gaza Strip - especially with
regard to exports of agricultural products, textiles and
other goods - as it will benefit the local economy and
generate badly needed jobs and income. We must all
continue to work with the Palestinians to turn this
overture into new development projects.

That is what we are trying to do bilaterally and
through the India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA)
initiative, as was just mentioned by the Permanent
Representative of South Africa. Last November, the
IBSA Forum approved a project for the partial
reconstruction of the Red Crescent Al-Quds Hospital in
Gaza, with resources allocated from the IBSA Trust
Fund. But much remains to be done.

As we have said in the past, easing the blockade
is no substitute for fully lifting it. The population in
Gaza should not have to survive on international
assistance or be forced to live amid ruble. The ongoing
tensions all too often demonstrate that the collective
suffering imposed on Gaza's entire population, apart
from being unacceptable, plays a questionable role as
part of an effective security strategy. We therefore
insist that freedom of movement for people and goods
can and should be ensured, while taking into account
Israel's legitimate security concerns.

Also unacceptable is the launching of rockets and
mortars into southern Israel by militants in Gaza. They
tend to trigger corresponding Israeli reprisals, in the
form of air strikes and punitive incursions, thus
perpetuating a cycle of violence and suffering. We
continue to condemn all violence and provocation by
anyone.

Before concluding, let me add a few words on
Lebanon. We are following closely the situation in that
country. We all realize the importance of Lebanon to
peace and stability in the Middle East. The
international community must come together in support
of dialogue and foster the spirit of reconciliation and
justice. We urge all political groups in Lebanon to
maintain calm, address their differences through
dialogue and political negotiations and abide by
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. It is time
to show their commitment to a viable future as a
nation, as well as to the right of their people to live in
peace and prosperity.

