Mr. Apakan (Turkey): First, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's open debate and
honouring us with your presence. Turkey believes that
it is very timely and pertinent for the Security Council
to deliberate on the important issue of drug trafficking
as a threat to international security. Therefore I thank
the delegation of Burkina Faso for taking that
initiative.

We also thank the Secretary-General and Mr.
Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for
their comprehensive and insightful briefings. We very
much appreciate the Secretary-General's leadership on
raising awareness of the issue and the valuable work
carried out by UNODC in building the capacity of
Member States to combat illicit drugs and the links
with organized crimes and terrorism.

Many of the difficulties, tensions and challenges
that nations face vis-a-vis drug trafficking today are

not exclusive to them as individual States. Indeed, drug
abuse, illicit drug trafficking and associated crimes
such as terrorism and money-laundering are issues of
grave concern that entail severe repercussions for the
entire international community. Hence, there is a need
for strong international cooperation on the basis of
common and shared responsibility.

Aside from its international, global character,
drug trafficking also presents a complex and
multidimensional problem with enormous financial
implications. Today the drug problem not only
adversely affects the economic and social fabric of the
countries concerned, it also constitutes a threat to the
security of States. In particular, the increasing links
between drug trafficking and acts of terrorism are a
cause for serious concern. Today it is a well-
documented fact that the revenue generated by drug
trafficking has become a primary source of terrorist
financing. It also undermines State authority, fuels
corruption and hampers economic development and
rule of law.

Therefore, given the magnitude and complexity
of threats posed by drug trafficking, the fight against
that challenge must be based on a comprehensive and
effective strategy. The supply, demand and trafficking
aspects of the drug problem have to be considered as
interdependent aspects of the same predicament and
thus should be dealt with through a balanced and
integrated approach.

Turkey is a natural bridge between Asia and
Europe. Therefore, as a transit country, it is generally
affected by illicit trafficking of opiates from East to
West and of precursors and synthetic drugs from West
to East. Accordingly, Turkey makes every effort to
further enhance the effectiveness of its efforts to
combat illicit drug trafficking. However, as I have
already mentioned, no country alone can combat drug
trafficking, and thus national efforts must be
complemented by effective international cooperation.

With that in mind, Turkey has signed and ratified
all relevant United Nations drug control treaties and has
concluded bilateral cooperation agreements with more
than 70 countries. Turkey also actively contributes to
the work of relevant international and regional
platforms. We have long-standing cooperation with
UNODC, the International Narcotics Control Board, the
Paris Pact, the Council of Europe and the Southeastern
Europe Centre for Combating Transborder Crime.

09-6381]
Activities of the Turkish International Academy against
Drugs and Organized Crime constitute a good example
of Turkey's efforts at regional cooperation in combating
illicit drug trafficking.

Now allow me to focus briefly on Africa, where
drug trafficking is a relatively new phenomenon. That
being said, its devastating effects are being felt across
the entire continent, and nowhere more than in West
Africa. Criminal organizations set on diversifying their
illicit drug trade routes are aiming to manipulate the
weak and unstable Government structures of that
region. That is a dangerous threat that needs to be
reversed, as the risks to regional stability are serious
and require the immediate attention of the international
community.

In the case of Africa, we have an opportunity to
tackle the threat before it takes root and becomes a
permanent problem in the subregions where it is now
manifesting itself. We must seize the opportunity.
Turkey thus emphasizes the need to develop a
comprehensive approach to the efforts to combat drug
trafficking in West Africa in particular. We welcome
the special emphasis given by the United Nations
Office for West Africa (UNOWA) to the issue.

As a nation that has long been at the forefront in
the fight against drug trafficking, we understand full
well the predicament of Western African nations, which
find themselves stuck as a transit route for supply, on
the one hand, and a large demand, on the other. The
phenomenon is spreading through West Africa, and our
experience dictates that only through effective,
sustained and comprehensive international cooperation
can it realistically be remedied. We believe that the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), UNODC and UNOWA, together with the
nations of the subregion, will need to place ever more
emphasis on the issue. We look forward to the rapid
and effective implementation of the ECOWAS
Regional Action Plan.

In developing institutional capacity to combat
illicit drug trafficking in the region in a context of
shared responsibility, increased international technical
and financial support will also be crucial.

In conclusion, I would like to stress once again the
common and shared responsibility of the international
community to fight drug trafficking, including in Africa.
We hope that the Security Council's renewed
commitment to address the threats posed by drug

trafficking will re-energize international cooperation.
The presidential statement, which we fully support,
certainly sends the right message in that regard.

