Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome you, Mr. President, as you preside over this
important meeting. We also welcome the adoption
today of resolution 2462 (2019) . We commend your
delegation's efforts in facilitating its adoption, which
will foster international cooperation in preventing and
combating the financing of terrorism. I also thank the
briefers Mr. Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku
for their important briefings.

Over the past two decades, terrorist groups have
developed advanced tools to ensure their continued
ability to carry out terrorist activities, thereby posing
a threat to international peace and security. Preventing
and combating the financing of terrorism is therefore
one of the most important pillars in countering the
phenomenon of terrorism throughout the world.

Terrorist groups finance their activities by
different means, including transnational organized
crime, ransom, arms and drug trafficking, the illicit
trade in natural resources and extortion. That has
called for decisive action by the organ entrusted with
the maintenance of international peace and security
through the adoption of many resolutions to strengthen
prevention and combating of financing terrorism, the
most important ofwhich is resolution 1373 (2001), which
has developed binding legal rules as international terms
of reference underpinning the action of the Council
in its adoption of new resolutions on preventing and
countering terrorism.

Those rules have compelled all Member States to
take effective, as well as preventive, measures aimed
at preventing and combating the financing of terrorist
acts, while refraining from any tacit or direct support
for entities and individuals involved in such terrorist
acts. That also includes ending recruitment by terrorist
groups and providing terrorists with weapons. The
Council has continued to address this phenomenon
through the adoption of resolutions 2253 (2015) and
2368 (2017), which have strengthened measures to
prevent and combat the financing of terrorism and
to tackle the financing of Da'esh at its roots. Those
measures have also fostered the sanctions measures
against Da'esh and Al-Qaida.

We have made great strides towards reducing
criminal activities of a terrorist nature. However,
despite the success of the international community
in that regard, the threat posed by terrorism and its
destructive impact persists. The ways and means to
which terrorist groups resort in order to finance their
activities attest to that. We should therefore step up our
efforts to strengthen international peace and security
through the effective implementation of international
resolutions, especially those that deal with preventing
or combating the financing of terrorism. Today's
resolution 2462 (2019) also reflects the firm resolve
of Member States to continue building on those past
successes in order to pave the way towards defeating
this heinous scourge from which millions of people
have suffered.

One of the most important factors helping us today
in preventing and combating the financing of terrorism
is international, regional and subregional cooperation in
the following areas: exchanging information; refraining
from inciting terrorist activities, controlling financial
support for terrorist groups through the implementation
of the measures contained in relevant Security Council
resolutions, and training law-enforcement personnel.

We also need to address the nexus linking crime and
terrorism, focus on youth and education and conclude
bilateral and multilateral conventions.

We therefore value cooperation among the relevant
United Nations agencies, Member States and regional
organizations in capacity-building and the exchange of
experiences. We look forward to further cooperation
and urge all Member States to take additional measures
to tackle the root causes of financing terrorism by
implementing financial sanctions imposed by the
Security Council. We should also raise awareness
concerning the use ofdonations and information-sharing
in connection with financial transactions in cooperation
with banks and competent Government authorities with
the aim of establishing financial investigation units
and ratifying international protocols and conventions
on counter-terrorism and transnational organized
crime, including the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, while
joining and implementing them as soon as possible. In
that regard, we welcome the efforts of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) to develop risk indicators
related to the financing of terrorism.

The State of Kuwait is aware of the threats posed
by the financing of terrorism and is working to combat
that scourge. We have therefore adopted a law to combat
money-laundering through a number of precautionary
measures, including the requirement that financial
institutions report all suspicious transactions. We have
also developed controls on the movement of cash, and
established a financial intelligence unit to collect and
analyse information about revenues suspected to be
related to crimes.

In 2017, the State of Kuwait chaired the Middle
East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force
to combat money-laundering and financing terrorism.
This group is seeking to adopt and implement the 40
FATF recommendations and strives to encourage joint
action to identify issues related to money-laundering
and the financing of terrorism at the regional level,
while exchanging expertise and developing solutions.

In conclusion, we reiterate our condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, regardless
ofits motives. It is a criminal act that cannot bejustified
or linked to any religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group. Combating terrorism requires the
mobilization of international efforts to address that
criminal scourge by taking measures to ensure respect
for human rights, the rule of law and good governance

