Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, I congratulate you,
Madame, on Colombia's assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month and on your
Government's initiative to convene this open debate on
the current situation in Haiti. The challenges facing
that brotherly Caribbean country are enormous in the
context of its reconstruction and in overcoming the
age-old structural problems inherited from the age of
colonization, neocolonialism, despotism and political
oppression.

I reaffirm Venezuela's commitment to Haiti. Our
country's participation in all initiatives to promote
Haiti's comprehensive development is ongoing. The
foreign policy of the Bolivarian Government shares a
new vision for Latin America and the Caribbean that
strongly promotes humanist integration processes. The
Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America-
Peoples' Trade Agreement (ALBA-TCP), Petrocaribe,
the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR), and
the soon to be created community of Latin America and
the Caribbean States in Venezuela are emblematic of
that policy. Similarly, the Bolivarian Government
further promotes bilateral relations with all countries of
our region, including Colombia, on the basis of
solidarity.

Venezuela's cooperation with Haiti increased
following the disastrous earthquake of 12 January
2010. But, as President Preval has noted, Venezuela
and the countries of ALBA-TCP were already present
in the country of Petion at the time of that tragic
natural phenomenon. Among other things, we wish
here to underscore that the generous cooperation of the
Government and people of Cuba in Haiti has been
exemplary. This morning, Minister Bruno Rodriguez
Parrilla provided ample details of his country's and
ALBA's solidarity with, and assistance to, the Haitian
people.

Following the earthquake, the Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela issued its plan for
the solidarity and contribution of ALBA countries to
efforts to rebuild Haiti. That plan set out eight steps in
various areas for the long, medium and short terms, to
which I would like to refer briefly.

In the area of health, Venezuela has made an
initial contribution of $20 million to Cuba's medical
mission, with a view to expanding health plans begun
in the context of the Cuba-Venezuela-Haiti tripartite
agreement.

With regard to financial support, we have
established the ALBA humanitarian fund for Haiti,
funded with an initial Venezuelan contribution of $50
million. The fund provides financing for social
organizations from voluntary financial contributions
from member States and from corporations, including
the Venezuelan companies Petroleos de Venezuela and
Citgo.

In the area of energy, Venezuela cancelled Haiti's
$405 million debt to Petrocaribe. In addition, on an
ongoing basis, we frequently guarantee Haiti direct
humanitarian fuel supplies for 45 health centres'
electrical plants throughout the country.

With regard to agricultural and nutrition
initiatives, the ALBA agricultural commission has
distributed corn seed donated by Venezuela's National
Agricultural Research Institute.

On education, since 2006 Venezuela has hosted
174 Haitian students to attend university courses in
11-29077
various areas of interest related to the development of
their country. In addition, since the end of 2009, with
Venezuelan financing, Cuba has provided technical
advice for the Yes I Can literacy programme.

On migration, we have regularized the
immigration status of Haitian citizens in ALBA-TCP
countries. In July 2010, Venezuela granted residency to
855 Haitian men and women.

With regard to reconstruction, we have build 128
low-income housing units in the Village Renaissance
area of Cite Soleil in Port-au-Prince.

In the areas of security, transport and logistics, at
the time of the original emergency, the Venezuelan
company Citgo guaranteed the transfer of supplies,
materials and equipment for reconstruction plans. That
included 679 tons in food supplies, 127 tons of
equipment, 120 tons of tents and 225,000 barrels of
gasoline and diesel fuel.

Venezuela has joined solidarity efforts promoted
by the Union of South American Nations by providing
technical and political assistance for the country's
reconstruction and by contributing to the development
of an inclusive, participatory and equitable
development model. Venezuela has also supported the
establishment of UNASUR's technical office,
including its plan of action.

Our country believes that efforts aimed at
achieving the long-term sustainable development of the
fraternal country of Haiti should be based on the
principles of solidarity, complementarity and
reciprocity. In that regard, there is a need to implement
a development policy that replaces the paternalistic and
economically driven vision. Such a policy should be
carried out in a sovereign manner by the Government
and people of Haiti, who are aware of their own reality
and needs. Full respect for institutions and elections
legislation, in the context of a sovereign institutional
reconstruction process in Haiti, constitutes an essential
precondition to achieving political stability.

There can be no development without peace and
stability; nor can there be peace and stability while
there is hunger, poverty and illiteracy. Achieving social
justice and eradicating poverty are the two main
challenges facing Haiti at this point in its history. The
Government and people of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela are prepared to continue to contribute to the
achievement of those noble objectives.
11-29077
