Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Uruguayan presidency for having
convened today's debate and for having prepared the
concept note (S/2016/22, annex ). We also thank the
Deputy Secretary General, the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Senior Humanitarian Policy Advisor of Oxfam for their
briefings.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the Permanent Representative of Slovenia
on behalf of the Human Security Network and by the
Permanent Representative of Iran on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Civilians continue to be affected most by armed
conflict. Their protection is one of the issues that
the Security Council must continue to prioritize,
particularly in its decisions related to actions taken by
the players in a conflict. The responsibility to protect
civilians because a State is unable or unwilling to
take action to ensure respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law is a key element in
the response from the Organization and Council. The
code of conduct on the non-use of the veto in situations
of genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes,
prepared by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, of which my country is a member,
and the French-Mexican statement on the issue, which
we have endorsed, are concrete proposals in the right
direction.
The reports of the ongoing review processes
contain similar recommendations. We acknowledge the
need to strengthen early-warning mechanisms and the
role that regional and subregional organizations play
in the effort. The political and humanitarian signals
that the Security Council sends should reaffirm the
importance of human rights, first and foremost, and
assess information provided by missions themselves
and by civil society.

Enhanced coordination among the Council, troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
would help to better protect civilians. Troops should
be properly trained and missions should include
gender advisers and advisers on protecting women,
children and human rights as an independent category
to ensure that vulnerable people are protected and
that their special needs are met. We acknowledge the
particular challenges that women and girls face. The
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and other
relevant resolutions, as well as the recommendations
of the global study thereon will undoubtedly help
to protect them. We urge the Council to implement
resolutions 2122 (2013) and 2242 (2015) by convening
the informal group of experts on women and peace and
security to better attend to the task.

Similarly, the situation of children and armed
conflict deserves special attention. We call for the
implementation of resolution 2143 (2014) and other
relevant resolutions to ensure the protection and
non-military use of schools and universities during
conflicts, according to the Lucens Guidelines and
the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration. There exists a
responsibility to combat impunity and prosecute and
punish those responsible for crimes perpetrated against
civilians. If States are unable or unwilling to prosecute
alleged perpetrators, it will fall to the International
Criminal Court to deal with such crimes, under the
Rome Statute.

In conclusion, we hope that today's debate will
lead to greater political support for protecting civilians
according to the provisions of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law.

