The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, and the Government of Chad for
organizing this debate on peace operations and the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union (AU).
(spoke in English)

Before addressing today's formal agenda item, I
should like to say a few words about the blood-curdling
attack today in Pakistan. The hearts of the world go out
to the parents and families who have lost loved ones in
the horrific attack on a school in Peshawar this morning,
which has taken the lives of more than 130 people, the
vast majority of them children. I condemn this heinous
act in the strongest possible terms. No cause can justify
such brutality; no grievance can excuse such horror.
It is an act of horror and rank cowardice to attack
defenceless children while they are learning. Schools
must be safe and secure learning spaces. Getting an
education is every child's right. Going to school should
not have to be an act of bravery.

I extend my deepest condolences to the people
and Government of Pakistan, and particularly to
those touched by today's tragedy. The United Nations
will continue to support the efforts of the Pakistani
authorities in their fight against terrorism and
extremism. I urge the Government of Pakistan to make
every effort to bring the perpetrators to justice.

I shall now turn to today's agenda item.
(spoke in French)

The cooperation between the African Union and
the United Nations in the field of peace and security is
crucial and must be systematically activated at the first
signs of crisis. It is vital that we continue to strengthen
our strategic partnership and that we strive more
effectively together to prevent, manage and resolve
conflicts. I welcome the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Ms. Zuma, for her willingness
to strengthen cooperation, and I stress the important
contribution that African countries make to United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

(spoke in English)

Over the years, cooperation between the United
Nations and its regional and subregional partners has
intensified. The Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council are working together more
closely, and there is increased support for African-
led peace operations and their transition into United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as we have seen in
Mali and the Central African Republic. The United
Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission meet
regularly for the United Nations-African Union Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security, mapping out joint
initiatives and strategies. Through the Regional
Coordination Mechanism for Africa, both organizations
have undertaken joint planning and implementation of
programmes.

Our partnership must be based on a common
understanding of what each organization can do in
any given context, and on a realistic assessment of
each other's comparative advantages. In the Central
African Republic, for example, cooperation among the
African Union, the United Nations and the Economic
Community of Central African States led to the
signing of the cessation-of-hostilities agreement in
Brazzaville in July. In Somalia, our two Organizations
are working together with other partners, including
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to
support the people and the Federal Government in this
critical phase of peacebuilding and State-building.

We are also working closely with the African
Union and with subregional organizations in the Sudan
and South Sudan. In the Great Lakes region, strong
cooperation among the United Nations, the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Southern African Development
Community has been vital to the progress that has
been made under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region.

However, we need to do more. In Burkina Faso,
there was close cooperation between the United Nations,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States in the immediate aftermath of the
uprising that led to the departure of former President
Blaise Compaore. But that crisis also points to the need
for greater emphasis on preventive action.

We also need to adapt in the face ofan evolving peace
and security landscape. Two-thirds of peacekeeping
missions are now operating in areas where there are
significant threats, including well-armed groups of
terrorists and extremists, transnational organized
crime and the trafficking of people and drugs, serious
human rights violations and impunity. In some cases,
the Security Council has responded by approving
robust mandates. However, peacekeeping missions are
now being mandated to advance national reconciliation
and dialogue in the absence of peace agreements, or
even clear identification of the parties to the conflict.

Peacekeeping is also becoming a more crowded
field, involving diverse actors and even parallel
missions. In the Central African Republic, for example,
the joint efforts of the African-led International
Support Mission for the Central African Republic, the
French Operation Sangaris, the European Union Force
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
have contributed to a significant improvement in the
security situation, especially in the capital, Bangui.

I have launched a major review of peace operations
as part ofmy efforts to address some ofthese challenges.
The review will encompass every aspect of our peace
operations, from mandates to our cooperation with
key partners, including the AU, to peacebuilding and
transition, the protection of civilians, accountability
and the role of special political missions and the United
Nations Police.

We have a responsibility to ensure that all the tools
we have at our disposal are ready to face current and
future demands. In addition to this review, and in line
with resolution 2167 (2014), I am also reviewing the
modalities for hand-over from African Union to United
Nations operations. And in March next year, I will
submit an assessment report with recommendations
on the progress of the partnerships between the
United Nations and relevant regional organizations in
peacekeeping operations.

Whatever the outcome of these reviews, we must
continue to strengthen the role of the United Nations
in conflict prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping,
and ensure the effective functioning of the collective
security system established by the Charter. In order to
do so, we face significant challenges.

First, we must build stronger political partnerships
that are anchored in a clear strategic Vision.

Secondly, we need a clear, agreed role for the African
Union and subregional organizations. It is important to
increase the predictability of our cooperation and to
conduct the joint assessment missions and planning
exercises that are critical to enhancing joint peace
operations.

Thirdly, the United Nations, regional organizations
and other partners must cooperate to enhance joint
logistical capabilities. To provide the necessary mobility,
capacity and robustness, we need creative approaches.
These might include multinational cooperation schemes,
pooled capacities and co-deployments. Member States
with certain specialized capacities, from helicopters
and intelligence to engineering expertise, can make
invaluable contributions. We should also strengthen our
trilateral discussions with the European Union, which,
together with the AU, is an important regional partner
in deploying and managing peace operations.

Fourthly, financing continues to pose a major
challenge to African capability. I have advocated for
further resources from within Africa, but we must find
creative ways to mobilize the international community.

The time has come for us to take our partnership
to a new level of clarity, practicality and predictability.
The Council knows full well that crises in Africa are
far from an African problem. They concern the entire
international community, and they will be resolved
only by all the parts of that community acting as one.

I commend the African Union for doing more than
ever before to meet those operational and political
challenges. I look forward to deepening our ties as we
strive to meet the yearning of the continent's people for
lasting peace.

