Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank Mr. Pascoe for his briefing this morning, and I
thank the Palestinian and Israeli representatives for
their remarks.

Peace in the Middle East is a high priority for the
United Kingdom. With every month that a sustainable
solution eludes us, the situation in Israel and Palestine
becomes more of a catalyst for resentment, violence
and extremism. So it is in the interests of this Council,
with its responsibility for international peace and
security, and of the rest of the international community,
to encourage direct negotiations between the parties,
leading to a lasting peace.

The expiry of the Israeli settlement moratorium,
and Arab League support for proximity talks in
September, highlight the urgent need for progress
towards a two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The only long-term solution is a secure and
universally recognized Israel living alongside a
sovereign and Viable Palestinian State, with Jerusalem
the capital of both States, and a fair settlement for
refugees.

We continue to strongly support the United States
efforts on proximity talks. It is imperative that the
negotiations focus on resolving the final status issues.
We encourage the parties to move to direct negotiations
as soon as possible. Both sides must avoid actions that
undermine the peace process. For Israel, this means
extending the settlement moratorium indefinitely and
ensuring that it also applies in occupied East
Jerusalem. The recent issuing of permits for the
construction of 32 new housing units in Pisgat Ze'ev
and the demolition of three East Jerusalem homes are
exactly the kind of provocative acts that must be
avoided. We continue to call for a complete cessation
of all settlement activity in both the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. Settlements are illegal under
international law and must stop.

For their part, the Palestinians and the Arab
States must not back away from their responsibility to
seize the opportunity presented by the efforts of the
United States Government. The Palestinian leadership
must be prepared to make bold decisions in the
interests of its people, and it must have the support it
needs from Arab States to see negotiations through to a
sustainable conclusion. There must be a complete halt
to rocket attacks into southern Israel, and Hamas and
other militant groups should renounce violence once
and for all. As Mr. Pascoe has said, Hamas attacks on
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) children's
summer camps in Gaza are particularly deplorable.

Turning to the Gaza flotilla incident of 31 May, I
reiterate our deep regret at the loss of life involved.
Accountability is important. We welcome the efforts of
the Secretary-General towards that goal. The Israeli
independent public commission should proceed swiftly,
transparently and rigorously, with access to all the
evidence available. We will be better able to draw
further conclusions once the conduct of the inquiry
becomes clearer.

This incident and the threat of further flotillas
highlight what we all know: that the situation in Gaza
is unsustainable. Together with the European Union
and the Quartet, we have called on Israel to ease
restrictions on access and enable a return to economic
normality. Israel's recent decision to move from a list
of 120 permitted goods to a list of specific prohibited
items is a welcome development. It shows that it is
possible to lift the pressure on ordinary Gazans without
compromising the security of ordinary Israelis. But we
need to see this translated into real change on the
ground. That will mean building capacity at the
crossings, getting vital reconstruction projects up and
running and ensuring that Gazans can export as well as
import goods. The United Kingdom stands ready to
support this.

We continue to call for the immediate release of
Gilad Shalit, who has been held hostage in Gaza since
June 2006. It is unacceptable that four years on he
should still be held by Hamas, in denial of the most
basic of human rights.

A solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict is in all our
interests. We want the new generation of Palestinians
to grow up in hope, not despair, believing in a peaceful
settlement with Israel, and not impoverished and
susceptible to terrorist recruitment. We want the next
generation of Israelis to live free from the fear of
rocket fire, and to be able to enjoy peaceful relations
with their Arab neighbours. The international
community has a responsibility to help deliver that
goal.

