Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Once
again, we would like to commend you, Mr. President, on
your presidency of the Security Council for this month,
and to congratulate your country on its outstanding
organization of this year's FIFA World Cup.

As you mentioned in your statement, Mr. President,
the Sudan, like other States that are not party to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), has no obligation to the Court with regard to
all the provisions of its Statute, including part IX, on
international cooperation. That is why we are here today
not to address the Court but the Council, in full respect
for the Charter of the United Nations. The Sudan is an
active member of the international community, and we
are therefore fully committed to respecting customary
international law and the various international treaties
and conventions to which we are party. Combating
impunity is one of our top priorities in that regard, and
we seek to achieve effective peace and justice in Darfur
while dealing with a conflict that is coming to an end.
We were surprised to hear Prosecutor Bensouda
refer in her statement to Abdel Hussein, a new name
that was added only today to her list. As we will prove
later on, our regional organization, the African Union,
has always categorically insisted, in all its resolutions at
the summit level, on its total commitment to combating
impunity. The Council has already seen for itself that
the main reason for many members of the African
Union to become party to the Rome Statute is to be able
to fight impunity. That is why the African Union and
its Member States - bitterly, objectively, continually
and consistently - criticize the International Criminal
Court, especially the Office of the Prosecutor, for
its practices and the many ways in which the Statute
contradicts international law. The African Union and
its Member States have underscored their commitment
to fight impunity.

The idea of establishing an international criminal
legal system as a means for applying international
criminal law was implemented only in 2002, when
the Rome Statute of the Court came into force.
Unfortunately, this young regime quickly fell Victim
to distortions and corruption - which the Prosecutor
calls distraction and asks us to ignore it. Because the
principle of universality has always been subject to
politicization, the system has fallen victim to abhorrent
selectivity, whereby where the Court and the Office
of the Prosecutor have focused their jurisdictional
activities on African States almost exclusively. The
response of the African Union has been a harsh one.

Furthermore, the Court has sought to arrest the
President of an African State - the Sudan - while
arrests have never been seen in any other region of
the world. My brother the representative of Ethiopia
eloquently addressed this issue today. The accusation
is not because of a committed crime that falls under
the jurisdiction of the Court, but because of the
nationality of the accused person. This politicization
and selectivity in the work of the Court were exposed
by WikiLeaks in February 2009. The objective is to
achieve political aims by putting pressure on certain
States and exploiting them politically in order to reach
great bargains.

The report of the Office of the Prosecutor that
was submitted for our consideration today admits that
the political exploitation, distortion and corruption
have led to a dangerous situation. I would like at this
point to paragraph 9 of the report, which refers to the
response to the rejection by the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan to the accusation by the Court of violating its
international commitments:
"the Appeals Chamber also invited expressions
of interest for observations from States Parties
and professors of international law, because
Jordan's appeal 'raises legal issues that may have

implications beyond the present case .

The ICC feels that it is imperilled as a result of a
situation in which it was put by the previous Prosecutor,
Luis Moreno Ocampo, a corrupt individual. The ICC
now finds itself in an out-of-control situation. The Rome
Statute is contradictory to international customary
law and to the immunities enjoyed by Heads of State
and Government. You yourself were particularly clear
on that point, Mr. President, in your statement as the
representative of the Russian Federation to the Security
Council. There is also much controversy about the
legality and legitimacy of Article 13 (b) of the Rome
Statute, particularly pertaining to cases referred by the
Security Council to the ICC.

This situation led the African Union in its Summit
held in January to request an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice concerning the immunity
of Heads of State. Before that, the African Union
had attempted for several years to communicate and
undertake a dialogue with the Security Council in order
to put an end to the procedures being enacted against the
President of the Republic of the Sudan under Article 16
of the Rome Statute. We have always sought to be above
board about these questions so as to ensure that we can
have a decisive ruling concerning the position under
international law with regard to the issue of privileges
and immunities to be enjoyed by Heads of State. We
wanted to be clear on this issue because we believe that
all the States Members of the United Nations, whether
or not they are party to the Rome Statute, want clarity
and decisiveness on this issue.

It is regrettable that the former and current
Prosecutors, in their 27 different reports on Darfur,
have come up against difficulties linked to the fact that
they are incapable of defining their own mission or
their own raison d'etre. There have also been problems
with the drafting their various reports and statements
submitted to the Security Council under resolution
1593 (2005), which have also been incoherent. We
have said repeatedly - and the representative of the
Russian Federation also made this point i that issues
relating to Darfur and Libya are always submitted in
the context of reports that do not seem to be reports of
the International Criminal Court, but rather reports that
are issued by a monitoring body.
We see that the Prosecutor and her Office have
chosen an erroneous methodology in their report for
our consideration today. They lied about an aerial
bombardment of the Jebel Marra region in central
Darfur during the reporting period between January
and June. The aerial bombardment never happened at
all. This lie is added to another lie contained in the
report issued by the Prosecutor's Office in September
2016. It claimed that chemical weapons had been used
by the Sudanese armed forces in Jebel Marra region.
That accusation was fabricated by the British group
Amnesty International. Unfortunately, the British
representative mentioned this dangerous accusation in
her statement, which could revive the conflict in Darfur.

It is therefore no surprise that today the Sudan is
firmly opposed to the actions and activities of the ICC.
The report described us as being hostile to the Court. The
meddling of the Court imperils security and political
and social stability in the Sudan. All of this presents
risks to the situation in Darfur and serves to incite rebel
mvements to commit fresh violations targeting victims,
whom the Prosecutor claims to be protecting.

We would like to draw the Council's attention
to another serious issue, namely, the fact that the
Prosecutor and her Office have stepped outside the
proper framework of what should be their jurisdiction.
They have gone beyond the jurisdiction set for them
in resolution 1593 (2005). The resolution sets clear
geographical limits for the case referred to the Court. It
was to deal only with Darfur. However, paragraph 33 of
the Prosecutor's report refers to protests in Khartoum
and the arrest of 411 people who were protesting
austerity measures and taken by the Government. The
relevant paragraph states that "hundreds of people
reportedly continue to be arbitrarily detained in [the]
Sudan for prolonged periods of time." We insist once
again upon the need for accountability pertaining to
such acts, which are not within the framework defined
in the resolution.

Lastly, the Prosecutor's report mentions a quotation
from two statements delivered by the representative of
Senegal in June and December 2017. The quotation
was selectively and partially cited to such an extent
that its meaning was completely distorted. Moreover,
my friend the representative of the Netherlands also
brought up this issue. We are happy to present the
Council with the complete quotation, which overall
corresponds with our beliefs and those of the African
Union and the international community. I would like to
quote what the representative of Senegal mentioned in
his two statements:

"Subscribing to the principles of accountability
and justice, my country - like the African Union,
which calls for re-establishing peace and justice in
Darfur - continues to believe that dialogue and
reconciliation are essential steps towards bringing
out comprehensive and definitive peace and finding
a lasting solution" (S/PV. 8132, p. 19).

