Mr. Oshima (Japan): We thank Mr. Volcker for
his detailed introduction of the Committee's report. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his observations.

We appreciate the high professionalism and the
exemplary meticulousness with which Mr. Volcker and
other members of the Committee carried out their task
under difficult circumstances. Japan welcomes the
present report. Because of its large volume and the
sensitivity of the matter, we need time to study it
carefully and thoroughly. However, at this stage we
wish to make a few preliminary observations.

First, before we start pointing fingers at the
problems and shortcomings that have come to light
now, it is important to note the central fact that the oil-
for-food programme succeeded in saving the lives and
alleviating the suffering of many Iraqis over the several
years that the programme functioned through its
essentially humanitarian work, thus averting a major
humanitarian catastrophe. As Mr. Volcker noted, that is
no mean achievement.

The programme was indeed a serious attempt -
of an extraordinary scale and complexity - designed
to bridge the gulf between the need to maintain
effective sanctions against Saddam Hussein's
Government, on the one hand, and the need to
ameliorate the humanitarian conditions of ordinary
Iraqi people living under the regime, on the other. The
programme was unprecedented in the history of the
United Nations and the Security Council, in the scale
and magnitude of the values involved and in the great
complexity of operations that had to be executed and
accounted for. My delegation therefore once again pays
tribute to the many staff members of the United
Nations who dutifully carried out their responsibilities
under the programme without being in any way
involved in any wrongdoing or corruption.

Secondly, that having been said, it is indeed
unfortunate and serious that there were apparently
certain lapses and instances of wrongdoing, which are
unforgivable. The report is very thorough and
comprehensive in its inquiry. Given the magnitude of
the alleged corruption and mismanagement, and taking
into account their political ramifications, the
Committee was expected to meet a very high standard
so as to help restore confidence in the United Nations.
We are pleased that it has indeed met that challenge. In
particular, the issue of ethics had never been taken up
squarely by a United Nations report in such a
fundamental way. Had it been left untouched, it might
have become impossible to restore confidence in the
United Nations. For that reason, the Committee's
contribution is critically important. All Member States
should take the Committee's findings and
recommendations seriously, take those allegations that
shake the international community's confidence in the
United Nations very seriously, and try their best to
restore that confidence.
Lastly, the four specific recommendations in the
report concerning United Nations management reform
are useful inputs for the ongoing discussions in the
General Assembly on the summit that begins next
week. We will study each one of them in detail.
Member States, particularly including those that had a
close relationship to the management of the programme
in the Security Council, as well as the Secretariat, have
a solemn responsibility to adopt and implement the
needed managerial and other relevant reforms
steadfastly, so that the Organization as a whole will
learn lessons from the oil-for-food programme issues
and regain the world's confidence in the United
Nations.

