The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council strongly deplores the
underground nuclear tests that Pakistan conducted on
28 May 1998, despite overwhelming international
concern, and calls for restraint. Reaffirming the
statement of its President of 14 May 1998
(S/PRST/1998/12), on Indian nuclear tests of 11 and
13 May, the Council strongly urges India and Pakistan
to refrain from any further tests. It is of the View that
testing by India and then by Pakistan is contrary to the
de facto moratorium on the testing of nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices, and to global
efforts towards nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament. The Council also expresses its concern
at the effects of this development on peace and
stability in the region.

"The Security Council reaffirms the crucial
importance of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the Comprehensive Test-
Ban Treaty (CT BT ). The Council appeals to India and
Pakistan, and all other States which have not yet
done so, to become parties to the NPT and to the
CTBT, without delay and without conditions. The
Council also encourages India and Pakistan to
participate, in a positive spirit, in the proposed
negotiations with other States for a fissile material
cut-off treaty in Geneva with a view to reaching
early agreement.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties to
exercise maximum restraint and to take immediate
steps to reduce and remove tensions between them.
The Council reaffirms that the sources of tension in
South Asia should be reduced and eliminated only
through peaceful dialogue and not by the use of
force or other military means.

"The Security Council urges India and Pakistan
to resume the dialogue between them on all
outstanding issues, including all those that the parties
have already discussed, especially matters
concerning peace and security, in order to remove
the tensions between them and to enhance their
economic and political cooperation. The Council
calls upon India and Pakistan to avoid any steps or
statements that could lead to further instability or
impede their bilateral dialogue.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/ 17.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.35 am.
