Mr. Lacroix: As Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo has just explained, after almost a year of talks the transitional Government of the Sudan, the Sudan Revolutionary Front and the Sudan Liberation Army- Minni Minawi joined their national and regional track counterparts in Juba for the initialling of a peace agreement on 31 August. This is obviously a very important milestone in the often-troubled history of Darfur, signifying hope for a more peaceful and prosperous future. I wholeheartedly commend the parties for their commitment to peace, as well as South Sudan for its critical role in mediating the agreement. As we meet here today, we are only just over a week away from the scheduled signing ceremony and the start of a new era for Darfur. Nonetheless, much work remains to be done to ensure that the goodwill shown in the negotiating process is translated into lasting and sustainable change on the ground. Key players, including the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW), are yet to join the process. The agreements, still a patchwork of documents negotiated on different tracks, are yet to be woven together into a single, unfractured vision of the future of the Sudan. With continued armed clashes and protests in Darfur signalling the anxiety of Darfuri constituencies on the decisions being made in Khartoum and Juba, we must, now more than ever, work together to bring all stakeholders on board and work towards preventing a relapse into conflict, especially in the hot-spot areas that require continuous attention beyond the lifespan of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Furthermore, the implementation phase, which is now beginning, will be just as crucial as the drafting of the agreement itself. This includes, as one of the key provisions of the security arrangements for Darfur, the creation of a 12,000-person joint security force within 90 days of the agreement's signing, made up of 6,000 members from the Sudanese security forces and 6,000 from the signatory armed groups. As forces are deployed and resources are mobilized in support of the implementation, it is essential to ensure that localDarfuri communities feel ownership of the agreement and fully participate in the implementation. Financing, too, will beakey challenge and managing expectations of what the international community can deliver in the current international context will be critical. The Darfur armed movements have suggested that implementation will require $13 billion over a 10- year period, and the Government has indicated that it will commit $7.5 billion. As the parties work to make the vision of the agreement into a reality, we in the international community have a responsibility to support them. In the agreement, the parties have called for guarantors and witnesses from the international community and the United Nations to support the implementation of the protocol on security, including through the provision of resources, expertise and advisers. It is foreseen, specifically, that the United Nations will chair the permanent ceasefire committee and have a representative in the joint supreme military committee, in the integration technical committee and in the Darfur regional disarmament, demobilization and reintegration commission. The security protocol stipulates that the permanent ceasefire committee and a third international party will take charge of the logistics of disarmament and demobilization efforts, including the establishment of gathering sites. UNAMID and the United Nations as a whole stand ready to help. As we await further indications from the parties with regard to specific actions to support implementation, UNAMID remains, for now, fully engaged with the Government, particularly in support of its national protection of civilians plan. Discussions to date have identified as priorities enhancing the capacity of rule-of-law institutions in implementing the national plan, as well as the training of trainers for the Sudanese joint forces on protection of civilians, international human rights and humanitarian law, child protection and women's protection. In some locations, UNAMID police have already started joint patrols with the Sudan Police Force, including in Kutum, Saraf Umra and Kabkabiya in North Darfur. The situation concerning the coronavirus disease continues to impact UNAMID's operations and movement, with the Mission placing focus on the provision of critical life support and core programmatic activities. Simultaneously, UNAMID _has_ been collaborating with the Sudanese authorities to combat the spread of the virus and mitigate its impact, including prevention support to internally displaced person camps, prisons and justice institutions across Darfur. At the same time as it has been providing technical, advisory and logistics support to the peace process, UNAMID has remained focused on the protection of civilians as its strategic priority. Continued intermittent clashes between Government forces and the SLA/AW, concentrated in parts of the Jebel Marra area, remain a challenge in this regard. Equally concerning, as talks in Juba have proceeded, has been the continued infighting between SLA/AW factions reportedly over disagreement on whether the group should join the negotiations, causing civilian deaths and significant displacement, mainly in parts of Central and South Darfur. The final steps towards the peace agreement have also been accompanied by a notable increase in intercommunal violence in Darfur in 2020, with major incidents in West, North and South Darfur. This violence has coincided with a rise in protests demanding increased security by Darfuri communities, particularly internally displaced persons and others, who fear that they may fail to benefit from the final agreement and its implementation. The Government has responded to intercommunal clashes by deploying troops to quell the violence and by sending mediators to support the peaceful resolution of conflicts. However, while the Government has vowed to meet the legitimate security demands of the Darfuri people, it continues to face significant challenges, including limited capacity and a trust deficit, particularly in conflict-affected areas and IDP camps, where protection is most needed. UNAMID has worked closely with the Government to reinforce that capacity, engage the communities and calm tensions where they occur. It must be noted that with its uniformed presence focused on the greater Jebel Marra area, UNAMID is limited in its ability to respond to protection needs that arise elsewhere in Darfur, such as in the areas of significant intercommunal violence in West Darfur in July. The protection of civilians is also at the centre of the ongoing work to prepare the special report of the Chairperson of the African Union (AU) and the Secretary-General of the United Nations, as requested by the Council, by the end of October. Taking into consideration the security situation, the impact of the peace process and the opportunities and challenges pertaining to the Government's protection plan in Darfur, a joint AU-United Nations working group is developing options that may be presented to the Council to address protection-of-civilians needs and challenges subsequent to the expiry of UNAMID's current mandate, in December 2020. Each option is being calibrated vis-a-vis the role of UNITAMS in order to ensure coordination and complementarity. To that end, we intend to ensure full consultation with the Sudanese Government, including by organizing experts-level and principals-level meetings of the tripartite mechanism. As we stand on the cusp of the historic peace agreement in Juba, we are heartened by the progress that has been made but also reminded of the significant challenges that remain. With the start of the implementation phase, it is essential that our support help to achieve improvements that can be felt by the people on the ground in Darfur, especially in strengthening the safety and security of Darfuris.
