Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I want to join others
in thanking Special Coordinator Mr. Mladenov for his
briefing and for the work that he and his team do on the
ground. I want also to thank Mr. El-Ad. Like the French
and Swedish representatives, we think it is important
that the voices of civil society can be heard in this
Chamber, and he was invited by the Security Council.

I wish to digress, ifI may, to make a point about
non-Council-member speakers, building on the one I
made yesterday. This is an open debate. It vitiates the
point of an open debate if we cannot understand what
is said in the Chamber, no matter who it is said by. I
would therefore like to know at some point what the
Israeli Permanent Representative said to Mr. El-Ad
in Hebrew. I would also like to make a general point
that if speakers use a language for which there is no
interpretation, that the presidency of the day stop them
and ask them to speak in one of the Council's - or the
Organization's - six authorized languages.

Turning to the substance, I think Mr. Mladenov is
right to remind us that every month we come here and
talk about the same things while everything that we
have heard today about the region shows how desperate
and unsustainable the situation is. There are terrible,
cruel and sad stories of deaths and injuries on both
sides. These stories underscore the need for urgent
progress to end what is a useless cycle of violence and
a heartbreaking waste of life and ruined families. On
terrorism, to quote a famous playwright: "The gunmen
are not dying for the people; the people are dying for
the gunmen." We ought to bear that in mind as well.

We fully respect Israel's right to security. At the
same time, as many speakers have said today, the
situation in Gaza is unsustainable. There needs to be an
immediate improvement in the humanitarian situation.
We need political resolve to make these improvements.
The reconciliation agreement of 2017 was a good start,
but now all the Palestinian factions must implement that
agreement. We strongly support the efforts of Egypt
and the wider international community to secure this
goal with some urgency. And we strongly support the
return of the Palestinian Authority to administer Gaza.
We continue to encourage all parties to work together
to ensure that this objective is met.

Like other speakers, we remain deeply concerned
about the planned demolition of the village of Khan
Al-Ahmar. I take this opportunity to again call on
the Israeli Government not to go ahead with its plan
to demolish the village. The decision of the Israeli
Supreme Court did not mandate demolition, which
remains at the discretion of the Israeli Government.
We appeal to the Government not to proceed with the
demolition of this village, which is located in an area
of strategic importance for the contiguity of a future
Palestinian State. Its demolition threatens the prospects
for a two-State solution with Jerusalem as a shared
capital because, as others have said, it would pave the
way for building settlements in the E-l area.

We have heard a lot of common themes from the
speakers today so I will not repeat them. I will just say
that the Special Coordinator asked us to echo his three
calls - for both sides to step back from the brink, for
them to uphold the 2014 ceasefire and for Hamas to
stop its provocations; for Israel to restore the delivery
of critical supplies and use proportionate responses in
their use of live fire; and for the Palestinian Authority
to not disengage from Gaza. I am happy to throw the
United Kingdom's voice behind his calls today and to
make it crystal clear how strong our support is for the
Special Coordinator.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) was
mentioned. In this regard, I would just say that we
welcome the increase in donor contributions that was
announced on 27 September. They will help meet the
immediate needs of the Palestinian people, but in the
longer term UNRWA itself needs to continue to give
priority to the implementation of cost-saving reform
measures. We will continue to work closely with
UNRWA and other donors on the continuity of its
central services.

In conclusion, like France, we consider ourselves
to be a friend to both the Israelis and the Palestinians.
Like France, we believe that the destinies of these two
people are inextricably intertwined. Substantive peace
talks between the parties leading to a two-State solution
based on 1967 borders, which includes the West Bank
and Gaza, is the best way to end this conflict and ensure
a sustainable peace. It is the best way to ensure Israeli
security, which is absolutely vital, and to achieve a just,
fair, agreed and realistic solution to the Palestinian
refugee question, in line with Council resolution 1515
(2003). The United Kingdom will continue engaging
meaningfully to help bring this about.

Finally, I want to say that I have concentrated today
on subject matter that the Special Coordinator raised.
I think I am right to do so. Other speakers touched on
wider matters. I do not have time now to go into the
issue of child soldiers, but I would just like to put on
record that the United Kingdom shares the concerns
about these child soldiers.

