Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council has already held open
debates on the threats posed by transnational organized
crime, piracy, illicit drug trafficking and climate
change. A recent example of that was the Arria Formula
meeting on climate change held last month.

We hope that today's discussion will enable us
to focus on the consequences and other threats being
faced by one of the most vulnerable groups, namely, the
small island developing States (SIDS). It is significant
that we are focusing on SIDS today, at a time when the
international community is on the threshold of adopting
a post-2015 development agenda, which includes a
broad spectrum of means and resources to implement
the new agenda. The pressing needs of the 50 million
inhabitants of SIDS are worthy of being appropriately
reflected in the new agenda.

The location of SIDS along the important trade
routes and the serious gaps in global security systems
turn them into convenient transit points for traffickers
in natural resources, wildlife, drugs and weapons. The
threats posed by the financing of terrorism through
the proceeds of crime are high, as was rightly noted
in resolution 2195 (2014). We are convinced that an
effective response to the threats of transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking and piracy hinges on
the actions of the international community as a whole,
with a leading role being played by the United Nations.

It is important to continue to strengthen the legal
and treaty basis for international cooperation to counter
transnational organized crime and piracy. We cannot
relent in our efforts to create and develop mechanisms
for bringing pirates and the sponsors of criminal trade
to justice. We acknowledge the existing experience
accumulated by SIDS in that field. The provision of
specialized technical assistance to SIDS for capacity-
building in law enforcement agencies and the bolstering
of border security are particularly important.

We would like to separately underscore the role
of public-private partnerships in combating criminal
challenges. It is important at the national level to create
the conditions needed to forge full-fledged cooperation
between business and State bodies in that area.

As a result of climate change, the oceans are
gradually wresting territory from SIDS, changing the
balance of ecosystems and the traditional economic
structures of SIDS, and threatening their lifestyles.
The Russian Federation has consistently advocated a
comprehensive and integrated approach to addressing
climate change within the framework of the specialized
international forums and formats, particularly the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC). We urge all Member States, in
accordance with the Lima Call for Climate Action, to
submit to the UNFCCC secretariat information on the
parameters of their potential obligations under a future
climate agreement, as Russia and a number of other
countries have already done. We believe that only an
understanding of our collective responsibility and a
willingness to seek compromise will enable us to make
progress at the UNFCCC Climate Conference to be
held in Paris in December.

At the same time, no agreement can have positive
results without creating the financial and institutional
mechanisms required for their implementation. The
mobilization of financial assistance and transfer of
environmentally clean technologies - as provided
for in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, adopted a few
days ago by the General Assembly (see A/69/PV.99) in
resolution 69/313 - and the operationalization of the
Green Climate Fund are essential tools for successfully
adapting the socioeconomic systems of small island
developing States to new conditions. Another
important component for improving the preparedness
of small island developing States for disasters will be
ensuring that the final document of the Sendai Third
World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction (General Assembly resolution 69/283, annex II) is implemented
as soon as possible.

The Russian Federation actively assists small
island developing States. In 2010, our support for that
group of countries amounted to about $20 million. Our
joint project, with the United Nations Development
Programme, on improving Pacific small island
developing States' preparedness for natural disasters
is in the final stages of preparation with total funding
of about $10 million. Since the Security Council does
not possess comprehensive expertise on issues of
socioeconomic development and the protection of the
environment, we believe it can do more to emphasize
the importance of supporting small island developing
States in grappling with new challenges and threats on
their path to achieving sustainable development.

