Mr. Mohamed (the Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We
are always interested to inform the Security Council
of the Sudan's position on the various questions
raised in the Council that are related to its interests.
Hence, I would like to seize this opportunity to deliver
this statement.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Council for
the spirit of cooperation and consensus that enabled it
today to adopt resolution 2416 (2018), on the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) for six months. I would also
like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the commitment
of my country to cooperating with UNISFA and
enabling it to implement its mandate, as per Council
resolution 1990 (2011).

The security and stability in Abyei and the
remarkable progress in entrenching the notions of
peaceful coexistence between the Misseriya and Ngok
Dinka, as reaffirmed in the reports before the Council
today, is the direct result of the concerted efforts of the
Government and the positive roles played by UNISFA
since its establishment. We stress that it is important for
all parties to exert concerted efforts to enhance security
and stability and to refrain from any action that might
undermine this positive atmosphere. They should also
avoid any decisions that are not well calculated until
the final status of Abyei is defined according to agreed
legal parameters, to which we are fully committed. Until
then, Abyei will remain an integral part of the national
territories of the Sudan, and the Sudan exercises full
sovereignty over that territory.

I would like also like to take this opportunity to
stress the centrality of the Agreement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security
of the Abyei Area, signed on 20 June 2011. It is the
foundation for all the relevant arrangements on Abyei,
including the deployment of UNISFA. The two parties
to the Agreement - the Government of the Sudan
and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM),
succeeded by the Government of South Sudan since July
2011 - agreed that the Agreement should remain in
force until the final status of Abyei had been defined. I
would like to quote paragraph 41, given its importance:

"This Agreement and the Abyei Protocol
(except as modified by the terms herein) shall
continue to apply until such time as the final status
of Abyei has been resolved."

We would also like to recall article 29 of the
Agreement, which links any amendment in the mandate
in UNISFA with the agreement of the two parties to
the Agreement:

"The Government of Sudan and the SPLM. will
request the United Nations Security Council to
approve the deployment and mandate of the ISFA,
with the understanding that the mandate referred
to in paragraph 27 of this Agreement shall not be
changed without the agreement of the Government
of the Sudan, the SPLM. and the Government
of Ethiopia."

My Government affirms its commitment to
all agreements signed with the Government of
South Sudan, starting with the 2004 Protocol on the
Resolution of the Abyei Conflict, the Agreement on
Temporary Arrangements for the Administration
and Security of the Abyei Area and the Cooperation
Agreement, signed on 27 September 2012. We call on
our brothers and sisters in the Government of South
Sudan to seriously engage with the Government of the
Sudan and the African Union in order to accelerate the
establishment of Abyei institutions, as stated in the
June 2011 Agreement. That includes the joint Abyei
Area Administration, the joint Abyei Area Legislative
Council and the joint Abyei Police Service.

The Council may agree with us that those
institutions are indispensable in the administration of
the Area and the provision ofbasic services to its people.
It is important to enhance peaceful coexistence among
the communities there, as well as to create conditions
conducive to settling the final status of Abyei in a
manner that fulfils the aspirations of all stakeholders
and is acceptable to all parties.

The Council may also agree that abiding by
agreements in general is another example of what we
mean by maintaining international peace and security.
International peace and security are threatened by the
pretexts given when agreements are violated. History
teaches the lesson in that respect over and over.

I would like to stress the importance of considering
Abyei in the broader framework of relations between the
Sudan and South Sudan and the development of internal
relations in each country. In that regard, we stress
that the path towards sustainable peace and stability
in the Abyei Area and along the borders between the
Sudan and South Sudan is based on two main pillars,
namely, the implementation of the Agreement on
Temporary Arrangements for the Administration and
Security of the Abyei Area and the implementation of
all agreements included in the cooperation agreement
signed on 27 September 2012. The latter laid a strong
foundation for the normalization of relations between
the two countries and enhanced cooperation in all areas,
as well as the sustainability of peace between the two
countries. It covers such areas as oil, trade, borders,
debts, security arrangements, civilian affairs and other
important aspects.

The joint communique of the Ministries for
Foreign Affairs of the Sudan and South Sudan dated
23 September 2017 and addressed to the Security
Council and the Secretary-General was intended,
in the first place, to maintain the state of stability
prevailing in Abyei. We should make no mistake about
that fact. Maintaining such a state is the key condition
for implementing the signed agreements. Maintaining
this state of peace and security is a goal in itself. We
therefore approach with a great deal of caution any
direct or indirect statement that might undermine
this state. We do have reservations on the content of
paragraph 6 of resolution 2416 (2018), namely, the
reference to the 2012 proposal of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel, which confirms the
Government of the Sudan's rejection of the Panel in the
past. We stress that this reference will have negative
impacts on the communities living in Abyei and might
lead to violence among them.

In conclusion, I would like to extend our sincere
thanks to all partners whose efforts facilitate the work of
UNISFA, particularly the Government of Ethiopia, the
African Union Peace and Security Council, the African
Union Commission and the High-Level Implementation
Panel, as well as the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan, and
the entire staff of UNISFA. We once again reaffirm
the Sudan's cooperation with UNISFA to discharge
all its tasks in an uninterrupted manner, pursuant to
resolution 1990 (2011) and subsequent resolutions.

The meeting rose at 3.25 pm.
