Mr. Roet (Israel): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this important
meeting. We would also like to express our gratitude to
the Permanent Representatives of Lithuania, Australia
and the Republic of Korea for chairing the Committees
and for their comprehensive briefings. Israel believes
that the United Nations counter-terrorism Committees
are essential to global efforts to isolate terrorists. We
appreciate their dedicated work, along with that of
other relevant agencies.

For the past month, the world's attention has been
focused on the kidnapping of hundreds of girls from a
school in north-eastern Nigeria by Boko Haram. When
our children are not safe in their schools and our families
are not safe in their homes, then we, as an international
community, have failed. Israel welcomes the inclusion
of Boko Haram on the sanctions list of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, but there is still much more work to be done.

In its 66-year history, Israel has not known a single
day free from terrorism. With every siren that wails,
every report of a terrorist attack and even every car
backfiring, our hearts miss a beat. There is not a family
in Israel that does not know the bitter taste of tragedy.
This past weekend, a gunman stormed the Jewish
Museum of Belgium in Brussels, killing Dominique
Chabrier, a French citizen; Alexandre Strens, a Belgian
citizen; and Emanuel and Miriam Riva, two Israeli
citizens. That horrific act proves yet again that both
anti-Semitism and terrorism are not confined by
national borders.

Since the beginning of this year, over 100 rockets
have been fired from the Hamas-controlled Gaza Strip
into southern Israel. Hamas now seeks the veneer of
international legitimacy by partnering with Fatah. In
case the Council thinks Hamas has changed its tune,
48 hours after forging a unity agreement, Hamas leader
Khaled Mashaal stated, "Our path is resistance and
jihad is our choice", and if anyone had any further
doubt, he also stated, "This is the original Palestinian
strategy". It is clear from that statement that lending
support to the Hamas-Abbas partnership is the same as
lending legitimacy to terror attacks against Israel.

The reach of terrorist organizations has grown
dramatically and dangerously. Israelis have become
the targets of an Iranian terror campaign executed
by the Iranian Revolutionary Guard and Hizbullah.
Those groups are responsible for attacks throughout
the world, from Burgas and Buenos Aires to Bangkok.
Just last month, authorities in Thailand foiled a plan
by Hizbullah agents to attack Israeli tourists. Hizbullah
has built its arsenal to unprecedented levels, amassing
over 80,000 deadly missiles and rockets, which it stores
throughout Lebanon in schools, homes and hospitals.
In doing so, it is committing a double war crime: first
by using Lebanese civilians as human shields; and
secondly by targeting Israeli civilians.

Both Hamas and Hizbullah receive funding and
support from the world's primary sponsor of terrorism,
Iran. In March, the Israeli Defense Forces intercepted
a cargo ship, the KLOS C, sent by Iran and carrying
advanced weaponry destined for the Hamas-controlled
Gaza Strip. The KLOS C was a close call. That time, it
was a ship carrying rockets bound for Tel Aviv. Next
time, it could be carrying a bomb meant for a capital
city in Europe or Asia or the Americas.

Iran is not easily discouraged, and it continues to fan
the flames of conflict across the Middle East. In Syria,
where the worst humanitarian crisis of this generation
is taking place, Iran has sent terrorist groups from
Lebanon and Iraq to fight alongside the brutal Al-Assad
regime. Directing this network is Qasem Soleimani, the
chief of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard's Quds Force.
Thousands of foreign fighters from all over Europe and
the Middle East have joined Al-Qaida in Syria and are
aggravating sectarian tensions in the region. Syria has
become the foremost academy for both Sunni and Shiite
terrorists, teaching the philosophy of fundamentalism,
the engineering of explosives and the calculus of chaos.

The international community must stand firm in
combating terrorism. Terrorism cannot be justified
on any grounds or for any reason, and it must be
condemned in all its forms and manifestations. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee and the 1540 Committee all remain essential
parts of the global effort to isolate terrorists and deny
them the means to inflict harm.

Israel attaches great importance to the work of
the United Nations counter-terrorism agencies and
commends the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) for its ongoing contribution to
coordinating action against terrorism. CTED has done
an excellent job monitoring the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), which Israel fully implements
and which constitutes the centrepiece of the United
Nations efforts to create a robust counter-terrorism
system. We support the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, which is currently being negotiated.
Israel believes that all four pillars of the Strategy must
be treated as a whole. Israel also recently submitted
its periodic report in accordance with resolution 1540
(2004) .

In Israel, the threat of terrorism is not theoretical.
It is prevalent and it is persistent. Out of necessity, we
have become experts in the field of counter-terrorism
and are sharing our knowledge with Governments
throughout the world. Israeli experts have contributed
their expertise on a range of issues, from terrorist
financing to forensic investigation and from aviation
security to border protection. Those activities reflect our
fundamental belief that terrorism can only be effectively
confronted through international cooperation.

There is a specific kind of ecosystem that creates
terrorism. It is seeded in hate, watered with instability
and cultivated by rogue regimes. As an international
community, we must attack the roots of terrorist
infrastructure and stem the flow of arms and money
from its sponsors. Working together, we can abolish the
weapons of war before they abolish us.

