Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada, like others,
congratulates Brazil on this important debate.

As Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Canada also fully
associates itself with the statement just delivered by
the Ambassador of Belgium on behalf of the country-
specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).

Today's debate reflects how far we have all
moved beyond sterile discussions about whether
security or development comes first; they are clearly
interdependent. As the World Bank has shown,
countries plagued by war are also the ones lagging
furthest behind in attaining the Millennium
Development Goals. Painful experience also
demonstrates that social and economic inequalities can
cause and even exacerbate conflict. Women and
children suffer particularly harsh consequences as a
result of conflict. It can take many years, or even
decades, to restore their social and economic well-
being.

This poses significant challenges for the United
Nations. One of the primary challenges is
organizational. Canada's adoption of a whole-of-
government approach in Haiti, the Sudan and
Afghanistan has demonstrated that working in a
coherent fashion yields dividends. Yet successful
integration requires clarity about roles and
responsibilities, a common strategy and the ability to
act rapidly in response to changing realities. Despite
recent progress, the United Nations must continue to
improve in these respects. Duplication of roles and
responsibilities still exists among United Nations
departments, agencies and programmes, and
Headquarters support to senior leaders in the field is
too frequently delayed or inadequate.

It is not only within the United Nations system
where improved coordination is essential. As noted in
last year's Dili Declaration and eloquently expressed
by the Group of Seven Plus, national ownership is
necessary for effective peacebuilding. The international
community must better align assistance behind national
priorities, thereby enabling the more rapid
re-establishment of core Government functions.

The interdependence of security and development
also points to the need for rapid access to tailored
civilian deployable expertise. In that regard, Canada
looks forward to the recommendations of the review of
international civilian capacities.

Beyond the United Nations, the international
community as a whole must also be ready to respond.
There is an urgent need to reinforce national capacity
and engage expertise resident in the global South,
especially in the areas of governance, the rule of law,
public administration, women, peace and security and
basic social services.

While a case-by-case approach is needed, it is
also clear that recurrent gaps exist. For example,
governance and the rule of law consistently emerge as
areas of weakness, with the justice sector frequently
suffering from inadequate attention. This unbalanced
approach is especially dangerous given that the
establishment of a functioning, capable State is a
fundamental precondition for lasting security and
sustainable development.

Finally, the interdependence between security and
development has implications for the work of the
Council. The growing practice of designating
integrated missions with mandates to coordinate a
coherent United Nations approach is of course
welcome. However, it will be important to draw on the
comparative advantages within the United Nations
system wherever possible, rather than expanding the
range of responsibilities imposed on peace operations.

These are areas in which enhanced cooperation
with the Peacebuilding Commission offers much
promise. Not only has the PBC begun to establish
partnerships with relevant development partners,
including the World Bank and regional organizations,
but its composition and mandate are ideally suited to
working at the nexus between security and
development.
(spoke in French)

Two roles should be strengthened. First, the
Security Council should increasingly draw on, and the
Peacebuilding Commission better provide, concrete

analysis on development issues that either undermine
security in the short term or will require early action to
deliver peace dividends.

Secondly, the Commission can deepen its
engagement with a wider circle of peacebuilding actors
in order to better coordinate efforts and systematize
lessons learned. At the country level, the PBC
configurations provide the constant and close attention
necessary to gaps, resource needs and the less pressing
consideration of questions of sequencing. Within the
United Nations system, the Commission can also play
an important role by encouraging greater cohesion
within the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
and by supporting reform processes outlined in the
Secretary-General's reports, as well as the five-year
peacebuilding architecture and civilian capacity
reviews. More regular interaction between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission, especially
in advance of defining mission mandates and in the
context of transition processes, could enhance the
ability of both parties to work more effectively.

In conclusion, Madame President, let me assure
you of Canada's continued commitment to improving
the ability of the United Nations to meet these strategic
and organizational challenges and to strengthen the
foundations for development in the long-term.

