The President: I thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for his statement.

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today's meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2014/7.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea.

Ten years ago, the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004) by the Security Council marked a key milestone
in our efforts to address the challenge arising from
the nexus between the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) and terrorism. As a
binding international norm under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, resolution 1540 (2004)
complements the existing non-proliferation regime,
which had formerly been focused on States. The
resolution reflects a fundamental shift in our paradigm
regarding the international community's response to
the threat of WMD proliferation.

Over the past 10 years, resolution 1540 (2004) has
mobilized significant efforts across the globe to combat
new WMD proliferation threats. The number of States
that have implemented legislative measures to prohibit
the proliferation activities of non-state actors has more
than doubled during this period. At the same time, law
enforcement and export control capabilities of these
States have improved steadfastly in recent years.

Despite past achievements, daunting challenges
still lie ahead in an increasingly complex operational
environment, given the rapid advances in science and
technology. This is why, on the tenth anniversary of
this landmark resolution, we should step up efforts
to achieve its full and universal implementation. The
presidential statement that we have just adopted sets an
important goal of achieving the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) by 2021, and maps out key areas
that we should work on to achieve this goal. Building
on the progress of the past decade, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) will
report a comprehensive road map and strategy to the
Security Council by 2016. In this regard, I would like
to stress, in particular, three essential tasks that should
underpin our future efforts.

First, the 1540 Committee's crucial role in
monitoring the implementation of the resolution should
be further enhanced. To date, 172 out of 193 Member
States have presented their implementation reports.
Considering the voluntary nature of the reporting,
that is a remarkable achievement. In marking the
tenth anniversary of the resolution, efforts should be
redoubled to achieve the goal of universal reporting by
Member States.

Secondly, we cannot overstate the importance of
capacity-building and assistance for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). As the saying goes, a chain is
only as strong as its weakest link. However robust the
security networks may be in many countries, it takes
vulnerability and failing in just one country to spell
insecurity for all. We should continue to strengthen the
matchmaking role of the 1540 Committee to facilitate
the provision of effective and tailored assistance to
States. In addition to the efforts by the Security Council,
we need to expand cooperation among all stakeholders,
including the relevant international and regional
organizations. For its part, the Republic of Korea has
launched the International Nuclear Non-proliferation
and Security Academy, which will contribute actively
to the capacity-building efforts in the region. We will
also contribute $1 million to support the activities of
the 1540 Committee.

Thirdly, we should promote synergy among
resolution 1540 (2004) and other non-proliferation
related norms and initiatives. Resolution 1540 (2004)
imposes an extensive set of obligations that cut
across a broad range of WMD-proliferation aspects,
encompassing nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery, as well as their
related materials and technologies. In today's security
environment, where non-State actors can easily have
access to WMD-related materials and technology,
non-proliferation and WMD security are indivisibly
linked. The Hague Nuclear Security Summit, held last
March, reinforced that important point, as more than 30
States announced the joint statement on promoting the
full and universal implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Such coordination efforts should be expanded
to other areas of WMD control.

Today, North Korea's nuclear-weapons programmes
have exposed the weakest link in nuclear
non-proliferation, along with nuclear security and
safety. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea is
the only country in the world to have conducted nuclear
tests in the twenty-first century. Notwithstanding the
efforts of the international community, North Korea
has continued to develop its nuclear weapons over
the past two decades, and is now threatening to carry
out its fourth nuclear test. If North Korea succeeds
in acquiring nuclear weapons, it will seriously
undermine the regime established by the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and exacerbate
tension and instability in North-East Asia.

Further nuclear tests by North Korea must be
prevented through concerted efforts of the international
community. Ifwe fail to effectively act upon such a clear
and present threat to international peace and security,
it will critically weaken the credibility of the Security
Council, as well as the integrity of the Charter of the
United Nations, which demands that all Members be
peace-loving States. We must clearly warn North Korea
that, if it challenges the international community with
another nuclear test, it will be met with the most serious
consequences.

Having the honour of presiding over the Security
Council today, I am pleased that we were able to adopt
today's significant presidential statement. As Chair
of the 1540 Committee, the Republic of Korea will
continue to lead efforts to realize the full and universal
implementation of the resolution over the course of
our remaining term. I look forward to participants'
constructive contributions on the development and
future direction of resolution 1540 (2004) during
today's open debate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

