Ms. Loj (Denmark): Like others, I should like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Soren Jessen-
Petersen, for his briefing. I would also like to thank the
President of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadic,
for his presence here today and for his statement.
Denmark also welcomes the presence at this meeting of
the Prime Minister of Kosovo, Mr. Bajram Kosumi, as
part of the UNMIK delegation.

I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union.

My Government is profoundly sad at the passing
away of the President of Kosovo, Mr. Ibrahim Rugova.
President Rugova was a man of dignity, a man of
dialogue and a man of reconciliation. He stood by
these values even in times of war and upheaval. We
welcome the election of Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu as his
successor and hope that President Sejdiu will promote
the same values as the late President Rugova.

Substantial dialogue between Kosovo's
communities, as well as between Pristina and Belgrade,
is of utmost importance. Therefore, we welcome the
first meeting at the ministerial level on decentralization
that took place in Vienna in September 2005. We urge
all parties to engage constructively in the upcoming
meetings on decentralization that are scheduled to start
in Vienna on 20 February. We join the Secretary-
General's call on Belgrade to encourage Kosovo Serbs
to participate constructively in the Provisional
Institutions in Pristina. The Kosovo Serbs are the glue
that binds the parties together, and their presence
would contribute positively to the process.

Denmark shares the Secretary-General's
assessment that, in spite of progress in some areas,
overall progress on standards implementation has been
too slow on the part of the authorities in Pristina. We
therefore join the Secretary-General in urging
Kosovo's political leaders to renew their efforts to
ensure substantive, accelerated and sustainable
progress in the implementation of standards. This
includes key areas, such as the return of refugees and
internally displaced people, access to justice, the
preservation of cultural heritage and improved
conditions for minorities.

The appointment of Mr. Martti Ahtisaari as the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy to lead the process
designed to determine Kosovo's future status received
the full support of the members of this Council. The
appointment signalled the start of a new policy - the
policy of standards and status. The logic of launching
the status process while standards implementation is
still ongoing was based on a recommendation in the
comprehensive review last September under the
leadership of Ambassador Eide.

Today, I think it is particularly important that we
pay attention to one of the key principles behind
Ambassador Eide's logic - namely, that success in
negotiating and implementing a future status will
depend on future standards implementation.
Ambassador Eide further warned that insufficient
standards implementation would entail the risk of
turning a future status into a failed status. The final
status depends on both the implementation of standards
and the constructive engagement of Belgrade and of
Kosovo's minority communities. It is in the interest of
all of Kosovo's communities and, indeed, of the whole
region to ensure that Kosovo turns out to be success.

My country views Kosovo as a key regional
issue. Denmark steadfastly supports UNMIK, the
UNMIK police and the Kosovo Force. We look
forward to a more peaceful and prosperous future,
which the peoples of South-Eastern Europe deserve.
This will entail close regional cooperation between
former foes and for the common integration of these
truly European countries into the Euro-Atlantic
institutions where they rightfully belong. However, the
Euro-Atlantic perspectives depend on the
implementation of standards and a sustainable solution
to Kosovo's future status.

