Mr. Meetarbhan (Mauritius): My delegation
wishes to focus exclusively on one aspect of this
debate, although we support the view that the many
issues raised by other speakers deserve attention and
consideration.

The rule of law, whether at the national or
international levels, requires enforcement and adequate
machinery for the settlement of disputes. Those are
essential components of the rule of law because a
normative framework, however well constructed, is not
sufficient. Unfortunately, that dimension of the rule of
law is often overlooked at the international level. The
rule of law at the international level can be really
meaningful only if there is adequate machinery for the
redress of grievances and the settlement of disputes.

Article 2 of the United Nations Charter provides
that all Members shall settle their disputes by peaceful
means. Article 33 spells out the means and ways of
doing so. In the same spirit, in its Chapter XIV, the
Charter provides for the establishment of the
International Court of Justice. However, recourse to
international adjudication for the settlement of disputes
between States has historically required the consent of
the States concerned. In recent times, a number of
bilateral or multilateral agreements have provided for
the prior commitment of States to submit to arbitration
or adjudication. Mauritius welcomes that development.

However, recourse to judicial or quasi-judicial
means or arbitration for determining disputes between
States still requires, as a general rule, the consent of
both parties. Giving consent is too often a matter of
bargaining power between the parties, and the stronger
party will often withhold consent because it can bear
the cost of denying the weaker party access to a
judicial determination of the law applying to the
contentious issue. Parties of similar size or economic
power therefore could be more likely to accept that a
dispute between them be referred to adjudication or
arbitration, but legal disputes between two parties of
unequal strength are likely to remain unresolved.

That is not consistent with the application of the
rule of law at the international level. Security requires
an appropriate legal framework for the redress of
grievances or the settlement of disputes so that some
States are not frustrated in their attempts to find a
peaceful settlement to their legal disputes. The
international community has yet to set up adequate
machinery for the settlement of legal disputes that is
available to all States.

Only about one third of the United Nations
membership has made declarations under Article 36 of
the Statute of the International Court of Justice to
accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. Many
States that have made such declarations have also
stated reservations that limit the Court's jurisdiction or,
in many cases, exclude it. Other States seek to vary or
revoke their declaration when a dispute is submitted or
is about to be submitted to the Court, to exclude the
competence of the Court over the dispute concerned.
Those examples illustrate the kind of difficulties a
State may have in settling a claim under international
law. One State involved in a dispute may refuse to
negotiate in good faith and seek to ensure that no
international tribunal can determine the law applicable
to the dispute.

Mauritius welcomes the decision of the President
of the General Assembly to adopt, as the theme for the
current session of the General Assembly, "The role of
mediation in the settlement of disputes by peaceful
means". Mauritius also welcomes the decision to
convene a high-level meeting on the rule of law during
the sixty-seventh session. However, my delegation
wants to stress that the debate on the rule of law must
apply at both the national and international levels. We
therefore look forward to Member States discussing the
rule of law as it applies to inter-State relations as part
of the forthcoming debates.

My delegation is fully conscious of the fact that it
might not be realistic to expect that States are ready to
accept compulsory jurisdiction or that the international
legal order would contain provisions on justiciability
and judicial authority similar to what obtains in
domestic legal orders. However, the United Nations
has a duty, as part of the promotion and strengthening
of the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security, to initiate a constructive dialogue
on the whole issue of the settlement of legal disputes.

Initially, that debate could focus on the adoption
of standards of conduct to which all States would
subscribe. The philosophy underlying such standards
could be that respect for the rule of law at the
international level entails a commitment to good-faith
negotiation, conciliation, mediation or other forms of
non-judicial or quasi-judicial settlement of legal
disputes. Alternatively, when a State does not accept
any of those, the standards of conduct could provide
that the State will submit to some form of international
adjudication. No subject of international law should be
left without any means or forum for the settlement of a
dispute or for determination of the law.

In his 20 August 2010 report on strengthening
and coordinating United Nations rule of law activities,
the Secretary-General stated:

"In 2008, I emphasized that in fulfilling its
responsibilities, the United Nations must work
towards the universal application at the
international level of the Organization's
definition of the principle of the rule of law."
(A/65/318, para. 9)
In the same report he went on to say,

"The principle that all individuals and
entities, including States, are accountable to the
law lies at the heart of the rule of law.
Responsibility of all subjects of international law
for fulfilling their obligations is thus essential to
any concept of rule of law at the international
level." (ibia'., para. 24)

The credibility of the debate over the rule of law
will be challenged if it is essentially limited to the rule
of law within States and does not encompass the rule of
law among States.

