Mr. Viinanen (Finland): We wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate on this
important issue. Similarly, we thank the Secretary-
General for his valuable report (S/2009/189) on
mediation and its support activities. We trust that this
report will start a process that leads to more structured
and professional mediation activities not only of the
United Nations Secretariat, but also in support of
Member States, regional organizations and civil
society. Finland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union. In addition, I have
the honour of presenting some additional national
views.

Mediation and settlement of disputes lie at the
very core of the United Nations, and especially of the
Security Council, with its primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. Finland
supports United Nations mediation efforts and stresses
the importance of enhancing the capacities for
mediation available within the United Nations
framework. Hence, we warmly welcome the role and
active input of the Mediation Support Unit of the
Department of Political Affairs, which provides
3
important expertise for the mediation efforts of the
United Nations and its partners.

While the United Nations has traditionally
occupied the leading role in international conflict
mediation, regional and subregional partners are
assuming growing responsibility in that field, as my
colleague from South Africa just mentioned. The
European Union, while learning from the valuable
experience provided by the United Nations, is
developing its own capacities for peace mediation.
Also, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe has developed versatile tools for conflict
resolution.

In the light of the current Security Council
agenda, particular attention has to be paid to Africa.
Finland strongly supports the strengthening of the
African Union's mediation capacity. For that purpose,
we are providing €2.9 million to finance a joint project
on enhancing the African Union's mediation capacity.
Against that background, we cannot but encourage the
United Nations to further engage in dialogue and
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.

Local ownership is essential for effective and
sustainable mediation results, as local actors are most
aware of the actual situations, conditions and
sensitivities.

In order to build sustainable peace and security,
there is also a need for increased attention to women's
equal and active participation in the mediation and
peace negotiations. In conflict situations women are
capable and powerful actors, and they should be
encouraged to actively participate in the settlement of
disputes. Up to now, no more than eight women have
served as high-level United Nations representatives in
the field. We agree with the Secretary-General that that
is not enough.

We emphasize once again the need to fully
implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and draw the attention of the Council to the
recommendations of the recent International
Colloquium on Women's Empowerment, Leadership
Development and International Peace and Security,
which was jointly chaired by the President of Liberia,
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, and the Finnish President, Tarja
Halonen.
The successful act of mediation is not concluded
by the signature of a peace agreement. As stated by the
Secretary-General, mediation must be followed by
immediate post-conflict peacebuilding efforts, notably
in the areas of police, rule of law, democracy, human
rights, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and security sector reform. We hope that the
forthcoming report of the Secretary-General on early
recovery and peacebuilding will provide concrete
recommendations in making the United Nations system
more coherent in the area of early peacebuilding.

Finland has a long tradition in international peace
mediation. The Nobel Peace Prize of President Martti
Ahtisaari is a testimony of our commitment to that
challenging task. At the same time, that highly
appreciated Nobel Prize is recognition for the valuable
efforts of the United Nations in peace mediation. We
believe that the United Nations should strive to groom
its internal capacity for mediation. The Secretary-
General could create a concrete plan on how to prepare
the next generation to follow the steps of previous
eminent United Nations peace negotiators. Finland is
also committed to engage in and support future
mediation efforts of the United Nations.

