Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I would like at
the outset, Sir, to welcome your presence in the Chair
and the presence with us of the Secretary-General.

I associate my delegation with the statement to be
made by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the
European Union later in this debate.

As the Secretary-General has told us this
morning, this debate is important and well timed. We
are grateful to your delegation, Mr. President, for
arranging it and glad that it provides us with an
opportunity to pay tribute to Pakistan's contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping and, through you, to the
contributions of other troop-contributing countries.

It is important as a debate and it is well timed
because we are in the middle of an unprecedented
surge in demand for United Nations peacekeeping. We
can see this as a sign of success. In some cases, it is a
sign that conflicts are coming to an end, as in Burundi
and the Sudan, for example. In many cases, it is a sign
of the international community's willingness to back
indigenous efforts in Africa to keep the peace, and
those are spurring complementary efforts by the
European Union and the Group of Eight. In all cases, it
is a sign of confidence that the United Nations can
deliver multidimensional peace-building that the
international community increasingly understands is
necessary for sustainable security. It is, perhaps, a sign
of success that the Council rather takes it for granted,
when it mandates a mission, that the resources will be
found and that the United Nations system will deliver.

But the surge in demand for peacekeeping is also
a grave challenge to the United Nations system and to
each one of us Member States. It is unprecedented and,
by the same token, so is the threat to continued United
Nations success. The risk is that the United Nations
elastic will be stretched too thin and that, somewhere,
some time soon, it will snap.

We should consider what this Council asks of
United Nations peacekeeping. There are just 600
Headquarters staff members in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to plan, launch and oversee
what are likely soon to be 18 operations. That is fewer
than 35 staff of all grades per operation. By the end of
the year, there will probably be fewer than one staff
member in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
per 100 staff members in the field.

All these operations are, by definition,
international, in which special representatives of the
Secretary-General, force commanders, contingents and
civilian components from many different nations come
together and have almost never trained together. Many
of these operations are complex, multidimensional,
evolving and unpredictable. All, by definition, are
highly political. Very few have a back-up military
reserve.

No nation, no Member State would be prepared to
do what we have instructed the United Nations to do.
And what private-sector organization would decide to
establish a series of major new programmes without
exhaustive assessments first of the resources,
requirements and risks involved?

Certainly, overstretch brings risks. There are the
risks of rushed planning of new operations and of
inadequate oversight of existing ones. There are the
risks that the Secretary-General has pointed to:
inadequate resources, whether of personnel or funding.
Civilian personnel looks like a particular challenge this
year, and this is against the background of civilian
undermanning in existing operations. What percentage,
for example, of civilian staff have been hired so far for
the United Nations Mission in Liberia? From
overstretch, there are risks of inefficiency and
ineffectiveness, and there are risks - and they are
real - of diminished accountability, breaches of
military discipline, corruption, political mistakes and
even military failure. So, what is to be done?
The United Kingdom is deeply committed to
United Nations-mandated peacekeeping. We provide
political support and a rapid response when necessary.
We supply more troops to United Nations operations
than any other permanent member of the Council. We
pay more for United Nations peacekeeping than any
country, except for the United States, Japan and
Germany. My country is not going to argue for less
United Nations peacekeeping in the face of United
Nations success and in the face of continued
humanitarian and international demand. Nor is it
credible that the Security Council should ask for less.
We agree with the Secretary-General that Member
States must show commitment.

So, the Council and United Nations Member
States face a choice, as the excellent non-paper
provided by the presidency has pointed out. We can
continue as normal and face a growing risk of failure
through overstretch, or we can embrace Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno's call to the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to suspend
business as usual for a while.

It is not really a choice. It cannot be business as
usual. Our goals are pretty clear. We all want forces
smoothly generated into cohesive, coherent operations,
including enablers and civilian components. We all
know we need to sustain that force and cover all
eventualities. We know we need better-informed
strategic direction of the operation, linked to the effort
on the ground. Therefore, we need clarity between
New York and first-rate Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and Force Commanders in the field.

The challenge is to be clear about what needs to
change, and how. We believe that we can build further
on the Brahimi panel report, and I would like to
highlight some important elements, many of them
reflected in the European Union statement to be
delivered later in this debate.

The first element is integrated mission taskforces.
Peacekeeping in the context of post-conflict
reconstruction requires delivery of rule of law and
attention to the problems of women and children in
armed conflict. It also requires development. That
means an integrated approach by the entire United
Nations family - not just the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations but United Nations funds,
agencies and programmes. It also means working in
integration with the international financial institutions,
regional organizations and relevant civil society
organizations. We believe that full implementation of
the integrated mission taskforce concept is needed,
involving the leadership of future Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, who, in turn,
need to be appointed much earlier in an operation than
has been the practice to date.

Secondly, we want to see the further development
of new partnerships between the United Nations and
regional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
Charter. With its ever-increasing peacekeeping
portfolio, the United Nations cannot be expected to
perform everything everywhere. Regional
organizations have unique and complementary
capacities to offer: rapid deployment, training, civilian
police and specialized enablers. Such operations by
regional organizations do not threaten the primacy of
United Nations peacekeeping; the United Nations still
mandates them. The organizational framework for a
peacekeeping operation is less important for United
Nations success than the quality and the availability of
the capacity to deliver.

Thirdly, we want to see further support for the
developing capacity of African peacekeeping, conflict
prevention and peace building.

Fourthly, as the Secretary-General has underlined
this morning, we believe that to ensure that United
Nations peacekeeping operations are properly
protected, there should be an enhanced United Nations
capacity for security assessment and threat and risk
analysis.

Fifthly, we need to pursue value for money and
the most efficient possible use of existing resources
through regional synergies among peacekeeping
operations.

To do these things, we also need to overcome
some immediate bottlenecks. We had previously heard
that it took an average of 347 days to recruit civilian
staff. What are the figures today? An extra six-and-a-
half thousand civilian staff are required. Would it be
impossible to contract out the shortlisting of civilian
candidates for those jobs? There needs to be additional
surge-planning capacity. Should we look afresh at
solutions to deliver that? External sources could
provide some planning, and the United Kingdom is
certainly ready to consider any such requests. We need
a larger pool of the most able available Special
Representatives and Deputy Special Representatives. Is
it inconceivable to employ headhunters to examine new
sources, such as chief executive officers from the
private sector?

A key recent improvement through the Brahimi
report has been the strategic deployment stocks in
Brindisi. However, we should ask whether it is big
enough to cope with the new missions. And once
stocks are expended, how can we rapidly replenish
them to meet the increased tempo of demand?

Indeed, perhaps we should take a fresh look at
pre-mandate authorizations in general. They cover
budget, personnel recruitment and other essential start-
up activities in missions. Perhaps we should look at
that once more.

How should we do these things? We believe, first,
that there needs to be a stronger partnership among the
Council, the wider United Nations membership, the
Secretariat, United Nations humanitarian and
development agencies and other United Nations bodies.
Those bodies include the Fifth Committee and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which
have central and clearly defined decision-making
powers for United Nations peacekeeping.

Secondly, we would like to see a stronger focus
by the Council on surge issues. The Council's Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and its new
mechanism for consultation have hitherto been
underused. Over the period of the surge in demand, the
Working Group should be used to underpin the
partnership with the Secretariat and contributors to
United Nations peacekeeping.

Thirdly, to support this work there needs to be
better information on surge issues. One tool, as new
missions are planned and established, might be more
extensive briefings, not only from the Secretariat but
also from heads of United Nations humanitarian and
development agencies. Another tool that could help
many parts of the United Nations system to mobilize
support might be short background assessments by the
Secretariat on a regular basis, highlighting unmet
requirements, critical shortfalls and key priorities for
existing and new operations. We are glad that the draft
presidential statement that we are considering calls for
such assessments.

It may not be easy to suspend business as usual.
But it is necessary, and we believe it can be done with
strengthened partnerships across the United Nations
system and beyond.

