The President: Under rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the representative of
Lebanon to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/381, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006).

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.

"The Security Council has been briefed by the
Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
following the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006).

"The Security Council recalls all its previous
resolutions and the statements of its President on
the situation in Lebanon.

"The Security Council is encouraged by the
calm that continues to prevail across the Blue Line
and in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon's
(UNIFIL) area of operations. It urges all parties to
make every effort to ensure that the cessation of
hostilities is sustained, and emphasizes the need
for them to continue working with the Special
Coordinator and UNIFIL, including through the
tripartite mechanism, to focus again on the goal
of a permanent ceasefire and to reflect positively
on ways forward on all outstanding issues in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
1701 (2006), 1680 (2006), and 1559 (2004) and
other relevant Security Council resolutions. The
Council also recalls the necessity for all parties to
ensure the security of the contributing troops and

that the freedom of movement of UNIFIL is fully
respected and unimpeded.
"The Security Council expresses deep concern
at all violations of Lebanon's sovereignty and
calls on all parties to fully respect Lebanon's
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence within its internationally recognized
borders, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

"As the impact ofthe Syrian crisis on Lebanon's
stability and security becomes more and more
apparent, the Security Council underscores its
growing concern at the marked increase of cross-
border fire from the Syrian Arab Republic into
Lebanon, which caused death and injury among
the Lebanese population, as well as incursions,
abductions and arms trafficking across the
Lebanese-Syrian border. The Security Council also
expresses its concern at all other border violations.
The Security Council echoes President Michel
Sleiman's protest, in his letter of 19 June 2013, at
such repeated shelling from the conflicting parties,
including by the Syrian Arab Armed Forces and
Syrian armed opposition groups, that violate
Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

"The Security Council further notes with
deep concern new developments with regard to the
involvement of Lebanese parties in the fighting
in Syria. The Security Council calls upon all
Lebanese parties to recommit to Lebanon's policy
of disassociation, to stand united behind President
Michel Sleiman in this regard and to step back from
any involvement in the Syrian crisis, consistent
with their commitment in the Baabda Declaration
of 12 June 2012. The Security Council further
echoes President Sleiman's call on the parties in
Syria to avoid military action near the Lebanese
border.

"In the face of attempts to undermine the
country's stability, the Security Council encourages
all parties in Lebanon to demonstrate renewed
unity and determination to resist a slide into
conflict, commends in this regard the continued
efforts of President Michel Sleiman to preserve
Lebanon's unity and stability, and underlines that
continued broad political support is needed for the
institutions of the State.
"The Security Council urges all parties in
Lebanon to continue to engage with Prime Minister-
designate Tammam Salam so as to allow the urgent
formation of a government. The Security Council
further encourages all Lebanese leaders to resume
efforts to agree arrangements for parliamentary
elections, consistent with Lebanon's long-standing
democratic tradition and in conformity with the
legal and constitutional framework.

"The Security Council also stresses the need to
support the security and judicial authorities so as
to combat impunity in respect of acts of violence.
It also recalls the need to put an end to impunity
in Lebanon, reiterates its full support for the work
of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, and urges
the Lebanese authorities to continue meeting their
international obligations in this regard, including
on financial matters. The Council calls upon all
parties to fully cooperate with the Tribunal.

"The Security Council also condemns recent
violence by armed groups across Lebanon,
including those in Tripoli and Sidon, the latter
of which left at least 16 soldiers dead and over
50 others wounded, and expresses condolences to
the families of the victims. The Security Council
also acknowledges the crucial role played by the
Lebanese security and armed forces in extending
and sustaining the authority of the State and
responding to new security challenges. The
Council calls on Lebanon's leaders across the
whole spectrum and Lebanese of all communities
to offer every possible support to the Lebanese
Armed Forces as a national and neutral institution
and central pillar of the country's stability.

"The Security Council is gravely concerned at
the dramatic influx of refugees fleeing violence in
Syria, now totalling over 587,000 Syrian refugees

and an additional 65,500 Palestinian refugees
in Lebanon. The Council commends Lebanon's
generous efforts in hosting and assisting those
refugees and encourages the establishment of
fully empowered institutional structures to
carry out planning, delivery and coordination
responsibilities.

"The Security Council stresses the need for
strong, coordinated international support for
Lebanon to help it continue to withstand the multiple
current challenges to its security and stability. It
encourages increased international support to
the Lebanese Armed Forces in response to their
recently launched capabilities development plan,
as well as in the context of the strategic dialogue
between the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL.
It notes the particular urgency of assistance which
would strengthen the Lebanese Armed Forces'
capabilities with respect to border control.

"As for the refugee crisis, the Security
Council underlines the need for assistance on an
unprecedented scale, both to meet the needs of the
refugees and of host communities, and to assist
the Lebanese authorities who face extraordinary
financial and structural challenges as a result of
the refugee influx. The Council calls in this regard
upon the international community to provide the
required assistance as swiftly as possible to the
latest joint appeal of the United Nations and the
Government of Lebanon, and in this regard urges
those Member States which committed themselves
to providing funds to live up to their pledges."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2013/9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
