The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

Throughout the Kosovo crisis, the Security Council
has set out clearly the international community's concerns
and requirements. Security Council resolution 1160 (1998)
imposed an arms embargo in response to the use of
excessive force by Belgrade security forces and to acts of
terrorism, and called for the start of a meaningful political
dialogue. Security Council resolution 1199 (1998) called for
a ceasefire, the withdrawal of security forces used for
civilian repression, cooperation with the international
monitoring efforts and steps to improve the humanitarian
situation. The situation in Kosovo represents a threat to
international peace and security in the region and to human
rights, and threatens a humanitarian catastrophe of even
greater proportions than now. We are again at a critical
stage where it is essential that the Security Council spell
out clearly what Milosevic and the Kosovo Albanians must
do if a regional disaster is to be averted.

The United Kingdom therefore welcomes today' s draft
resolution, which places the weight of the Security Council
behind the commitments made by President Milosevic to
comply with Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998) and
1199 (1998) and with the agreements reached with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) providing for the establishment of ground and air
verification missions.

It is right that these commitments should be enshrined
in a mandatory Chapter VII resolution. President
Milosevic's history of unfulfilled commitments over the
summer, including those he made personally to President
Yeltsin on 16 June, means that we cannot rely on his word.
It is actions we must watch, and watch closely. And
Milosevic must understand that the international community
will not let him get away with token gestures or partial
implementation.

The United Kingdom welcomes too the readiness of
the OSCE and NATO to respond quickly to implement
these agreements. In agreeing to these two missions,
President Milosevic has accepted that the international
community has a significant role to play in resolving the
problems of Kosovo. The presence of the missions in and
over Kosovo will be essential in helping to restore peace
and security and in providing the reassurance sought by
those who have fled their homes to return. As winter
approaches, it is essential that the displaced return to their
villages if a humanitarian disaster is to be averted. This
will not happen unless all concerned in Kosovo adhere
strictly to the ceasefire. If the civilian population are to
have the confidence to return, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Serbian forces must withdraw to their
pre-crisis positions, cease the wanton destruction of
homes, crops and livestock and abandon their violent
intimidation of the civilian population. The OSCE
Verification Mission will, through its intrusive mandate,
be able to verify that they do and to report back to the
international community if they do not.

The United Kingdom is pleased to be playing its part
in making these agreements work. We expect to provide
200 members of the OSCE Mission. We will also provide
aircraft for the Air Verification Mission over Kosovo. We
will be resolute in following up implementation of these
agreements and of the resolutions.

It is imperative that the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, the Kosovo Albanian leadership
and all others concerned allow the OSCE Verification
Mission to do its job. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
has guaranteed the freedom of movement of the Mission
as well as its safety and security. We shall hold it to these
guarantees. No one should be in any doubt that we will
use to the full our inherent right to protect our nationals
if they are in danger, and the right under this draft
resolution to take action to ensure their safety and
freedom of movement.

No one should have any doubt: Britain will not stand
by and watch a humanitarian disaster unfold in Kosovo.
We wholeheartedly endorse the demands made in this
draft resolution of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the Kosovo Albanian leadership to cooperate with
international efforts to prevent this happening. Again, the
United Kingdom is ready to do its share.

This draft resolution and the agreements it endorses
also mark the beginning of an accelerated political
process. The United Kingdom calls upon the authorities
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo
Albanian leadership to seize this opportunity to build a
new Kosovo based on free elections and the principle of
self-government for its people. Failure to do so will not
be understood or accepted by the international
community. Our message to both sides is, there is a
chance for peace, for a better society, for a settled future,
for a welcome to Europe and the wider world. Take it.

 

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in S/1998/992.

A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, Costa Rica, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Slovenia, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

Against:
None

Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation

The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
13 in favour, none against and 2 abstentions. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 1203 (1998).

I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements following the voting.


