I thank Foreign Minister Heiko Maas for convening today's briefing on the maintenance of peace and security, focusing on the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the African Union Commissioner for Social Affairs, Ms. Amira Elfadil Mohammed Elfadil, for their respective briefings. Today's opportune meeting is being held following the unanimous adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2532 (2020), on the COVID-19 pandemic in the context of maintenance of peace and security. By adopting this resolution, the Council has finally pronounced on this global challenge and its possible peace and security implications. At the outset, I would like to reiterate my country's position that the attention the Security Council pays to global public-health emergencies should be clear and directly linked to issues that fall under the purview of the Council's mandate. We urge the Council to be cautious and refrain from focusing on international public- health matters and economic measures that are more appropriately addressed by the broader United Nations system, the Secretary-General and the General Assembly. As States Members of the United Nations, we should aim to strengthen those parts of the United Nations system that are set up to directly address global health matters. An effective response to the extensive ravages and acutely global nature of the COVID-19 pandemic necessitates strengthened multilateralism, strong global solidarity and coordination. The pandemic has exacerbated existing humanitarian and socioeconomic crises, with particularly devastating impacts on those struggling to survive in conflict situations. Of specific interest and concern to the Security Council is COVID-19's disruption of the activities of peacekeeping missions and electoral processes in conflict situations, affecting progress on conflict-resolution processes and exacerbating the health risks and safety of peacekeepers. In this regard, South Africa remains concerned about the impact of the pandemic, especially the potential to reverse the vital gains made in peace and political processes in conflict situations. I take this opportunity to reiterate South Africa's support for the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire and a humanitarian pause in order to focus due attention on the pandemic and attempt to mitigate its impacts. This call has been reiterated by the African Union. All parties to armed conflicts must seize this opportunity to prioritize addressing the humanitarian impacts of the virus and conflict in general. The pandemic highlights the fundamental importance of unity and cooperation over divisions and violent conflict in addressing common threats to humanity. South Africa commends the leadership and proactive action of the United Nations in putting in place measures to protect the health and safety of peacekeepers and navigate the effects of the pandemic. We take this moment to express our deepest condolences to the families of the peacekeepers who have lost their lives to COVID-19 and thank those peacekeepers who continue to put their lives on the line in order to execute their mandates. We also wish a speedy recovery to those peacekeepers who are still battling the disease. South Africa believes that the Security Council can do more to alleviate the plight of innocent civilians affected by armed conflict and the spread of COVID-19. In this regard, the Secretary-General has called for the waiving of unilateral coercive measures and sanctions in order to allow affected Governments and societies to have the requisite resources to secure much-needed life-saving and medical supplies and personal protective equipment to respond to the pandemic. The Security Council has been briefed numerous times by the Secretariat and civil society representatives with first-hand information on the situations in which they operate and have made clear the severe impact of sanctions on ordinary citizens. We regret that the Council has not been able to take the necessary action to alleviate the impact of the pandemic on the humanitarian situation in affected conflict areas. Sanctions should be used to support peace processes, and not as a means of collective punishment, which is made all the more devastating in the context of a pandemic that even the most capable economies have been struggling to deal with, as illustrated by the daily figures of infections and deaths. Despite the devastating consequences for all of us in all parts of the world, scientists are telling us that this virus is not going away anytime soon. We are also deeply concerned about the plight of refugees, migrants and internally displaced persons, whose difficult living conditions have been exacerbated by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. South Africa wishes to pay tribute to the bravery of the health workers and humanitarian personnel, whose perseverance and commitment to saving lives in the face of COVID-19 is commendable. It is paramount that they be provided with adequate and appropriate supplies to enable them to better perform their work. In this regard, South Africa reaffirms its firm support for the critical leadership role being played by the World Health Organization (WHO) in preventing and mitigating public-health emergencies, and the centrality of the United Nations in leading multilateral responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, we reaffirm WHO's indispensable role and commend its work in assisting affected countries and regional organizations in addressing the spread of COVID-19. Accordingly, we underscore the vital importance of national, regional and international support, coordination and cooperation with WHO in formulating an appropriate global response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The World Health Organization's role is central to this global response, and should therefore continue to be supported and capacitated. The spread of the virus in an increasingly globalized world has shown that we are only as strong as our weakest link. Sustained support and assistance to those most in need will therefore prove vital in ensuring that we emerge from this global crisis together. Half a million people worldwide have been affected by the pandemic; some are gasping for air to survive, while others are either in isolation or self-quarantine, hoping to overcome the disease. All the affected people expect us to unite, coordinate our actions, cooperate and support the specialized agencies leading the war against the pandemic. Let us extend solidarity to all States Members of the United Nations battling this pandemic. In conclusion, every effort should be made to assist those trapped in conflict worldwide and to ensure that all essential facilities and infrastructure are protected in order to allow the International Committee of the Red Cross, local organizations, UNICEF and specialized agencies, inter alia, to deliver assistance, especially to women.
