Mr. Kavanagh (Ireland): We in this delegation
are very grateful to Special Representative Steiner for
his wide-ranging briefing this morning. We also thank
Deputy Prime Minister Covic' for his statement. We
appreciate the work that has gone into preparing the
Secretary-General's report.

Ireland fully supports the statement that will be
delivered shortly by the representative of Denmark on
behalf of the European Union.

Ireland is encouraged by the increased focus of
the provisional institutions of self-government on their
assigned tasks in the most recent period. The passage
of the Kosovo Assembly's first piece of legislation and
preliminary work on further legislation is an especially
important step in this regard. But we believe it should
be seen as simply a first step.

The Assembly should not allow itself to be
distracted in the coming period from the very important
range of areas for which it is responsible. There is, as
Mr. Steiner has reiterated again this morning, a
continuing need for urgent progress in the health and
education sectors, progress which has been delayed as
the Assembly strays into other responsibilities.

Beyond further progress on the passage of
legislation, there is a continued need for all political
leaders to develop a substantive dialogue, both within
and between the various communities. Political leaders
will be unable to represent their constituencies
effectively without real progress in this area. Such a
political dialogue will also be a key aspect of
preparation for the municipal elections, which have
been scheduled now for 26 October. It is important that
the views of the Kosovo Serb members of the
Assembly be given due consideration. We encourage
Special Representative Steiner in his efforts to address
this and other issues within the Assembly. We know
indeed that he is doing so.

We are encouraged by the initial phase of
preparation for the municipal elections, including the
certification of a broad range of political parties. The
level of participation in the certification process is a
very encouraging sign - and a major improvement in
comparison with the previous municipal elections held
in 2000. We look forward to the full participation of all
communities in those elections.

We are also encouraged by progress by the
provisional institutions in establishing concrete actions
designed to meet the benchmarks set out by the Special
Representative before the Council in April. As the
Secretary-General has said, the ultimate goal must be
local ownership of the process, and the full engagement
of the Assembly will be critical to this end.

Improved cooperation in the work of the
provisional institutions must be accompanied by real
progress on the creation of a society based on the rule
of law. Kosovo's future development can only be
assured in such an environment. We are encouraged,
therefore, by some improvements in the overall
security situation, and particularly with regard to a
decrease in violent crime. We fully support the efforts
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to enforce the rule of law,
through, for example, the arrest of former members of
the Kosovo Liberation Army last month, among other
high-profile arrests. The recent improvement in the
security situation of minority groups gives grounds for
cautious hope that we are entering a new phase in
Kosovo's troubled history. Democracy will only be
able to take hold where crime and violence cease to
hold sway.

While the positive trend in relation to the Kosovo
Police Service has continued, it is now accompanied by
signs of real change with regard to minority
representation in the judiciary. We welcome the
cooperation of the authorities in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and in Serbia with regard to issues such
as pension and social security rights, but it is essential
that there be rapid movement on the dismantling of
parallel judicial structures, so that the proposed
changes have a real impact on the ground. The
situation in Mitrovica in particular remains
unacceptable, and there must be early progress on the
dismantling of parallel security structures.

As the Secretary-General's report makes clear,
there is now, for the first time, a climate which may be
genuinely conducive to the promotion of inter-ethnic
dialogue and returns. The Kosovo Assembly, building
on very positive signals from Prime Minister Rexhepi,
adopted an important resolution earlier this month on
the rights of communities and the conditions for
returns. This has been accompanied by a small but
significant increase in minority returns. Significant,
too, is the increase in small-scale local cooperation
projects. It is, in the end, reconciliation efforts at this
level that will determine whether there can be a real
step forward in facilitating a significant number of
returns over the next two years. We fully support the
efforts of UNMIK at all levels to facilitate the process
of dialogue and reconciliation.

As we have said previously, it is vital now that
we seize the opportunity offered by this growing
positive momentum, encouraging efforts at both the
local and regional levels. The putting into place of a
framework of economic measures will, of course, be a
key component in encouraging lasting returns to
Kosovo.

Progress on the returns issue is intimately linked
to the development of dialogue with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. We are encouraged by the
recent progress that has been made through meetings of
the High-ranking Working Group. The incremental
progress that has been made in this and other formats is
laying the foundation for close cooperation between the
provisional institutions and the authorities in Belgrade.

UNMIK and the provisional institutions of self-
government have begun to cooperate closely on
measures to encourage economic development in
Kosovo. In our View, it is important that progress be
made in creating the conditions for real investor
confidence in Kosovo, so that there can be a genuine
perspective of hope, in particular for the unemployed.
It is only through progress on the economic front that
real and long-lasting stability can be created in
Kosovo. This is especially true with regard to the many
unemployed young people.

Let me say in conclusion that Kosovo's vocation
lies in Europe. Peace and stability in south-east Europe
are dependent on Kosovo's successful development. In
our View, Kosovo's leaders should work to build a truly
multi-ethnic, democratic society in order to ensure
Kosovo's progress along the road towards European
integration. Ireland, together with its partners in the
European Union, will continue to support greater
integration and regional cooperation through the
Stability Pact and the Stabilization and Association
Process.

