Mr. Lemoyne (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of France, I thank the Ethiopian presidency,
the United States and its Secretary of State, Mr. Rex
Tillerson, for convening this very timely and necessary
meeting. I also thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her very
informative speech.

The General Assembly's high-level week will be
marked by intense discussions on the acute threats
to our world. Our strategic environment and the
foundations of peace and security, as we know them,
are facing major challenges, particularly in the area of
non-proliferation. There is no doubt that the outlook
is bleak. With the barbaric use of toxic agents in
Syria, Iraq and Asia, we are witnessing the disastrous
reappearance of weapons that sow the seeds of fear and
death among people - ones that we thought we had
banished to the annals of history.

I also refer to the growing risks on the Korean
peninsula, which will have monopolized many of our
discussions this week. The threat has now risen to an
increasingly alarming and unprecedented level and is
of concern to us all. Far from reverting to reason, the
Pyongyang regime is continuing its military escalation
and continues to provide evidence of its irresponsible
attitude through its increasingly disturbing and
threatening actions.

Beyond those worrying cases, we are facing
increasingly complex proliferation flows and increased
risks of diversion of sensitive goods and technologies,
which are more and more easily accessible. Finally,
proliferation is no longer the exclusive domain of
a single type of actor - the risk of non-State actors
getting their hands on sensitive materials is now a
dangerous reality. In the face of those extremely serious
challenges, only pragmatic and realistic multilateralism
can be the solution.

The Iranian case confirms that a proactive attitude
from the international community can open up solutions
to proliferation crises. The Vienna agreement, which
France has actively helped to build and improve, is a
major historic milestone. President Macron has said that
France is firmly committed to it. It would be a mistake
to denounce the agreement, as it would be irresponsible
to pursue an a la carte implementation of the provisions
of the resolution that endorsed it. We must respond to
the intensification of Iran's ballistic activities, some
of which are not in conformity with resolution 2231
(2015). Such behaviour is destabilizing for regional
security and undermines mutual trust.

To put it another way, there can be no alternative to
the non-proliferation regime. That is a constant line from
which France has never deviated. That is particularly
true of the issue of chemical weapons in Syria, where
those responsible for the tragedy on 4 April and so
many other attacks will have to be held accountable.

That also applies to the ongoing crisis on the Korean
peninsula, which we must respond to with firmness
and unity. The only way out of the crisis is to chart
the way for a negotiated solution. While North Korea
refuses that option and chooses dangerous isolation,
only firmness can give us the leverage we seek to bring
the regime to the negotiating table.

Collective action to contain proliferation requires
dialogue and a direct discussion of crises. However, it
also involves concrete and operation action. To contain
and curb proliferation, we must, more than ever,
increase our mobilization. However, let us not neglect
the virtue of the regimes already in place - the current
non-proliferation regime is being severely tested but it
has also proved its worth.

The Security Council has long been committed to
strengthening the current non-proliferation regime. It can
count on the support of the international organizations
that are capable of verifying the compliance of States
with their commitments and establishing facts and
responsibilities. I would like to commend the work
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the International Atomic Energy Agency.

In addition, multilateralism, as part of
non-proliferation, strengthens cooperation and the
exchange of information. Mechanisms, such as
export control regimes and the Proliferation Security
Initiative, are part of a virtuous movement that enhances
our level of vigilance. We must work to strengthen
those mechanisms.

To conclude, I wish to recall one simple truth. What
is at stake is the weakening of the non-proliferation
regime. If that were to happen, the very existence and
authority of the rule of law wouldbe threatened. We would
need to further sanction violations. Beyond our passing
political differences, as deep as they might seem, there
are fundamental rules from which we cannot waver.
Non-proliferation is at the forefront of those, because
it is a important concern to us all. France's message is
simple - the fight against proliferation is a collective
responsibility. Everyone must contribute to shouldering
that responsibility as much as they can. There is no
room for impotence, fatalism or political exploitation.
We can and must do more. Our responsibility today,
our credibility in the future and our ability to protect
generations to come from the risk of an eroded or even
collapsed non-proliferation architecture are at stake. I
assure the Council that France is fully committed to
that endeavour.

