Mr. Kongo-Doudou (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I would first like to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. On behalf of my Government, I would also like
to take this opportunity to thank all the members of
the Security Council for their unanimous adoption
of resolution 2149 (2014), which paves the way for a
solution that can end the crisis that the Central African
Republic has undergone for more than a year.

Speaking in this Chamber on 6 March (see S/PV.7128), I urged the Security Council to endorse
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
the Central African Republic (S/2014/l42), as it took
into account the various sensitivities and views of the
national and international actors involved in settling the
crisis. One month later, I am happy to say that my appeal
has been heard. Today's resolution, which authorizes
the deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), marks a decisive stage in the
process of restoring security and peace, and thus of
stabilizing the country. This is the moment to once
again reiterate the gratitude of the Central African
people to the members of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General and to convey how much the hope
of an entire nation rests on this resolution. We also
commend the remarkable efforts of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and of Operation Sangaris, which
have enabled the worst possible scenario to be averted
in Bangui and in the hinterland.

In giving its political backing to the Secretary-
General's report and the need to deploy a peacekeeping
operation, my Government sized up the extent and
complexity of the crisis in the light of the limited
capacity of the human and material resources that
had been committed to it up until then. Following the
adoption of the resolution, I would like here to reaffirm
the Government's wish to reinforce MISCA prior to
the deployment of the peacekeeping operation with the
increase of3,000 men, in accordance with the Secretary-
General's proposal. I therefore urge the international
community to continue to support the security sector in
the Central African Republic by providing troops and
other necessary resources as MINUSCA is set up.

In referring to the resolution just adopted, we are
aware of the fact that the transitional authorities have
the heavy responsibility of protecting the Central
African people. However, how can we play that role
effectively without defence and security forces - even
if they are being re-established? Moreover, we cannot
equip them with weapons, which are under embargo. In
that regard, I reiterate the wish of the Central African
Government to lighten the sanctions on the weapons
embargo in order to be able to equip our defence and
security forces, which will be trained, supervised and
correctly identified in cooperation with the international
community.

Beyond the security aspect, with the support of
the international community we are committed to
alleviating the humanitarian suffering of our people.
To that end, we welcome the appeal made to donor
countries in the resolution to make their pledges and
follow through on them.

On the political front, the Council may rest assured
that we have already started the process of national
dialogue and reconciliation by establishing the key
architecture to that end. I can assure the Council of
the full determination of the transitional authorities to
combat impunity by restoring the penal chain and by
re-establishing administration throughout the country.
That is an essential precondition for the proper holding
of the elections required to restore democracy in the
Central African Republic.

While noting the recommendations in the resolution,
we will spare no effort to ensure our full readiness and
cooperation in order to facilitate the establishemnt of
the MINUSCA operations.

The Government, led by Her Excellency
Ms. Catherine Samba-Panza and Prime Minister Andre
Nzapayeke, is perfectly aware of the fact that it is not up
to the international community to solve the problems
in place of the Central Africans themselves. On the
contrary, the United Nations is going to help us to
establish the necessary framework to facilitate dialogue
among the various political actors, civil society and
others, since it is up to the Central Africans to sit down
together and engage in dialogue so as to find lasting
solutions to the many crises affecting the country.

The adoption of the resolution has been the
conclusion ofa lengthy process. We would like to thank
the mediator for the Central African crisis, President
Denis Sassou Nguesso of Congo, the current Chairman
of the Economic Community of Central African States,
President Idriss Deby Itno of Chad, the African Union,
France, the United States of America, the European
Union, our bilateral and multilateral partners, and
international non-governmental organizations and
other national and international civil society actors, to
whom we owe our gratitude for the efforts in the pursuit
of peace and security.

In conclusion, I would like to to reaffirm the
recommendations in my last statement to the Council
that the Mission's leadership and Force Commander be
African and that the linguistic criterion and the gender
aspect be taken into account during the deployment of
MINUSCA (see S/PV.7128).

