Mr. Serry: The Council is meeting at a difficult
but also formative moment for the future of the Middle
East. A number of realities have to be squarely
addressed if peace is to be advanced: the severe
humanitarian, economic and political repercussions of
the Gaza crisis; continued Palestinian divisions; a new
political situation in Israel; the inconclusive results of
last year's Israeli-Palestinian negotiations; unmet Road
Map obligations, especially regarding settlements; and
the freeze in indirect Israeli-Syrian negotiations.

The challenges are daunting, but peace can
prevail - and it must. In the year ahead, the
international community will need to be united and
determined, and it must intensify its efforts. In this
regard, the Secretary-General takes heart from the
active engagement of the Security Council, including
through resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009). The
Secretary-General also welcomes the clear statements
of intent and early engagement of President Obama and
his new Administration, including the appointment and
deployment of Special Envoy Mitchell. The United
2
Nations and its Members, including those gathered in

the Quartet, have political responsibilities that need to
be shouldered.

But Israelis and Palestinians need to shoulder
their responsibilities too. Palestinians must face the
challenge of reconciliation. We note the resumption of
direct Fatah-Hamas contacts in recent weeks and look
forward to the planned meeting of all Palestinian
factions in Cairo on 22 February. We urge them to find
common ground in Cairo so that the many outstanding
issues can be tackled and unity achieved, leading to a
united Government and paving the way for the conduct
of presidential and legislative elections. We urge all
regional and international parties to create an
environment conducive to the success of Egypt's
efforts. As the Quartet agreed in December, restoring
unity on the basis of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) principles would be an important
factor in progress towards the fulfilment of the
Quartet's principles - the more so in the context of a
durable Gaza ceasefire. As the Secretary-General
informed the Council last month, the United Nations
will work with a united Palestinian Government
encompassing Gaza and the West Bank under President
Abbas.

On the Israeli side, the challenge ahead is the
formation of a new Government after elections on
10 February produced a result with no clear winner.
Following consultations with party leaders, President
Peres is expected to commission one of them to try to
form a coalition Government, a process which could
take several weeks. Prime Minister Olmert will
continue to lead the Government until a new coalition
is formed. Any Israeli Government should abide by
Israel's commitments, including to implement its Road
Map obligations and to pursue continuous final status
negotiations on all core issues without exception, as
was reaffirmed by the parties before the Quartet in
Sharm el-Sheikh last November.

Even as we await the outcome of these internal
processes, an immediate priority is to address the
situation in Gaza, as called for in resolution 1860
(2009). Egypt is conducting talks with Israel and
Hamas aimed at achieving a durable and sustainable
ceasefire. I visited Cairo on 3 February and reiterated
the Secretary-General's support for these efforts, as
backed by the League of Arab States. We still await
progress in the efforts under way.
09-24102

It is clear from the experience of last year's
tahdiya that a ceasefire regime will only be durable if
there is broader progress, including an exchange of
Palestinian prisoners for the release of Israeli captive
Gilad Shalit, continued cooperation and action to
prevent resupply of weapons to Gaza, the full
implementation of the Agreement on Movement and
Access, and Palestinian unity - steps which would
also pave the way for the longer-term recovery and
reconstruction of Gaza. A coordinated international
response to concrete progress on these issues would be
crucial, in sharing information regarding
implementation and in assisting in crisis prevention
and management, in support of Egypt's efforts.

I emphasize these points because, one month
since unilateral ceasefires were declared, a proper
ceasefire regime is still not in place, and there is an
ever-present danger of a return to the unsustainable
conditions of last year, or even of renewed and more
devastating violence. Since the end of major hostilities,
in attacks that are as irresponsible as they are
unacceptable, Palestinian militants have fired 15
rockets and 12 mortars towards Israel and detonated an
explosive device against an Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) jeep on the Israeli side of the fence. The Israeli
army has conducted 19 air strikes in Gaza. One Israeli
soldier was killed by Palestinians and another three
soldiers and two civilians have been injured. Six
Palestinians, including one child, were killed by the
Israeli army, and another 30 Palestinians, including
eight children, were injured. There is an urgent need
for all acts of violence to cease, and for full respect of
international humanitarian law by all parties. I should
also add that there have been reports of a number of
worrisome incidents of Hamas in Gaza purportedly
taking revenge on alleged collaborators, which has led
to the death of at least one activist from a rival
movement.

In the month since major hostilities ceased, a
daily average of some 146 truckloads have entered
Gaza. That is four times what entered Gaza in
December 2008 but only a third of what entered in
May 2007. The Gaza Strip remains desperately short of
basic household, commercial and industrial goods and
supplies, as more than 90 per cent of all imports during
the reporting period were food and medical supplies.
Only 52 per cent of needed industrial fuel and 23 per
cent of the necessary quantity of cooking gas entered
the Strip during the reporting period. The total ban on
09-24102
the import of petrol and diesel, in place since
2 November 2008, has continued, except for small
quantities delivered to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). Twelve trucks carrying bulk paper to print
UNRWA teaching materials have not been able to enter
Gaza, leaving 60 per cent of children in UNRWA
schools without required textbooks. There have been
no exports for 13 months, save for one solitary truck,
with flowers for export to Europe, which left Gaza last
week after third-party intervention.

The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) estimates that the Israeli operation damaged
or destroyed 14,000 homes, as well as public buildings,
schools and entire industrial estates, leaving
destruction in some places that is shocking to see.
Thousands of Gazans remain homeless. Despite
gradual improvement in the supply of food since the
ceasefire, the level of food insecurity is estimated at
75 per cent due to shortages and inflated prices. While
some cash was recently transferred, more must be
allowed into the Strip, as there is a physical inability
for people to pay for goods. Tens of thousands are
without water, and hundreds of thousands suffer from
intermittent supply as a result of damage to
infrastructure, which cannot be repaired due to the lack
of spare parts. It is a positive development that
electricity shortages have decreased as a result of
increased amounts of industrial fuel entering the Strip,
and that only small shortages of medicines are
reported.

As Council members know, on 2 February 2009,
in Geneva, the United Nations issued a flash appeal
covering funding needs of $613 million over nine
months for 188 non-governmental organization and
United Nations projects in the fields of food needs,
cash-for-work and cash assistance programmes, shelter,
agriculture, mental health support, protection, and
others.

The United Nations is in constant dialogue with
the Government of Israel with regard to humanitarian
conditions and access into Gaza, in pursuance of the
approach outlined by Under-Secretary-General Holmes
in his recent briefing to the Council. While we
appreciate Israel's stated readiness to address
humanitarian needs, we have not yet seen truly open
crossings for required access, which is so crucial given
the extent of the needs in Gaza. Meeting the
3
humanitarian needs of the people of Gaza is Israel's
obligation under international law.

The United Nations continues to take concrete
steps to ensure the integrity of its humanitarian
operations in Gaza. On 6 February, UNRWA suspended
operations after Hamas confiscated food aid and
blankets. Following the return of the confiscated
goods, distribution resumed on 9 February. We call on
Hamas not to interfere in the operations of the United
Nations.

The United Nations mine action team on the
ground is working to render unexploded ordnance safe
and has made significant progress in ensuring the
safety of the civilian population and enabling
humanitarian operations to provide much-needed aid.
The removal by unknown persons to an unknown
location of several unexploded aircraft bombs from a
local police traffic compound underscores the need to
identify a secure site to which unexploded ordnance
can be transported and secured. The United Nations is
seeking the return of those hazardous materials.

For its part, the Palestinian Authority is preparing
a Gaza early recovery and reconstruction plan, which is
to be presented at the conference to be held in Sharm
el-Sheikh on 2 March, which the Secretary-General
looks forward to attending. The Palestinian Authority's
plan will constitute the basis for donor pledges. Ahead
of the presentation of the plan, we welcome the
initiatives of Prime Minister Fayyad to provide
immediate assistance to the civilian population in
Gaza, with United Nations assistance. Those include
$50 million in cash transfers for temporary shelter,
$11 million and $6 million for electricity and water
pipeline repairs and a $600 million housing loan
guarantee scheme to supplement cash assistance.

The Board of Inquiry established by the
Secretary-General into incidents in Gaza has
commenced its work in New York and is expected to
travel soon to the region. The Board will review and
investigate a number of specific incidents that occurred
in the Gaza Strip between 27 December 2008 and
18 January 2009 in which death or injuries occurred or
damage was done to United Nations premises. The
Secretary-General expects that the board will enjoy the
full cooperation of all parties concerned.

The situation in Gaza must not distract us from
the overall political process or the challenges on the
ground in the West Bank. It is a testament to the efforts
of President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad that
relative calm and security were maintained in the West
Bank during the Gaza crisis. That has preserved the
important law-and-order gains made in 2008 for the
well-being of the Palestinian people. In fulfilment of
their road map obligations, Palestinian security forces
have resumed actions to disarm militants. We note that
a commission of inquiry has been established with
regard to the death under unclear circumstances of a
Hamas member in Palestinian Authority custody.

There is a continuing need for donors to deliver
quickly on pledges, as the Government is still obliged
to meet regular monthly budgetary commitments
through interim measures. The amounts anticipated for
Gaza's recovery and reconstruction are, of course, in
addition to the Palestinian Authority's existing salary,
pension and other social safety net commitments.

On the ground, Israel has eased certain closure
measures, although curfews were imposed on
17 January on Nablus and Qalqiliya. Over 150
Palestinians have been arrested by the IDF and there
have been three fatalities, including one child, and
96 injuries, including 22 children, from IDF actions.

Illegal settlement activity continues, prejudicing
final status negotiations and undermining Palestinians
who seek a negotiated peace. According to one
monitoring group, there was a 69 per cent increase in
the number of new structures built in settlements in
2008 over the previous year. Planning to seize over
1,700 dunums of Palestinian land for the expansion of
the settlement of Efrat has been reported. On
2 February, the Israeli Government submitted a
proposal in the High Court to evacuate the settlement
outpost of Migron, built on privately owned Palestinian
land, by relocating 45 settler families to permanent
structures in another settlement, Givat Binyamin.
Meanwhile, there have been a number of Israeli settler
attacks on Palestinians, including a shooting attack on
12 February that injured seven Palestinians, five of
them children, as well as continued incidents of settlers
attempting to force Palestinians off their land by
blocking access, placing trailers or clearing for
cultivation.

Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem remain
closed by Israeli order. The barrier continues to be
constructed within occupied Palestinian territory in
deviation from the Green Line and contrary to the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.

As the Council is aware, I and my colleagues
report the same basic points regarding settlements in
every briefing. The approach taken since Annapolis to
ensure the implementation of Road Map commitments
to freeze settlement activity, including natural growth,
and remove outposts has not worked. That is a clear
challenge that must be addressed. In that context, in the
aftermath of the Gaza crisis and the continuing
political uncertainties, official communication between
the Israeli and Palestinian Governments is limited. The
bilateral negotiation process on the core issues, on
which so much effort was expended during 2008, is for
now effectively on hold.

Turning to Lebanon, mindful that the Secretary-
General will present his report on the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) at the end of this month,
allow me to brief the Council on issues that will not be
addressed in the upcoming report.

The crisis in Gaza led to considerably increased
tension in Lebanon. Frequent demonstrations took
place throughout the country, including inside several
Palestinian camps. For the most part, those
demonstrations were quite small and peaceful.
Divisions between the PLO and Hamas have not
translated into open confrontation in Lebanon, where
local Palestinian party leaders continue to stress that it
would be in no one's interest to escalate intra-
Palestinian tensions. There is still concern that events
might affect Palestinian camps in Lebanon. On 29 and
30 January, two explosions took place in the
Palestinian camps of Wavel and Ein el Hilweh. The
motives are unknown and no injuries were reported.

Progress, albeit slow, continues to be made
towards the reconstruction of the Nahr el-Bared
refugee camp. Despite the considerable amounts of
unexploded ordnance that continue to be found at the
site, there has been progress with rubble removal, and
reconstruction is set to start within the next month. On
29 January, the Lebanese Cabinet signed a decree
relating to property located in the camp, paving the
way for faster progress in reconstruction. Securing
adequate funding for the reconstruction of Nahr
el-Bared remains an issue of serious concern.

Domestically, Lebanon continues to enjoy a
period of relative stability, and the implementation of
the May 2008 Doha Agreement took place on schedule.
There are, however, signs of increased political
tensions in the run-up to the parliamentary elections,
which the Ministry of the Interior announced would
take place on 7 June 2009. Technical preparations for
the elections appear to be on track. Candidates will
have approximately one month to register, starting on
2 March.

The national dialogue, which brings together
Lebanon's main political leaders or their
representatives, met on 22 December and 26 January to
discuss, among other issues, the Gaza crisis and the
national defence strategy. The next session of the
dialogue will be held on 2 March.

A rally took place on Martyrs' Square on
14 February to commemorate the fourth anniversary of
the terrorist attack that killed former Prime Minister
Hariri and 22 others. A politician close to Druze leader
Walid Jumblat was stabbed to death after attending the
commemoration. An investigation is under way. On
16 February, a rally was organized to commemorate the
one-year anniversary of the killing of Imad Mughnieh.

Turning now to other regional aspects, settlement
activity in the occupied Syrian Golan has continued.
Israeli-Syrian talks facilitated by Turkey were
discontinued as a result of the Gaza crisis, at a time
when there appeared to be prospects for progress. We
continue to believe in the importance and potential of
Israeli-Syrian negotiations and hope that it will be
possible, in the year ahead, to further that track
alongside a reinvigorated Israeli-Palestinian track.

The Secretary-General believes that a
comprehensive regional approach to peace, as
embodied in the Arab Peace Initiative and the
resolutions of the Security Council, is required if
bilateral efforts are to bear fruit. He looks forward to a
collaborative finalization of plans for an international
conference in Moscow.

The Secretary-General intends to actively engage
his regional and international partners, including in the
Quartet, on the way ahead. We look forward to an
active and systematic international effort at conflict
resolution - one which combines the weight,
resources and legitimacy of the Quartet's members and
partners and ensures that a process that has been
described as irreversible is just that. The Secretary-
General remains firmly committed to doing everything
he can to achieve an end to occupation and an end to
conflict, resulting in two States living side by side in
peace, within secure and recognized borders, and
5
comprehensive peace in the region, in accordance with
the Security Council resolutions.

