Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Mr. President, I should
like to begin by congratulating you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
March and by expressing my delegation's appreciation
for your having convened today's meeting on the
situation in Afghanistan.

My delegation would also like to thank Mr. Tom
Koenigs, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, for their informative briefings. We
are pleased to have Mr. Massimo D'Alema, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Italy, among us for today's
discussion.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report on the situation
in Afghanistan. His report provides an overview of the
current situation and of the multiple threats that we
continue to face alongside our international partners.

In assessing the current situation in Afghanistan,
we must look back to where Afghanistan was five and
half years ago. We are all aware of the many
achievements that have taken place since 2001, to
which we have referred on numerous occasions in
statements before the Council. I shall therefore limit
my comments to some of the most pressing challenges
facing both Afghanistan and the international
community in our joint endeavour towards achieving
lasting peace, stability and prosperity in my country.

Terrorism, narcotics, weak State institutions and
the slow pace of reconstruction are among our main
challenges. As such, it is safe to state that we have
jointly underestimated the magnitude of the challenges
facing Afghanistan. Therefore, it is increasingly
obvious that a renewed commitment on the part of the
international community is required to address the
remaining obstacles and consolidate the gains made in
past years.

The prevailing security situation remains at the
forefront of our challenges. Regrettably, in 2006 we
witnessed a significant surge in terrorist-related
activities, occurring mainly in the southern parts of the
country. Those activities have not only affected the
daily lives of the Afghan people but have also had a
significant negative impact on various sectors,
including the health and education sectors, as well as
on development and reconstruction projects undertaken
with the support of our international partners.

Improving security in Afghanistan will require a
comprehensive, multifaceted approach - one which
will address both the internal and regional dimensions
of the problem. Internally, our national army and police
lack the number of personnel required to effectively
combat a resurgent enemy force. Therefore, accelerating
the recruitment and training of our security forces will
be crucial to achieving our intended goal of a standing
army of 68,000 and an 82,000-strong police force by
the end of 2008. The success of our security
institutions in effectively combating a revitalized and
well-equipped enemy force will depend largely on the
level of international assistance in terms of financial,
logistical and technical support.

In that regard, we welcome the recent decision
taken by the United States of America, NATO allies
and other international partners to increase their level
of financial and military assistance to our security
forces.

The regional dimension relates directly to the

existence of foreign sanctuaries that train, equip,

recruit and indoctrinate extremist fighters carrying out

attacks in Afghanistan. As indicated in paragraph 7 of
the Secretary-General's report:

"Many attacks appear to have been financed from
abroad. According to national and international
security sources, the training camps for these
attacks are located outside Afghanistan."
(S/2007/152)

It is by now evident that unless external sources
of insecurity are addressed in a comprehensive and
resolute manner, our efforts to achieve a stable and
prosperous Afghanistan may be in vain. The threat
posed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremists is
not limited to Afghanistan alone; rather, it puts at risk
the stability of the region and areas beyond. We are
pleased to note that that fact has finally been
acknowledged by the wider international community.

The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan attaches
great importance to the role of regional cooperation in
the combat against terrorism. While commending the
crucial role of the international community in
providing security, we remain firmly convinced that
regional cooperation will be indispensable to achieving
our shared goal of a stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
We welcome in this respect the recent arrest of the
former Defence Minister of the Taliban by the
authorities of the Government of Pakistan. We hope
that such measures will continue in a sustainable
manner.

Afghanistan continues to maintain high-level and
constructive contacts with the Government of Pakistan
with a view to improving security along the border
region. These interactions are taking place both within
the framework of the Tripartite Commission and on a
bilateral basis. Efforts are now under way to convene a
cross-border jirga of tribal and influential figures from
both sides of the border. In that connection, we are
pleased to inform the Council that the first preparatory
meeting of the jirga commission took place on 13
March and that the next meeting is scheduled to
convene in Kabul in the coming month.

We look forward to the upcoming Third Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan,
scheduled to convene in Islamabad in late 2007. The
Conference will offer another opportunity to further
enhance regional cooperation in achieving security and
development in Afghanistan.

Apart from security, another area that requires
due attention is the social and economic development
of the country. The inextricable link between
development and security necessitates a particular
focus on accelerating the pace of implementing
development and reconstruction projects throughout
the country. That will in turn have a positive impact in
creating employment opportunities and providing basic
services to achieve substantial and sustainable progress
in improving the daily lives of the people. In that
regard, particular attention should be given to areas
affected by conflict.

As the principal mechanism mandated to
coordinate the efforts of Afghanistan and the
international community in the implementation of the
interim National Development Strategy and the
Afghanistan Compact, the Joint Coordinating and
Monitoring Board (JCMB) has proved its importance.
My delegation therefore underscores the need to
further strengthen the role of the JCMB, with a View to
improving the effectiveness of international aid and
promoting greater international engagement.

No matter how intense or skilful, our efforts
alone will not be sufficient to enhance the capacity of
our State institutions to meet the needs of the people.
While expressing our sincere appreciation for the
support of the international community over the past
five and half years, it is worth mentioning that
Afghanistan has received far less assistance from the
donor community in comparison to other post-conflict
countries. We therefore reiterate the need for increased
and sustained assistance to meet the benchmarks of our
National Development Strategy and the Afghanistan
Compact. In that context, we believe that better
coordination of donor assistance will be beneficial in
achieving greater transparency and tangible results.

The fight against narcotics remains a top priority
of Afghanistan, as it poses a threat to the stability and
security of Afghanistan and the region, given its nexus
with terrorism. Eliminating that menace from the
region will require a concerted effort by the
international community. For our part, we have
initiated a series of substantial measures to that end.
The National Drug Control Strategy forms the basis of
our counter-narcotics endeavours. It should be noted
that the successful implementation of the Strategy will
only be realized if we are able to provide other modes
of legal economic activity. Regional cooperation will
be key to overcoming that common threat. In that
regard, we underscore the need for an equal effort on
the part of transit and consumer countries, in
accordance with the principle of shared responsibility.

We pay tribute to the United Nations for its
central role in leading international efforts to
implement the Afghanistan Compact. In that context,
we welcome the intention of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to expand its
presence to additional provinces in Afghanistan, as an
important step towards further strengthening United
Nations activities in Afghanistan.

As we have now entered the critical phase of
State-building, it is even more imperative that we
maintain the current level of international consensus on
Afghanistan and intensify our efforts to overcome the
remaining challenges. We look forward to continue to
work with our international partners to achieve our
shared objectives. We are more committed than ever
before to realize the vision set out in the Afghanistan
Compact.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation for the sustained support of
the international community for our efforts aimed at
achieving a stable and prosperous Afghanistan.

In conclusion, we would like to thank Mr. Tom
Koenigs, Special Representative of the Secretary
General for Afghanistan, and the members of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for
their tireless efforts in carrying out their important
mandate.

