Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome the President of
Colombia to the Security Council for our discussion of
topical issues regarding the situation in Haiti. We also
welcome the presence here today of President Preval.

Over the past year, Haiti has had to confront
serious trials. The destructive earthquake was followed
by the outbreak of a cholera epidemic and a difficult
period in the country's political development. It is
significant that, thanks to the collective efforts made,
those problems are gradually being overcome.

International assistance provided to the country,
in which the United Nations has played a leading role,
is greater and more united than ever before. Russia has
participated in rescue operations and has provided
$8 million towards Haitian recovery efforts through the
channels of various international organizations,
especially United Nations funds and programmes.

The conduct of the second round of presidential
and parliamentary elections in a peaceful and calm
environment shows that the situation has stabilized. We
congratulate the people and Government of Haiti on
that major event. We look forward to the publication of
the official election results and hope that it will be
possible to form competent national organs of authority
within the established time frame.

We are pleased that the security situation is
generally calm. Much credit is due to United Nations
peacekeepers and the Haitian National Police.
However, the political, socio-economic and
humanitarian situation in the country remains complex.
Recovery processes will take some time. About
700,000 Haitians are still living in tent camps. We
agree that international efforts to provide
comprehensive assistance to Haiti, including
humanitarian aid, must be continued. We believe that
international assistance should be provided with
unconditional respect for Haitian sovereignty and for
the lead role of national institutions of authority in the
country's recovery. The key thrust of external
assistance should be to strengthen Government
agencies. Over the long term, that will give Haitians an
opportunity to independently deal with issues related to
the country's reconstruction and national development.

We support the work of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which
has been in constant contact with all political forces
and which is carrying out important work in supporting
law and order, protecting the civilian population and
strengthening the national security forces. We thank the
head of the Mission, Mr. Mulet, and his staff for their
dedicated work under complex circumstances.
MINUSTAH also has a number of Russian
peacekeepers on duty.

We welcome the constructive contribution of
regional organizations in Latin America and the
Caribbean in providing multilateral assistance to
Haitians. We deeply appreciate the efforts of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Haiti, President
Clinton. The Russian Federation will continue to
provide assistance to the people and Government of
Haiti to ensure the conditions for a peaceful, stable and
sustainably developing State. We also support
Colombia's draft presidential statement.

