Mr. Al Hussein: The sounds of mass murder and
war are not the howling of machine guns or popping
of side arms. The real sounds of an act of genocide, the
sounds of Srebrenica that I heard years ago were the
dull, low moaning of 10,000 and more living victims
of genocide - all the mothers, sisters and daughters of
the murdered 8,000 boys and men. How could we, all
of us, in the United Nations at the time have been so
foolish as not to anticipate their murder? How could we
have made so many mistakes? Still today we have not
properly understood them, nor have we even taken the
right corrective measures to avoid their repetition.

One week ago, The Hague Institute for Global
Justice and the United States Holocaust Memorial
Museum organized a discussion that brought together,
for the first time, many of the key officials connected
to the events 20 years ago in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially Srebrenica. Our task was to piece together in
detail what happened from the formation of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 1992 to the fall of Srebrenica and the
mass murder that ensued, with the help of recently
declassified documents, as well as materials from the
relevant trials at the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Allow me to briefly narrate some
of the key events.

Early in 1993, the Bosnian Deputy Prime Minister
Hakija Turajlie was shot and killed by Bosnian Serb
soldiers at a checkpoint outside Sarajevo, while riding
in a United Nations armoured personnel carrier. The
United Nations watched the killing haplessly. In one
sudden bloody stroke, it lost the respect of both sides to
the conflict. When General Morillon placed Srebrenica
under the protection of the United Nations two months
later, it restored some credibility to the Force, but it
also showed UNPROFOR to be operating in its own
orbit, unguided by New York. Resolution 836 (1993)
subsequently gave UNPROFOR that guidance, and
some leverage too, by providing a stick - that is, the
authority to take the necessary measures, including
use of force, such as NATO air power, in reply to
bombardments against the six safe areas. That stick was
used successfully in February 1994 when the United
Nations used the threat of NATO air power to oblige the
Serbs to cease their pounding of Sarajevo.

Yet that stick was then dropped by UNPROFOR
during the GoraZde crisis in April 1994, when the
Secretary-General, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the UNPROFOR Commander in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, General Sir Hugh Michael Rose, were not
eager to use the threat of force and settled only for close
air support, a limited action solely in defence of the
United Nations. They were concerned by the apparent
contradiction of having Blue Helmet troops take sides
in a conflict, yet by not taking sides when the conflict
was so obviously one-sided, with an aggressor and a
clear victim, the United Nations appeared to many to be
doing just that - siding with the aggressor.

The hesitation of the United Nations to use NATO
air power meant the Bosnian Serb leadership could push
on an open door. Whenever, in 1994, UNPROFOR came
under attack in one of the six designated safe areas and
requested closer support from NATO, leading to what
was described as "pinprick attacks", the Bosnian Serb
leadership took United Nations personnel hostage. This
caused even more vacillation in the United Nations,
prompting the Bosnian Serb leadership to exert even
greater levels of pressure. The United Nations simply
became reactive, especially after the collapse of the
Vance-Owen plan in 1993.

Only on 24 and 25 May 1995 did this change.
Following the withdrawal of heavy weapons from
the United Nations weapons collection sites around
Sarajevo, a new UNPROFOR Commander, more
disposed to the use of air power, warned both sides to
return their weapons. The Bosnian Serbs were slow to
comply and air strikes, as opposed to close air support,
were ordered. The next day, the Bosnian Serbs bombed
Tuzla, leading to a second set of NATO air strikes on
Bosnian Serb targets. This prompted, in turn, the taking
of some 400 United Nations peacekeepers hostage.
Soon after, the United States, together with the United
Kingdom and France, decided to suspend the use of air
strikes. The stage was set for Srebrenica.

Earlier, on 8 March, Radovan Karadzic' had
approved his Directive 7, ordering the Bosnian Serb
Army to squeeze the eastern enclaves, including
Srebrenica, to "create an unbearable situation... with no
hope of survival or life for the inhabitants of Srebrenica
and Zepa". Together with this pause in the use of air
strikes coming into being in the first days of June, a
door clicked open and the hand of Ratko Mladie swung
towards it.

On 3 June, the Bosnian Serbs attacked Observation
Post Echo on the edge of the Srebrenica safe area, found
little resistance and took over the post. It was the litmus
test for what was to come. The following day, 4 June,
Ratko Mladie met with the overall United Nations
Commander, Lieutenant General Bernard Janvier, and
came away with the impression that the United Nations
would not use NATO air power so long as the Bosnian
Serbs refrained from threatening United Nations
personnel.

One month later, as the Bosnian Serb army
advanced on Srebrenica from the south-east, there were
two requests for close air support from DutchBat, on
6 and 8 July, respectively. Both of them were denied,
even though resolution 836 (1993) had been clearly
violated. When Mladie saw that there was minimal
resistance, he decided on 9 July to take the town. On
10 July, the Dutch set up a blocking position that, if
overrun, the United Nations warned, would trigger a
NATO response. But when Lieutenant General J anvier
spoke to General Tolimir on the evening of 10 July to
demand that the Bosnian Serb soldiers immediately halt
their firing, Janvier telegraphed, in his choice of words,
his reluctance to use air power.

On 11 July, NATO aircraft were flying over
Srebrenica from 6 a.m., ready to pounce, but there was
no request from Lieutenant General Janvier. Only after
the Bosnian Serbs began to actually overrun the United
Nations blocking position at 11 am. did Janvier present
his request to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Akashi, who approved it. But there was a
condition attached to the order - air power could be
used only against the actual weapons system firing on
the United Nations blocking position, so not only was it
all too late, but also too little. The safe area was seized.

On the night of 11 July, Ratko Mladie began the
process of transforming that military victory into a
crime on a scale not seen in Europe since 1945. It was,
apparently, on that night that he took the decision to
execute the 1,000 boys and men gathered in Potocari.
The mass executions began on 13 July. Realizing that
they had been undetected by the United Nations, the
killers continued their work until over 8,000 hors de
combat boys and men were dead.
In the years since then, while many of us have been
haunted by these events, there has never been a proper
discussion about them at the United Nations, beyond one
perfunctory debate in the General Assembly in 1999.
The fact that UNPROFOR had a clumsy mandate in the
beginning was abundantly clear, and it was obvious that
two cultures, the United Nations and NATO, operated
together with some confusion. Still, those boys and
men may well have lived had the UNPROFOR Chief of
Staff in Sarajevo actually approved the request for close
air support, or had the United Nations used air strikes
in line with resolution 836 (1993) on 3 June, when the
attack on Observation Post Echo took place; or on
6 July, when the advance against Srebrenica began; or
on 8 July; or if Lieutenant General J anvier had approved
them on 10 July, or early on the morning of 11 July.

And the deeper lessons for the United Nations
are as relevant today as they were 20 years ago. Our
inability to anticipate events, so prevalent then, is still
with us today, as is our recurrent failure to understand
with whom and with what we are dealing. Even after the
events earlier in the war in Kljuc, Kotor Varos, Prijedor
and Sanski Most, none of us believed that Mladie could
be so brazen as to commit genocide when the United
Nations was there in Bosnia and Herzegovina in great
numbers.

We got it wrong i so wrong - although the
people of Srebrenica knew full well who they were
confronted with and what was in store for them. We
simply had not stopped to think about these issues
in sufficient depth. Perhaps we could say the same
thing about the international community's approach
to the political crisis in July 2013 in Juba, given what
unfolded subsequently in South Sudan. All too often in
UNPROFOR, we lurched almost mindlessly from crisis
to crisis, and still today the United Nations seems to
skate over the surface of many of the conflicts on its
agenda.

Moreover, UNPROFOR feared the Bosnian Serbs.
We in UNPROFOR did not even allow for the possibility
they could also have feared or learned to fear us. We
were often timid, and readily communicated this
impression. The most foundational lesson of Srebrenica
was this - to succeed, the United Nations must be
respected. For the United Nations to be effective in
robust peacekeeping, all parties to a conflict, and in
particular the aggressor, must take the measure of the
Council, its decisions and the United Nations presence
on the ground. They must believe there will be serious
consequences, and no impunity.

We also too often crossed the line from needing
to understand the grievances of the oppressors to then
almost showing sympathy with them. And this, to me
was and is exceedingly dangerous. More alarmingly,
we perceived the complexity of the political scene
but then made the mistake of believing that what
was complicated politically must also be complicated
morally. It was not. The fact that all sides committed
crimes was true, but this did not mean that all sides
were equally guilty - not when scale and proportion
were factored in. In the case ofBosnia and Herzegovina,
the moral picture was actually very straightforward for
anyone who wanted to see it.

General Rupert Smith, the single most influential
United Nations Commander, who brought the fighting
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to an end in 1995, today
argues persuasively that Commanders of United
Nations operations must command, and that others must
do the negotiating. If not, when they are faced with an
assault on their mandate or personnel, or on civilians,
the Commanders or the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General will have nothing to offer in
negotiations except the mission itself.

Again, so long as there is no respect for the United
Nations, it is likely that further massacres will be
perpetrated. At the very least, ifthe United Nations is to
make good on its commitment to protecting civilians, it
must be resolute, undivided and clear about its intention.
Had that been the case with Sri Lanka in 2009 - or
now in the Sudan, Syria, the Central African Republic
or even Burundi and Myanmar - the consequences for
the lives of millions of people would be immense.

I also believe that it is clear from the 1999
Srebrenica report that the safe area concept can work,
but only if implemented properly. I believe it should
be examined very thoroughly for possible application
in some of today's crises, where the acute suffering of
innocent people reminds us ofthe thousands of families
weeping, hauntingly, for the men and boys of Srebrenica
whom they would never see again.

Srebrenica was a catastrophe for its inhabitants and
the refugees huddled there on 11 July 1995, and also
for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the
United Nations. It is a trauma from which we could still
learn, with great remorse. For many of us who served
with the United Nations in the former Yugoslavia,
Srebrenica will remain for many years the heart that
breaks daily.

