Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I too would like to thank Ambassador Danforth and the
entire delegation of the United States of America for
the remarkable role they played in the presidency of
the Council during the month of November. I would
like also to say, Sir, how pleased we are to be working
under your able leadership. We can ensure you of our
full cooperation throughout the month of December,
which will be Spain's final month as an elected
member of the Security Council.

Security Council resolution 1577 (2004), which
we have just unanimously adopted, not only extends
the mandate of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi (ONUB) for an additional six-month period. It
is a resolution that also contains important political
messages for the Burundian parties, in particular with
respect to the cessation of violence and to the peace
process. Those messages are directed to all parties, but
in particular to the Forces nationales de liberation
(Palipehutu-FNL).

The resolution is the first reaction by the Security
Council since it received the joint report of the United
Nations Operation in Burundi, THE United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
regarding the massacre that took place in the Gatumba
refugee camp on 13 August 2004.

Unfortunately, the Gatumba massacre was not the
only case of atrocities committed during the long
conflict in Burundi, which has lasted more than a
decade. Burundi's recent history is a history that has
included widespread human rights Violations, most of
which also, unfortunately, have been committed with
impunity. If we want peace to be achieved in Burundi,
that cycle has to be broken. The fight against impunity
for the most serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law is a matter of particular
concern for all of us and must be properly addressed,
as a priority, by Burundi and by the other States of the
Great Lakes region.

It is clear that the Burundian justice system needs
political and material support from the international
community. The fight against impunity in Burundi and
other States that have limited capacities in that area can
be won only with effective international support. We
welcome the intention of the Government of Burundi,
as expressed in its letter of 29 October 2004
(S/2004/867), to refer the matter to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) following its own national
investigations.

One of the recommendations of the joint United
Nations report on the Gatumba massacre is indeed to
encourage the Government of Burundi to invoke, at the
proper time, the Court's jurisdiction in this case. Spain
welcomes the support of the Security Council, as
expressed in resolution 1577 (2004), which we have
just adopted, for the efforts that are being made by
States to end impunity in the region. In addition to
national efforts, these also include efforts being made
by States in cooperation with international institutions
and tribunals, and specifically with the International
Criminal Court.

The Government of Burundi is making a
significant effort to investigate the massacre in the
Gatumba refugee camp, including its stated willingness
to refer the matter to the International Criminal Court
at the proper time. It is thus perfectly appropriate for
the Security Council to encourage regional
Governments and other parties concerned to cooperate
actively with those efforts.

