Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): This summer
will herald a decisive moment for the international
community's commitment in Afghanistan. Spain has
been part of that commitment from the outset and has
devoted significant military and civilian efforts, with
the clear aim of contributing to the stabilization and
reconstruction of the country.

Ijoin previous speakers in thanking the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2013/350) and Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing. I also
acknowledge the important work carried out by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I note in particular the work carried out by
my colleague and friend Ambassador Tanin.

Throughout the past 12 years, Spain has
continuously been one of the main contributors to
the Security Council-mandated NATO International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan (ISAF). Like
our partners in ISAF, we have now begun withdrawal.
At the present time, there are some 900 Spanish soldiers
deployed in the provinces of Herat, Where the airport
is operated by Spain, Badghis, where the Spanish
provincial reconstruction team is based, Qala-i-Naw
and Kabul.

Spain resolutely supports the efforts of the Afghan
Government in the ongoing and complex transition
process, in both the security and civilian perspectives.
We welcome this week's announcement of the
achievement of milestone 2013, whereby Afghan forces
will take the lead in security operations and of the start
ofthe fifth and final phase ofthe transition process. Last
December, Murghab district was included in tranche
4, bringing the entirety of the Badghis province into
the transition process. We are satisfied at the way in
which the transition is progressing. Spain will remain
fully engaged by providing advice, capacity-building
and support to the Afghan security forces until the
conclusion of the process.

With regard to the civilian aspect of transition,
the vast majority of the cooperation projects Spain
is carrying out in its area of responsibility is already
being managed by Afghan personnel. The transfer has
been formalized through the signing of appropriate
agreements with the competent Afghan ministries.
In July, seven years of successful presence of direct
Spanish Cooperation in Afghanistan will come to an
end. The participation of the Spanish Cooperation
will continue in the years to come under the form of
multilateral projects through our contributions to
international organizations.

The year 2012 was one of major international
events related to Afghanistan; 2013 is the time to build
upon their numerous accomplishments. For example,
the bases are currently being laid for the new allied
mission that will operate after 2014, which will focus
exclusively on training, assistance and support for the
further strengthening of the Afghan National Security
Forces after 2015.

At the regional level, we are pleased to note that
the Istanbul Process, whose main objective is to
promote cooperation and regional security to achieve
peace and stability in Afghanistan, is making decisive
progress. Furthermore, the Mutual Accountability
Framework, agreed last year in Tokyo, continues to
lay the groundwork for the political and financial
sustainability needed to uphold the current Afghan
regime. The Afghan Government must, in that
context, continue and strengthen its fulfillment of its
fundamental commitments in the areas of governance,
development, the rule of law, human rights and the
fight against corruption. In that regard, the presidential
election announced for 5 April 2014 will be a significant
logistical test, to meet which the international
community will provide support to Afghanistan. The
Afghan authorities will be responsible for ensuring
an inclusive, transparent and democratic election that
produces results that are fully acceptable to the Afghan
people. The work and support of the United Nations
will be of the utmost importance in that election. Spain
underscores the central and impartial role that the
United Nations plays in promoting peace and stability
in Afghanistan.

The Afghan election is also closely linked to the
process of reconciliation and reintegration of Taliban
elements willing to participate in the democratic
system. We support all efforts aimed at making such
reconciliation a reality, despite the enormous resistance
that the process faces both inside Afghanistan and in
the complex regional environment. We must strongly
support dialogue that leads to a sustainable and inclusive
reconciliation process that involves armed groups and
all sectors of Afghan society.

