Mr. Braun (Germany): We thank the Egyptian
presidency for organizing this very timely debate.
All too often, our discussions centre on the effective
use of law enforcement and military capabilities to
combat terrorism. But as the concept note (S/2016/416, annex) rightly points out, we must combat terrorism
in a comprehensive manner. Countering the root
causes of violent extremism, especially the underlying
ideological tenets that correlate with terrorist acts, is
essential to defeat global terrorism.

Terrorism is not a new phenomenon. We have
witnessed it for centuries in Europe and elsewhere.
However, completely new is the apparent effortlessness
with which terrorists are recruited today. Modern
technologies make it possible for terrorists to spread
their murderous ideologies across the globe in literally
seconds. Perhaps the most troubling feature of that
new development is that those messages often resonate
even with those who have not espoused extremist
views before. In too many cases, the messages have
been a catalyst for terrorist attacks. In view of those
dangerous developments, we must redouble our efforts
in combating the spread of ideologies of terrorist
organizations.

Critical to limiting the effect of extremist
propaganda is a confident society, one in which citizens
are compelled to uphold peace and tolerance. We cannot
take those values for granted; they have to be reaffirmed
and defended every day. The exclusion of minorities,
the lack of democratic participation, the suppression
of certain opinions or beliefs, and grave human rights
Violations in general are all well-documented factors
that make people more susceptible to violent extremist
narratives. Therefore, all Governments - and I include
in this appeal all the countries who have just spoken
before the Council - are well advised to strengthen
structures that promote inclusive dialogue grounded in
the values mentioned.

As was highlighted in the General Assembly's
high-level thematic debate last week, religious leaders
and faith-based initiatives can play a significant role
in promoting tolerance and countering radicalization.
In my country, the German Islam Conference, which
was founded ten years ago, has been instrumental
in that sense. It has brought together Government
representatives and Muslim organizations in an effort
to discuss important issues, such as the introduction
of courses on Islam in schools and universities and
the State-funded further education of imams. The
German Islam Conference aims to empower Muslims
to participate in society, while seeking to advance the
integration of Islam into the cooperative relationship
that exists in Germany between religious communities
and the State.

Currently, the fight against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is at the top of our counter-
terrorism agenda. Germany is an active partner in
the global coalition against ISIL. We are confident
that the military campaign will be successful, as the
territories controlled by ISIL are being diminished by
the day. It is important, however, that liberated areas
do not become breeding grounds for terrorism in the
future. We must help to quickly stabilize those regions
and restore trust and confidence among the population.
We have to demonstrate that there is a positive future
in a multi-ethnic and multiconfessional society. As
Co-Chair of the Stabilization Working Group, Germany
has initiated a whole range of projects to that end.

My country continues to engage actively in the
fight against violent extremism in other international
frameworks, including the European Union, the Group
of Seven Roma-Lyon Group, the Global Counter-
Terrorism Forum and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). As this year's OSCE
Chair, we will host in Berlin later this month an OSCE
conference that will focus on preventing and countering
violent extremism and radicalization that lead to
terrorism. We are convinced that the conference will,
inter alia, give us valuable input in our efforts to draft
a national action plan on preventing violent extremism,
which will be published shortly.

I would like to close by reiterating that Germany
remains firmly committed to taking action against
terrorism, ensuring accountability and tackling its root
causes, including by exposing its faulty narratives and
ideologies.

The President (spoke in Arabic) I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.

