Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Assistant Secretary-
General Bintou Keita for her detailed briefing on the
situation in Darfur and her own impressions of her
recent trip to the Sudan.

We share our colleagues' assessments of the
current state of affairs in Darfur and note the
continuing generally stable situation in the region.
We are pleased that there have been no major armed
clashes there for a long time and that intercommunal
conflicts are virtually non-existent. It is encouraging
that on the whole the Government of the Sudan is
successfully implementing its package of measures for
collecting weapons from the population and is doing
a great deal to normalize the situation in Darfur. We
note Khartoum's constructive role in resolving regional
issues, including its contribution to advancing the peace
process in South Sudan, and we should also single out
the efforts of the Sudan generally and President Omer
Al-Bashir personally regarding the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, which resulted in the signing of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.

I am sorry to be compelled to point out here that a
number of our Western colleagues have once again used
today's meeting on the situation in Darfur to criticize
the Sudanese leadership regarding episodes that have
nothing to do with that subject, which is a completely
unacceptable tactic. It is crucial to evaluate the prospects
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) solely in the light of the situation
in Darfur itself. We will not support attempts to drag
any other issues related to the internal situation in the
Sudan into this discussion. As regards Darfur directly,
given the positive momentum in the region, we believe
it is important to continue the process of drawing down
UNAMID's military component in accordance with
resolution 2429 (2018). We share the view that in order
to avoid relapses into conflict it is important to prevent
a power vacuum in the region and focus on building the
capacity of State institutions in Darfur. That is a goal of
the transition concept of the functioning of UNAMID
approved in the resolution, designed to support the
people of the Sudan in launching the peacebuilding
phase of the settlement in Darfur.

We call on donors to fulfil their commitments made
at the Cairo and Doha conferences in March 2010 and
April 2013, which we believe, along with a relaxation of
the unilateral sanctions on the Sudan, will undoubtedly
help to normalize the socioeconomic situation in the
Sudan as a whole as well as resolving issues related to
the efforts for peacebuilding and consolidating security
in Darfur. We are satisfied that almost all the provisions
of the 2011 Doha Document for Peace in Darfur have
been met.

We deplore the fact that although the unreconciled
armed opposition has forfeited its presence on the
ground, it has continued its attempts to undermine
the situation and incite new outbreaks of violence in
the region. We have long known that the Darfur peace
process has been stalemated thanks to the unhelpful
negotiating position of the Sudan Liberation Army-
Abdul Wahid. It is unfortunate that the Secretariat has
continued to resort to false equivalencies by essentially
refusing to admit that. We believe that flirting with the
unreconciled opposition only harms the peace process
and that the Sudanese opposition's external sponsors
should not encourage the unreconciled opposition
to hold meetings in their capitals and should work
actively to convince their proteges to make more
realistic demands.

We have noted the conclusion on 6 December,
through the mediation of the African Union, of a
pre-negotiation agreement with the non-signatories
to the Doha Document. We are sorry it did not last
long. We view it as another concession on the part
of the Government to the radical opposition, and we
hope to see it produce serious rapprochement efforts
from the latter. If Abdul Wahid Nour does not meet
the African Union's demand that he take part in the
negotiating process unconditionally, we are willing to
consider the possibility of sanctioning him through the
Security Council.

We believe that establishing the necessary
preconditions in Darfur will enable us to arrive at a full
withdrawal for the mission in accordance with the time
frame outlined for it in resolution 2429 (2018), which is
the end of 2020.

