Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (Spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express my sincere thanks to all
States members of the Security Council for their
ongoing interest in Yemen and their close follow-up of
the political settlement process and the humanitarian
situation in my country. I also thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his acute attention to the
Yemeni crisis, as maintained by his Special Envoy to
my country, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, and his
team. I further thank the international humanitarian
community, represented by Mr. Stephen O'Brien.

We reiterate the readiness of the Yemeni
Government to participate in talks with the putschist
Houthis and Saleh at any time and anywhere in order
to stem the bloodshed and achieve peace in Yemen. We
demonstrated that readiness by attending the Basel talks
in December 2015, where an agreement was reached
on a number of points related to detainees, emergency
assistance and other humanitarian issues. A venue was
identified for new talks on 14 January, but the rebels
blocked all efforts to that end and failed to meet their
commitments with respect to confidence-building
measures. They did not participate in the January
consultations and are procrastinating in setting a
new date.

We express our strong support for the Special
Envoy and stress the importance of the international
community's support for his efforts. That is the only
path to peace in my country, in accordance with the
Gulf initiative, the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference, resolution 2216 (2015) and the consultations
endorsed in Basel in December.

Despite a significant improvement in the
humanitarian situation in my country, particularly
in the areas liberated from the putschist militias,
the humanitarian needs of my people remain vast,
especially in regions under the control of the militias.
The war imposed by the putschist militas, the Houthis
and Saleh - which have plunged the country into utter
chaos and destruction in order to achieve their cynical
political objectives by force - have exacerbated
humanitarian conditions that were already poor before
the attempt to overthrow the Government. The Houthis
and Saleh continue to target civilians and civilian
neighbourhoods. Ta'izz governorate and its people
continue to be systematically attacked. Katyusha
rockets and artillery shells are aimed at civilian areas
and innocent civilians. The militias have besieged the
city for more than four months, targeting hospitals and
medical infrastructure and preventing the delivery of
the most basic emergency supplies, such as oxygen,
food and water.

The situation is now on the verge of becoming a
major health catastrophe. As the militias have closed in
on the city over the past 10 months, more than 1 million
people have been displaced to rural areas. And now,
because of this continuing siege by the militias, the
spectre of starvation has arisen in the rural areas
hosting displaced people.

As we thank the organizations that have continued
to work to reach those in need in Ta'izz, the Houthis
continue to hamper the delivery of such assistance to the
needy. The World Food Programme (WFP) has stated
that it has been able to deliver food assistance to 3,000
families in Ta'izz, which represents approximately
18,000 people if we count six individuals per family.
This is a very limited number when compared with
the number of the actual needy - over 1.2 million
people inside the besieged city alone. This number
is escalating, particularly when we note the harsh
humanitarian conditions in host communities resulting
from the militia war. Furthermore, the WFP has stated
that it has not been able to distribute any assistance in
some areas of Ta'izz.

The putschist militias are acting like war criminals.
They are using starvation as a weapon of war against
my people in every province under their control. The
Houthi militias continue to spread death everywhere.
Antipersonnel mines have been planted around cities,
on major roads and subsidiary roads, and this has slowed
down the delivery of any humanitarian assistance to a
number of regions.

The Houthi militias and the Saleh forces continue
to detain humanitarian activists who have only been
attempting to help their brethren in many cities. An
example was the targeting of a tanker carrying water
to Ibb governorate to aid those under siege in Ta'izz.
Activists were detained and beaten. Sana'a is suffering
terribly. The Houthis militias and the Saleh forces
continue to loot assistance convoys going to Sana'a,
Amran, Hajjah and Saada and are selling those goods
on the black market.

This situation has only prolonged the suffering of
our people. What is truly strange is that international
organizations are reluctant to name those who are
looting humanitarian assistance. We know that this is
a widespread phenomenon; it is not limited. I would
put the responsibility squarely on the shoulders of
the international community because it has failed to
condemn this blackmail and looting by the putschist
militias that have stripped the Yemeni State of all its
resources and are attempting to take us back to the dark
ages with their sectarian discourse.

With the assistance of our brethren, notably the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, represented in the King
Salman Centre for Humanitarian Aid, the Emirati and
Qatari Red Crescent organizations, and many other
humanitarian organizations from the Gulf acting in
my country, we have attempted to return to a normal
economic life with regular commercial activity. In
early August 2015, the Yemeni Government agreed
with the United Nations and alliance forces to set up the
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
(UNVIM) and operationalize it. On 24 February, the
Government of Yemen appointed its representative
to the steering committee of UNVIM, and we stated
our position on the location of the headquarters of
UNVIM. The Government had agreed with the United
Nations that the headquarters would be in the city of
Aden, following its liberation from the Houthi forces.
Previously, there had been an agreement for UNVIM
to be based in Jeddah, in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia. We were therefore very surprised when the
headquarters were moved to Djibouti without even
consulting the Yemeni Government. We strongly
objected to that because it breached our agreement with
the United Nations.

The putschist forces continue to target our children,
the rights of our children and future generations in
Yemen. More and more children are being recruited to
Houthi militias. This threatens future generations in
areas still under the control of the putschist militias.
The recruitment of children and the brainwashing
of children with religious and sectarian extremist
ideologies are a time bomb. The Security Council
must act to defuse it in due time through implementing
relevant United Nations resolutions which have clearly
addressed this issue.

Before concluding, I would express the wish that
the Security Council will continue consulting with the
Yemeni Government and its Permanent Mission here in
New York on any negotiations or consultations on any
Security Council output on the humanitarian situation
in Yemen. We wish such outputs to echo the screams of
our children, our suffering, including Fareed Shawky,
who is dying in Ta'izz under siege. I would ask the
Council to kindly say to those Houthi killers and the
Saleh forces to stop killing the dreams of my people
and free them to build a democratic State.

