Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
hear your call, Mr. President.

We very much thank the Special Representative
and the Force Commander for being with us today. It is
very good to see them and I fully agree that we had a
very informative and useful briefing from the Special
Representative.

We welcome the Secretary-General's
comprehensive report. It comes at a critical juncture in
the peace process and shows the significant
achievements of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL): its steady and ongoing
deployment; the effective implementation of the Abuja
Ceasefire Agreement; securing the real commitment of
the Revolutionary United Front and the Civil Defence
Force to demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration; the release of child combatants and
detainees; and the gradual improvement, though still
too slow, of the humanitarian situation.

The United Kingdom continues to support
UNAMSIL and the Government of Sierra Leone very
actively. We, too, were encouraged by recent
developments and recognize this as a real opportunity
to achieve lasting peace. The coordination which was
so urgently called for by the Security Council mission
last October has markedly improved, not least with the
appointment of the Deputy Special Representative.

We need, however, to maintain this momentum
and the report correctly identifies some of the risks and
challenges ahead. Sierra Leone has to negotiate a safe
course through the handover of control of the diamond
fields and the preparation of elections. The re-
establishment of stable state institutions has to be part
of this, not least the steady reconstruction of a well-
trained army subject to proper civilian authority.

The Special Representative is right that the
priority in the short-term has to be to ensure the
success of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. We support the Secretary-General's call
for urgent new resources for the World Bank trust fund
and reintegration projects. The United Kingdom has
committed £15 million to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process over the last
two years and is now funding a community
reintegration programme in Port Loko. This has been a
major commitment by one donor and, with the
Secretary-General, we believe that it is time that this
burden was shared more widely. The success of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme and, by extension, of the peace process
more widely depends on more donors coming forward.
Ambassador Adeniji has focused on this point.

I should say that we particularly look to and are
particularly grateful for the interest shown by our
European Union colleagues, whose recent mission to
West Africa shows the importance which the Union
attaches to the region and to building up the
relationship with the Economic Community of West
African States. We warmly welcome the presence here
today of Secretary of State Dahlgren.

We share the Secretary-General's concern for
more effective coordination between all the agencies
involved in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. The National Commission for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration is
now developing a coherent plan for the roll-out across
Sierra Leone and the preparation of adequate facilities.
It is important that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration does not get ahead of this programme. We
have to take account of the challenge of extending the
government services. The three R's, including
reconstruction in the economic area and the
reintegration of internally displaced persons and
refugees, are still a huge task involving neighbouring
States.

As the Secretary-General identifies, however,
there must also be a greater sustained effort at
providing real integration and reinsertion opportunities
for ex-combatants if disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration are to succeed in the long term. There are
still serious gaps at present and the military
reintegration programme is still available only to a
small minority.

The restoration of government control over the
diamond fields and the orderly mining of diamonds, to
the benefit of all Sierra Leoneans, are among the
international community's main objectives. This is a
major challenge. Our Department for International
Development is commissioning a study at present to
help the Government draw up plans for the equitable
management of the diamond fields as UNAMSIL
deploys eastward and government control extends over
these areas. The Government is already benefiting from
the introduction of the certification scheme for
diamond exports. The value of legal exports has
increased from $1.5 million in the year up to October
2000 to $17.3 million since October 2000.

Free and fair elections are going to be an
important part of the processes of reconciliation and
the normalization of politics. We welcome the
Government's intention to hold elections as soon as
conditions permit. We support UNAMSIL's intention to
increase its focus on elections, specifically the creation
of a small electoral unit, in the light of the challenges
and preconditions identified by the Secretary-General.
UNAMSIL should ensure that it coordinates its
electoral activities with those of other agencies. We
would need to consider very carefully any request for a
significant uplift in UNAMSIL's resources to cover
electoral responsibilities.

We want to see the early establishment of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the Special
Court. We welcome the report's call for the
Commission to be operational as soon as possible, but
both are equally important elements of the conflict
resolution process in Sierra Leone. A delay to one
should not hold up the establishment of the other. We
look to donors to provide financial support to both
institutions and hope that the Office of Legal Affairs
and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights will work with the Government to dispel the
potentially destabilizing confusion within Sierra Leone
and among combatants about the respective roles of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the Special
Court and how the two processes will interrelate.

If we compare what we were facing a year ago
with the situation we are looking at now, I think we
have to be encouraged. We set ourselves the task of
turning around the desperate state of one of Africa's
poorest and most troubled States and we have made
progress. UNAMSIL, with its international support, is
the reason for this, even after all the ups and downs.
We pay tribute to the whole team on the ground,
including troop contributors, agencies and
humanitarian groups involved, for their courage,
determination and increasingly effective work.

