Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): On behalf of my delegation, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of September.
My delegation is confident that your wisdom and
experience, as well as your spirit of impartiality, will
guide the Council's work in an exemplary manner. You
may rely on the cooperation of the Rwandan delegation.
I also wish to take this opportunity to thank the
President of the Council for last month, Ambassador
Nugroho Wisnumurti, the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia, for the outstanding work he accomplished in
the month of August. It was during his presidency that
Rwanda began to see the light at the end of the tunnel in
this Council. My delegation wishes to thank him for this.

My delegation also thanks the Caucus of the Non-
Aligned Movement, of which Rwanda is a member, for
submitting the resolution. We fully support its contents.

 

It was time such a resolution was adopted in order to
ensure respect for resolution 918 (1994), which imposed an
arms embargo on Rwanda. Indeed, on several occasions my
delegation has asked, through various Presidents of the
Council, that the Council or the Secretariat provide
information on the training and arming of the former
Rwandan armed forces. No positive response was ever
received. Fortunately, four non-governmental organizations
of different kinds - Human Rights Watch, Amnesty
International, Medecins Sans Frontieres and the BBC -
took an interest in the matter. It is a shame that this
problem, which affects the security of an entire region,
should be put on the back burner, when prevention would
cost the United Nations and its Member States less than
allowing the situation to fester.

Resolution 918 (1994) was imposed on Rwanda and
on countries that were engaged in violations. My delegation
feels that any resolution aimed at verifying respect for this
embargo must also fall under Chapter VII. Since this is not
the case, the members of the Commission will not have a
free hand in doing their verification and the result of their
work may thereby be blunted. My delegation therefore feels
that it was necessary to invoke Chapter VII in order to give
this resolution enough strength, just as it was for the
resolution whose implementation it is intended to verify.

There are many indications that resolution 918 (1994)
has been violated on a number of occasions; respected
authorities and reliable organizations have documented this
and eminent personalities have confirmed it. All of these
organizations and individuals belong to countries that are
affected by the violations or that share the same moral
values. We believe that it is important that the Commission
take this into account. The Rwandan Government is
prepared to assist the Commission and to share with it any
information that it has.

My delegation wishes to make two observations. First,
the problem of arms is woven into a fabric that cannot be
touched without referring to the impunity enjoyed by the
criminals who masterminded the genocide in Rwanda.
These people, to be found in the countries of the region and
in Europe and America, pass themselves off as refugees
while organizing the arming of the former Rwandan armed
forces.

The problem of arms is linked to that of the return of
refugees: arming them creates an atmosphere of tension
which does nothing to facilitate their welcome in the
country. The non-functioning of the local courts and the
International Tribunal contributes to filling the jails.
Tension in the prisons could be reduced and pardons
granted if the countries which harbour these criminals at
least arrested the 10 worst offenders. That is why a bad
solution can only perpetuate the problem in Rwanda and
its neighbours.

My second remark concerns the type of cooperation
that has evolved in Rwanda and the region. There has
been more cooperation in armaments - that is, in
destruction - than in development. This situation
concerns not only Rwanda, but other African countries,
including Angola and Mozambique, to name but two. It
is high time for a resolution to be submitted - in the
Security Council and/or in the General Assembly -
demanding that those countries that help Africans to kill
each other be obliged to rebuild the countries that fall
victim to this destructive cooperation.

My delegation recognizes the right of any country,
organization or corporation to sell arms to a State or give
it military assistance, but it objects to these weapons'
being used to violate human rights. We appeal once again
to those countries which export arms to Africa to become
providers of computers and tractors instead; thus will
Africa become an economically sound and politically
stable partner.

