Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open meeting
concerning the situation in Kosovo. I would also like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Michael Steiner for his presentation. Allow me to take
this opportunity to commend him for the achievements
made during his tenure, and to express the hope that his
successor will be appointed as early as possible.

As the continued instability in Kosovo has the
potential to negatively affect the security of, and
economic development in, neighbouring areas,
ensuring the stability and prosperity of Kosovo is of
vital importance to South-Eastern Europe as a whole.
In that belief, the Government of Japan has supported
the peace implementation process in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

Thanks to the efforts of Mr. Steiner and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Kosovo has made significant
progress. However, major challenges remain to be
addressed - including the strengthening of the rule of
law, especially as regards improved security and
freedom of movement for all, and the matter of the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons -
before the goal of building a democratic and multi-
ethnic society can be achieved, a society in which the
basic human rights of all people are respected
regardless of their ethnic background and in which all
communities can participate fairly in the political
process. Therefore, what is important at this stage is to
work steadily to address those challenges, rather than
hastily discussing the future status of Kosovo.

My Government has supported the "standards
before status" policy advocated by the Special
Representative, and hopes that the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government will make further
efforts to solve those problems.

There are two major issues to resolve in
confronting those challenges: the transfer of
responsibilities from UNMIK to the Provisional
Institutions, and establishing a dialogue between
Kosovo's Provisional Institutions and the Government
of Serbia and Montenegro. We support the Secretary-
General's policy of a phased transfer, taking into
account the limited capacity of the Provisional
Institutions and the need for them to be held
accountable for Kosovo's population. Regarding the
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade, my
Government welcomes the news that, on the occasion
of the EU-Western Balkans Summit in Thessaloniki,
the leaders of both sides have agreed to hold
discussions on practical issues. We hope that such
direct talks will start soon and that constructive
dialogue will take place.

The existence of violence and organized crime in
Kosovo has not only made the region a hotbed for
illicit weapons trafficking and ethnically motivated
crime, it has also had had a negative impact on the
economy as a whole. Security-related incidents such as
the murder in Obilic and the bombing of a railway
bridge in Zvecan may be undermining the process of
reconciliation in Kosovo, towards which we are all
working. It is therefore important that the international
community extend assistance for ethnic reconciliation,
including funds for the eradication of organized crime
and further improvement of the security situation. The
Japanese Government has previously extended
humanitarian and reconstruction assistance in various
areas - including for the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, housing and electricity -
and has recently decided to contribute to the small
arms control programme in Kosovo and the project
aimed at achieving reconciliation in Obilic.

In closing, I would like to assure the Council that
Japan remains determined to continue to make a
positive contribution to the stability and prosperity of
Kosovo.

