Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to congratulate
the fraternal country of Guatemala for its leadership
during its presidency of the Security Council.

We are here before the Council once again to
address the issue of the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. We endorse the presidential
statement of the Security Council which you, Madam
President, promoted and which strongly condemned the
terrorist attacks in Aleppo, Syria, which took place on
3 October and led to dozens of deaths and injuries.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela associates
itself with the statement made by Ambassador
Mohammad Khazaee, Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

My country wishes to express its deep frustration
at the inaction of the Security Council when faced with
the expansionist policy of Israel, the occupying Power,
in the Palestinian territories. Such inaction is, as the
Council is aware, the result of the threat of veto by the
United States and its closest allies. Those Governments
are today promoting armed intervention in Syria; last
year, they spearheaded resolution 1973 (2011) on the
situation in Libya, which led to hundreds of civilian
deaths and to chaos and violence in North Africa. The
resulting collateral damage is euphemistically referred
to "necessary costs". The absurd logic that they use
to "protect civilians" and "promote democracy"
encourages war and violence.

In the Middle East, there is an alarming increase
in volatility and violence, which without any doubt
threatens world peace. Regrettably, certain members
of this body tend to remain silent in the face of the
evident threat to international peace and security posed
by the Government of Israel. On the other hand, they
encourage conflicts that should be resolved solely
through mediation and dialogue; that is the case with
Syria.

That bellicose attitude threatens the institutionality
of the United Nations, the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Military interventionism is the
method chosen by certain Powers in order to promote
their expansionist, colonialist ambitions.

In Syria, terrorist mercenaries are being financed
and armed with a view to overthrowing the Government
of that country. In that context, thousands of innocent
civilians have been killed, and the situation in the
Middle East has been further destabilized.

There is an attempt in the region to put in power
Governments that will yield to imperial Powers and
offer no resistance to the political and military elite of
Israel, the occupying Power. In that way, they seek to
strengthen that Power and to weaken the Palestinian
cause at the expense of greater uncertainty and
instability in the Middle East.

In short, those Powers disregard and violate the self-
determination of peoples and the sovereignty of States.
The imperialists and their allies try to establish a kind
of beneficial terrorism and resort to it, including State
terrorism, when they wish to appropriate or control
territories and their natural resources or to overthrow
leaders of the people - whatever they wish.

The Bolivarian Government of Hugo Chavez Frias
has warned against the serious consequences of arming
mercenary terrorist groups in order to overthrow the
Government of Syria. In that way, they seek to put
Israel in a stronger position in the negotiations with
Palestine, Lebanon and Syria.

As Noam Chomsky said, the great threat to the
region and to the world is Israel's nuclear arsenal and
the power that that gives Israel to expel Palestinians
from its territories and to threaten the countries in the
region. The countries that arm and protect Israel speak
of peace, human rights and international humanitarian
law without any moral or political authority. Ironically,
those who today speak of peace are the ones that have
the greatest interest in the colonial expansionist war.
Let us recall that Israel, the occupying Power, has
refused to allow inspections of its nuclear installations
or to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That Power is the real threat to the region and
to the world.

The many detailed letters from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
Ambassador Riyad Mansour, addressed to the President
of the Security Council and of the General Assembly
pitifully describe the inhumane and illegal aggression
of the State of Israel against the Palestinian people.
International law, including international humanitarian
law, the provisions for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and the prohibition of reprisals and the
collective punishment ofcivilians subject to occupation,
is being flagrantly violated.

Such crimes must be immediately investigated
and the perpetrators brought to justice. The attempt to
disguise one of the main causes of the conflict in the
Middle East, namely, the expansionist policy of Israel,
should be condemned.

The Bolivarian Government advocates peace and
the pursuit of balance in the Middle East. It supports
dialogue and mediation as the only way to achieve
peace and brotherhood among peoples.

