Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to welcome
Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Burkina Faso, to the Security Council.
I would also like to thank all briefers for their very
interesting contributions.

I, too, would like to add my voice to the condolences
extended to the Niger, Burkina Faso and France.

In 2014, Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso, the
Niger and Chad decided to join forces against common
challenges. Five years later, that ground-breaking
initiative remains more relevant than ever. Belgium is
in favour of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) being mandated under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations. In addition, the
Force must be able to rely on adequate and sustainable
funding. That is why we also support, under well-
defined conditions, funding the Force from mandatory
United Nations contributions.

In the meantime, my country supports the
operationalization of the Joint Force through the
European Union, of course, but also bilaterally. Last
year, Belgium contributed €1 million to ensure that
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) could
provide logistical support to the Joint Force. Belgium
also supports the G-5 Sahel Defence College, to which
it makes trainers available. In Burkina Faso, Mali and
the Niger, Belgian soldiers provide training to their
Sahelian comrades.

I would like to underscore the following point. The
success of a regional security operation depends, to a
large extent, on the existence of strong national armies.
In that regard, in the context of Mali, we support the
Secretary-General's call for comprehensive security
sector reform.

In recent months, the Joint Force has undergone
two positive developments that we must welcome: first,
the relaunch of the Force's operations in January, and
secondly, the gradual implementation of the compliance
framework for human rights and international
humanitarian law. We strongly encourage the G-5 Sahel
States to pursue their efforts on both tracks.
Some equipment promised to the Force, however,
has not yet been delivered, which has had an impact on
operational planning. But other means exist, and they
can be used now. The further implementation of the
compliance framework; the development of the police
component; the functioning of the permanent secretariat
and the Defence and Security Committee; the updating
of the concept of operations; and the establishment of
a mechanism to coordinate international support, such
as the follow-up group, are examples of areas where the
G-5 Sahel can fully pursue its operationalization with
the means already available.

Belgium is deeply concerned about the deterioration
of the security and humanitarian situation in the Sahel.
As in all crises, the solution is primarily a political one,
and the steps to be taken are manifold. A strong security
response is, of course, essential to the dismantling of
terrorist networks, the drying up of their sources of
funding and the thwarting of their deadly narrative.

But the profound aspirations of the people and
the various communities also deserve to be heard in
order to avoid sliding into situations of violence. There
is no magic formula, but there is a whole range of
measures to be stepped up in terms of governance, the
rule of law, the fight against corruption and impunity,
respect for human rights, the fight against all forms of
stigmatization of certain ethnic groups or communities,
the provision of basic services and even adaptation to
climate change.

In that respect, we must shed light on the events
that took place in Boulekessi and draw all the necessary
conclusions from them on the judicial level. With regard
to the situation in Burkina Faso, Belgium is closely
following the efforts of the Secretary-General to
redouble United Nations support, notably as penholders
with our partner from Cote d'Ivoire, for the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.

Belgium supports the tripartite arrangement among
the G-5 Sahel, the European Union and the United
Nations. We regret the underutilization of resources
due not only to the absence of operations, but also
to the overly restrictive framework of conditionality
imposed on MINUSMA. To echo the plea heard during
our Council's mission to the country, Belgium urges the
pragmatic adaptation of MINUSMA's support for the
Joint Force. The enemies ofpeace recognize no borders.

