Mr. Feltman: When intensive Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations resumed earlier this year, tensions were
to be expected along the way. Nobody predicted that
would have been an easy process. Indeed, four months
since their resumption, the talks have reached a delicate
moment. On the positive side, it appears that the
negotiators have been engaging on substance and have
gone some way towards narrowing their differences,
notwithstanding the great difficulties that peace will
entail. But strains have been growing dangerously
between the parties, and they can, and must, be
overcome.

International engagement, which is critical, remains
strong. United States Secretary of State Kerry visited
the region again for in-depth discussions with leaders
on both sides, following his regular consultations with
Arab foreign ministers that took place in Paris last
month. Quartet envoys met on 29 October in Jerusalem,
in addition to their separate ongoing engagement with
the parties. All of them maintained respect for the
confidential nature of the talks.

Nevertheless, the process suffered a significant
setback with a series of announcements on settlement
plans in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
following the agreed release on 29 October of
26 pre-Oslo prisoners in the second of four tranches.
We have been following these critical developments
with growing concern, especially the announcement,
on 13 November, of plans for the advancement of
some 24,000 units, including in E-l, which cannot
be reconciled with the goal of a negotiated two-State
solution.

On the same day, Prime Minister Netanyahu
instructed the Minister of Housing to reconsider the
plans announced on 13 November. Special Coordinator
Serry discussed tha reconsideration with Israeli chief
negotiator Tzipi Livni. We hope that those plans are
suspended. The Secretary-General has reiterated the
United Nations unequivocal position that settlements
are contrary to international law and an obstacle to
peace. He expects the Government ofIsrael to put a full
stop to those plans. In protest over those developments,
Palestinian negotiators submitted their resignations,
now under consideration by President Abbas, who has
nevertheless made it clear that that does not constitute
a Palestinian departure from talks. Parties should
now intensify efforts and refrain from actions that
undermine trust and the spirit of the talks.

The situation on the ground remains tense. Israeli
security forces carried out some 356 search-and-arrest
operations. In one such operation, on 22 October near
Ramallah, an Islamic Jihad militant, reportedly involved
in the bombing of a bus in Tel Aviv on 21 November
2012, was shot dead. Searches uncovered a weapons
cache in Hebron on 8 November, and on 9 November
of a Palestinian was arrested carrying pipe bombs
near Nablus. A total of 355 Palestinians were arrested,
including two Hamas members of the Palestinian
Legislative Council. A total of 154 Palestinians were
injured, including during continued demonstrations
against the barrier as well as the commemoration
of President Arafat's death on 11 November. Three
Palestinian civilians were shot dead, including two
in separate incidents on 7 November near Salfit and
Bethlehem while allegedly threatening Israeli soldiers
at checkpoints, and another during an incursion near
Jenin on 31 October, although Israeli forces denied
being the source of the fire. We urge that a thorough
investigation be conducted into all such cases, and that
accountability for any violations of international law be
ensured.

Violence between settlers and Palestinians
continued on a daily basis throughout the West Bank.
Settler attacks resulted in nine Palestinians being
injured, including six children, as well as material
losses, including over 600 trees and saplings being
damaged during the olive-picking season. Palestinian
attacks, including stone and firebomb-throwing,
resulted in eight Israeli settlers being injured.

We continue to be deeply concerned by any act
of violence and incitement, which we condemn. On
13 November, an Israeli soldier was stabbed to death
in the Israeli city of Afula by a 16 year-old Palestinian
from the Jenin area. We are also deeply concerned
about the fate of a Palestinian man who, a day earlier,
was critically injured when he was reportedly attacked
in the Old City by two young Israelis who dropped a
stone on his head. We reiterate our call on all parties to
refrain from violence. The need for calm is all the more
important at this critical juncture.

We also remain worried about the continued
demolition of unlicensed Palestinian infrastructures.
Duringthereportingperiod,atota10f27weredemolished,
leading to the displacement of 65 Palestinians, including
31 children. The issuing, on 1 November, of demolition
orders for 10 apartment buildings in the East Jerusalem
neighbourhood of Ras Khamis, if implemented, would
result in the displacement of some 1,500 people. We
reiterate the importance of Palestinian access to a fair
planning and zoning regime.

On 5 November, a 22-year old Palestinian who was
under administrative detention died from cancer after
having been transferred to an Israeli hospital, where his
condition deteriorated in mid-October. As in all cases
of prisoners in critical medical condition, we note that
access to timely and acceptable health care is a human
right. I also recall the Secretary-General's position that
persons in administrative detention should either be
charged or released.

Turning to Gaza, one year since the understanding
for a ceasefire agreement was signed in Cairo, the
situation is once again deteriorating, amid renewed
violence and worsening economic and humanitarian
conditions. On 31 October, Israeli forces conducted
an incursion some 200 metres into the Gaza Strip to
demolish a recently discovered tunnel into Israel.
The operation came under attack by Hamas militants
and an explosive device was detonated in the tunnel,
injuring five Israeli soldiers. Subsequent shelling by
Israel killed four Hamas militants. Additional violence
in and around Gaza during that period included the
firing of four rockets and four mortar shells from Gaza
into Israel. One rocket was intercepted while the other
projectiles landed in Israel without causing injuries or
damage. Israel retaliated with five airstrikes into Gaza,
which injured two Palestinians, and conducted a total
of seven incursions.

The deteriorating socioeconomic situation in
the Strip can been seen as a combined energy and
construction crisis. Rolling blackouts increased to up to
16 hours per day following the shutdown on 1 November
of the Gaza power plant, which was producing 25 per
cent of the total power available in Gaza. That has
affected the lives of the Gazan population and the
functioning of basic services, including health and
water facilities. While a stop-gap measure to replenish
the on-site reserves for those critical facilities is
now being implemented with the assistance of the
United Nations, thanks to a donation by the Turkish
Government, a longer-term solution to provide Gaza
with the required 450 megawatts is now more urgent
than ever and requires concerted efforts by all.

On 13 October, Israel suspended the import of
all construction materials, including for international
projects, following the discovery of a reinforced tunnel
dug from Gaza into southern Israel. Virtually all
construction projects in Gaza, including for the United
Nations, have been suspended, putting thousands of
people out of work. During the past several years, the
United Nations has implemented a growing package
of housing, schools and infrastructure projects with
stringent control procedures, agreed to with the
Government of Israel, to preserve the integrity of
each project and avoid misuse of materials. While we
recognize Israel's legitimate security concerns, we
are confident that those procedures remain adequate.
We therefore call on Israel to urgently reconsider its
decision to temporarily halt the import of construction
materials into Gaza.

The financial situation of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) has become more serious
despite efforts to streamline services and mobilize
additional resources. Unless the $36-million deficit is
bridged before the end of the year, UNRWA will be
unable to adequately fund its core services, especially
in education, health and poverty mitigation, and to
pay December salaries of its 30,000 teachers, medical
personnel and social workers. We strongly appeal to
all donors to step up their contributions to support
Palestinian refugees and help prevent an already dire
situation from worsening.

As the Council will be briefed next week on Lebanon
and resolution 1701 (2006), I will keep my remarks on
Lebanon brief. Lebanon witnessed a further devastating
attack today in the Bir Hassan neighbourhood ofBeirut,
apparently targeting the Iranian embassy. Initial reports
indicate that at least 23 people, including one Iranian
diplomat, were killed. Over 140 people were injured.
The appalling attack has been widely condemned by
Lebanese politicians across the political spectrum. The

Secretary-General has issued a statement condemning
this terrorist attack, and extends his condolences to the
families of those killed, to the Government of Lebanon
and to the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Turning to the political situation in Lebanon,
eight months have passed since Prime Minister Mikati
resigned, but there is still no progress on forming a new
Government. Meanwhile, the caretaker Government
continued to work with the World Bank and the United
Nations on a national stabilization response of the
Syrian crisis to the impact on Lebanon of the Syrian
crisis, and on the creation of a multi-donor trust fund
for Lebanon, as envisaged by the International Support
Group for Lebanon.

As of 18 November, 1,500 families fleeing fighting
in the Al-Qalamoun region of Syria are reported to
have crossed the Lebanese border to the town of Arsal
in the Bekaa valley. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, in coordination
with other United Nations agencies and partners and
the Lebanese Ministry of Social Affairs, is assessing
the situation and providing assistance. Earlier, on
14 November, there were reports of two separate
violations of Lebanese airspace by Syrian military
helicopters, which fired at least four missiles towards
Arsal. In a statement, President Sleiman stressed the
need to "protect civilians and Lebanese villages and
prevent the recurrence of such attacks".

In Tripoli, calm was restored, but tensions remain
high since fighting began on 21 October, resulting in
six fatalities. Additional suspects have been arrested,
both for the 23 August bombings in Tripoli and in
connection with the firing of rockets earlier this year
on the southern suburbs of Beirut and towards the
presidential palace in Baabda. Credible reports suggest
that Hizbullah fighters continue to support Syrian
Government forces in battles in Syria, in clear violation
of Lebanon's disassociation policy.

There were no major incidents in the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon area of operations
and along the Blue Line, although Israeli air violations
of Lebanese airspace continued on an almost daily
basis.

In Syria, civilians continue to bear the brunt
of the conflict, with warring parties failing in their
responsibilities to offer protection. Already, half of
the country's population is in need of assistance and
displaced from their homes. Palestinian refugees also
remain trapped in the conflict. UNRWA is particularly
concerned about the situation of civilians in Yarmouk
and other Palestinian refugee camps. The Agency
managed some days ago to deliver some food to
several dozen refugees in Yarmouk when an upsurge in
conflict required the operation to withdraw. UNRWA is
standing by until an arrangement can be made with the
parties to the conflict to access the camps.
More fighting will bring nothing but further
suffering and despair to the Syrian people. It is past time
to move to a political process. The Secretary-General
and the Joint Special Representative for Syria continue
to work hard to bring the Syrian sides to the negotiating
table to jointly agree on how to fully implement the
Geneva communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex) in accordance with resolution 2118 (2013) of
27 September. I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate our appreciation for the hospitality and
generosity of Syria's neighbours towards refugees from
Syria, in spite of their own growing socioeconomic
challenges.

Let me also reiterate the Secretary-General's call
for the flow of arms and foreign fighters to Syria to
be halted, as well as his commitment to delivering
humanitarian assistance to all in need in Syria and
in neighbouring countries. The Secretary-General
will convene the second donor conference in Kuwait
on 15 January 2014, and we hope that all will show
generosity in supporting our humanitarian work.

In conclusion, let me return to the status of the
ongoing Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. The risks they
face are apparent to all of us, yet a two-State solution
remains the only way to fully realize the legitimate
aspirations of both peoples to self-determination,
peace and security. The consequences of failure would
be dire for Israelis and Palestinians alike. We thus
continue to urge the parties to remain steadfast in their
commitment to seeing this process through, but we fear
that unless steps are taken to prevent the recurrence of
negative developments, such as those of recent weeks,
the remaining chances to achieve a negotiated two- I now invite Council members to informal
State solution may be irreparably damaged consulttations to continue ourdiscussion on the subject.

