Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to thank the delegation of Pakistan
for having organized today's debate on United Nations
peacekeeping, and to welcome the participation of
Mr. Jalil Abbas Jilani, the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan.

The delegation of Sri Lanka associates itself with
the statement delivered by the Egyptian delegation on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

United Nations peacekeeping missions embody
one of the best examples of nations coming together
for peace and security, in keeping with the objectives
mandated by the Charter of the United Nations. Today,
United Nations peacekeepers are one of the most
widely recognized elements of the United Nations.
Over the years, we have seen an evolution in United
Nations peacekeeping, from a traditional role to
a multidimensional one that includes aspects of
peacebuilding and even of peace enforcement.

We strongly believe that the performance and
direction of United Nations peacekeeping operations
should be reviewed at regular intervals to maintain focus
on priorities, the fundamental principles of the United
Nations, the goals of Member States and realities on the
ground. We should not permit peacekeeping missions
to get bogged down under outdated frameworks. We
hope that this open debate will help us to focus on
the evolving relationship between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.

As early peacebuilders, peacekeepers can play a
crucial role in the transition phase to prevent arelapse into
conflict by bolstering basic safety and security elements,
providing essential services, institution-building and
economic revitalization. Peacekeeping should not be
treated as a substitute for addressing the root causes of
conflict, as violent armed conflict may originate due
to a range of different reasons. It should be considered
only as an effective tool to create an environment
conducive to addressing the causal issues in a coherent,
well-planned, coordinated and comprehensive manner,
by implementing appropriate political solutions and
development strategies.

Many conflicts are rooted in economic deprivation,
marginalization and a lack of opportunity. If the goals
of peacekeeping are to be realized, those aspects also
need to be addressed.

In their role as early peacebuilders, United Nations
peacekeepers have to be aware of peacebuilding
challenges from the inception ofa mission. Peacekeepers
should be deployed only after careful assessment of a
conflict situation. The ultimate goal of peacekeeping
should be to build peace and the national capacities
and institutional capabilities of the affected countries
to enable them to manage their own affairs without
outside interference. Once the basic framework for
peace has been created and a framework established for
addressing the root causes, an exit strategy must exist
for the withdrawal of peacekeepers. There should be
no hasty withdrawal of peacekeepers, as has happened
in some instances. Exit strategies must be developed
carefully, inter alia by keeping in mind the safety of
peacekeepers. A successful transition can be guaranteed
only through developing clear, credible and achievable
mandates.

Well-trained and experienced military and police
can play a vital role in peacebuilding. It is important
that the criteria for the selection ofpeacekeeping troops
remain at the level of their proven and recognized
professionalism and integrity.

The equipment necessary for missions must be
provided from all available sources. We are surprised
that equipment is still an issue.

We pay tribute to the many peacekeepers and
associated staff who have sacrificed their lives in the
line of duty over the years.

Sri Lanka firmly believes that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be conducted by
respecting fundamental principles. The consent
of the parties, impartiality and sensitivity to local
circumstances are central in that regard. Any
peacekeeping mission must reflect respect for the
principles of sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and non-intervention in matters that are essentially
within the domestic jurisdiction of States.

The development of peacekeeping policies and
strategies should take place through intergovernmental
processes. Cooperation between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop contributors is integral to
the successful completion of peacekeeping mandates.

We affirm the role of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations as the central body responsible
for policy development. In our View, despite their
shortcomings, United Nations peacekeeping operations
remain vastly superior 4 in terms of effectiveness
and efficiency 4 to other alternatives. Diversified and
multidimensional mandates are key, as they enhance the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping missions.

We hope that this debate will also focus on
the importance of providing adequate resources to
peacekeeping missions to carry out their mandates.
We stress that resource gaps and issues related to
reimbursement for peacekeepers should be resolved in
a way that does not unduly burden troop-contributing
countries, some of which are in fact subsidizing the
United Nations.

From the planning stage until actual deployment, it
is imperative to have close consultations on and careful
evaluation of the resource gaps. All stakeholders in
the peacekeeping partnership need to work together to
deliver the best results.

In conclusion, Sri Lanka is pleased to reiterate
its continued commitment to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We are honoured to have
been able to serve with other Member States in a
number of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We continue training and assessment of peacekeepers
in Sri Lanka in an effort to uphold the highest standards
of peacekeeping.

