Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): It
is an honour for my country, Sir, that I am speaking in
this forum for the first time during this semester under
your presidency and on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The candidate countries Bulgaria, Croatia,
Romania and Turkey, the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and the European
Free Trade Association countries Iceland and
Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes this opportunity
to address the situation in Haiti and notes that the
presence here of several high-ranking political
personalities underlines the importance of today's
debate. The European Union welcomes also the report
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes, as well as the unanimous
decision taken by the Security Council on
29 November 2004 to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
until June 2005, with the intention of extending it for
further periods.

The European Union notes that the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti is nearly up to
its full authorized strength and that this has increased
its ability to use a more robust approach in
implementing its mandate, in particular when it comes
to conducting joint operations with the Haitian
National Police against illegal armed groups.
The European Union welcomes the recent
positive developments on the ground but notes that
further action is required to improve the overall
security situation in the country, which remains of
concern. In some areas, the lack of security is still an
impediment to effective humanitarian assistance and
project implementation.

The European Union urges all parties without
exception to refrain from any kind of violent behaviour
that would further imperil the welfare of the Haitian
people, to abide by the rule of law and to respect
human rights. We call on the Transitional Government
to take the necessary measures to put an end to
impunity.

We strongly believe that the ongoing crisis in
Haiti can be resolved only by peaceful means, through
a constitutional and inclusive political process of
national dialogue, compromise and reconciliation,
leading to free and fair elections by the end of this year
and to the transfer of power to elected authorities. We
strongly encourage the Transitional Government to
pursue its efforts in this regard, with the assistance of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission. In that
context, it is important that all political forces publicly
renounce violence and join the democratic and
electoral process.

The European Union strongly supports the
adjustments proposed by the Secretary-General in
November 2004 with regard to the structure of
MINUSTAH, in particular adding a formed police unit
to provide enhanced operational support to the Haitian
National Police; implementing quick-impact projects
that will directly improve the lives of the Haitian
people; and increasing MINUSTAH's capacity to
implement projects in the area of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration into the community.

In that context, the European Union encourages
the Transitional Government of Haiti, assisted by
MINUSTAH, to redouble, as a matter of highest
priority, its current efforts aimed at removing all illegal
weapons from the streets and fully to disarm all armed
groups, in order not to jeopardize the democratic
transition process under way.

With 271 million euros' worth of pledges, the
European Union has emerged as the largest single
donor from the pledging conference on Haiti held in
Washington in July 2004. Those pledges do not include
contributions from individual EU member States. The
European Union will make every effort to reduce
bottlenecks and to disburse those funds promptly, with
a view to creating employment and achieving quick
and visible changes. A total of 45 million euros has
recently been approved for infrastructure projects, and
27 million euros for rehabilitation projects. To promote
the rule of law, the European Union, together with
Canada, has furthermore launched an important project
aimed at reforming the judiciary system.

The European Union is also providing substantial
financial support for the organization of elections.
Haiti is also on the European Union's priority list for
electoral observation for the local, parliamentarian and
presidential elections, scheduled to take place in
November and December 2005. An exploratory
mission is scheduled to be dispatched in June to assess
the feasibility of a European Union election
observation mission to Haiti.

The European Union fully supports the efforts by
the countries of the region, as well as those undertaken
by regional groups such as the Organization of
American States. We believe that the United Nations
should be present in Haiti for as long as necessary,
with a view to encouraging international support for
the sustainable political, social, economic and
ecological development of the country. In that context,
we support the activities of the Economic and Social
Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti.

The European Union, for its part, remains
committed to supporting the ongoing political process
and to playing its role in providing further help to
alleviate the Haitian people's suffering by means of
prompt humanitarian aid and continued long-term
assistance, with a view to contributing to lasting peace
and stability in Haiti.

