Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): The Security Council has unanimously adopted resolution 2543 (2020), renewing the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which China very much welcomes. As Afghanistan's close neighbour, China supports UNAMA in carrying out its mandated work and sincerely hopes that the war and violence in Afghanistan will come to an end and the country will soon achieve development and prosperity. With intra-Afghan negotiations recently launched, a major breakthrough was made in the Afghan peace process. China calls for the parties to the peace talks to adhere to the basic principles of Afghan leadership and ownership. We hope that both parties can seize this opportunity, demonstrate good faith, find an effective political solution to the Afghan issue as soon as possible and reach a broad and inclusive future arrangement. The withdrawal of foreign military forces should be carried out in a responsible and orderly manner so as to ensure a smooth transition of the situation in Afghanistan and avert the emergence of a security vacuum in the country, which would exacerbate insecurity and have a spillover effect on neighbouring countries. UNAMA and the Secretariat need to remain seized of this matter and report to the Council ina timely manner. All parties should continue to fight terrorism in Afghanistan with determination and prevent the use of Afghan territory for terrorist activities, while strictly adhering to uniform standards throughout the process. Peace and stability in Afghanistan cannot be achieved without a solid socioeconomic foundation. Integration, regional cooperation and connectivity are the only way to strengthen the Afghan economy and improve people's livelihoods. In accordance with its mandate, UNAMA should continue to promote regional cooperation and interconnectivity, support peaceful reconstruction in Afghanistan, strengthen coordination and cooperation with regional partners and help Afghanistan tackle long-term problems, such as poverty and narcotics. Through its promotion of the Belt and Road Initiative, China remains committed to helping Afghanistan forge closer trade and economic ties with countries of the region, especially its neighbours. China supports the Afghan Government in its continued fight against the coronavirus disease, and endorses the effective measures taken to ensure the safety and health of UNAMA personnel. Lastly, China hopes that the intra-Afghan process will bear fruit and will continue to be a supporter, mediator and facilitator of the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan. In addition, China stands ready to join the international community in making unremitting efforts and active contributions to advancing peace, stability and development in Afghanistan.
