Mr. Hernandez-Milian (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): On this final day of Turkey's current
presidency of the Security Council, I join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on your successful diplomatic
performance at the United Nations. We wish you every
success in the future.

My delegation is grateful for the convening of
this debate on the situation in Afghanistan. We take
note of the briefing provided by Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan. We also welcome the presence among us
today of Ambassador Tanin.

We wish at the outset to acknowledge the efforts
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to help strengthen political
stability and attain the overall economic, social and
development objectives of Afghanistan. We support
UNAMA's activities, which, as the Special
Representative has noted, can be summed up under
three interconnected categories: security strategy,
development strategy and political strategy. It is crucial
to work in harmony with those strategies in order to
strengthen the rule of law. Carrying out these tasks
should be accompanied by efforts to fight corruption
and to prevent impunity from prevailing. In our view,
the fight against narcotics and other drugs is also
important.

We take note of the various international efforts
that have taken place since our previous debate on
Afghanistan (see S/PV.6094). These duly reflect the
outcomes of the Paris Conference of June 2008 and, in
particular, the Hague Conference of March this year.
We are aware of the vital importance for the stability of
Afghanistan of obtaining firm, united support from the
international community. In that regard, we highlight
the role that UNAMA is playing in coordinating the
various international cooperation efforts. We welcome
in particular mechanisms aimed at ensuring the
appropriate transfer of international funds and other
resources. We urge that such processes be carried out
with transparency and effectiveness. We also welcome
all endeavours that help maintain a climate of regional
stability. In that regard we support the talks that have
taken place between Afghanistan and neighbouring
States.

My delegation is concerned at the increase in the
number of security incidents in Afghanistan, which
poses a threat to the country's stability. We cannot fail
to condemn all violence, which runs counter to the
quest for lasting peace in Afghanistan. My country
continues to be concerned about collateral damage that
has taken place, with direct effects on the civilian
population. We warn and are concerned about the
number of civilian victims and the attacks against
United Nations facilities, humanitarian personnel and
educational institutions. The right - in particular of
girls - to education must be respected.

The fact that women and children are victims of
the escalation of violence deserves special mention,
and we urge Council members to endorse the
conclusions of the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict in Afghanistan
(S/2008/695). It is crucial to implement the resolutions
that have been adopted on the protection of civilians.
International humanitarian law must prevail and must
be respected by all parties.

Costa Rica is clear about the importance of the
electoral process that has begun in Afghanistan. We
hope that the elections will be free, fair and
competitive. We hope that the opportunity to elect
leaders will strengthen internal democracy and the
diversity of political expression within the system. We
call for suitable international monitoring, which would
make it possible to certify the outcome of the process.
The international community must ensure that electoral
stability is preserved in Afghanistan, for the elections
could become a choice target for those seeking to
destabilize Afghanistan and instigate violence against
its people. In the context of these elections, the safety
and freedom of the civilian population must be
guaranteed.

Last March, when the Security Council extended
the mandate of UNAMA for one year, the Mission was
encouraged to redouble its efforts to meet certain
benchmarks in its mandate, such as ensuring progress
towards peace and development. Despite the practical
obstacles on the road to compliance, we urge the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to step
up his work to achieve these tasks.

Finally, my country is closely studying the three
major shifts to which the Chapter X, "Observations",
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/323)
refers: the increased emphasis on civilian efforts
alongside military ones; a new focus on what is viewed
as proper and necessary democratic governance; and
the alignment of international cooperation behind key
sectors for the political and economic development of
Afghanistan. The common emphasis of those three
interlinked areas poses a challenge to the country's
institutions. The future of Afghanistan as well as its
stability could depend on this achievement, so we urge
UNAMA to continue its efforts in the area of
coordination to help to carry out this agenda in order to
achieve the peacebuilding and development that is
sought by the Afghan people.

