Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this open debate, which gives us the opportunity to reflect
on the importance of preventive diplomacy. My country
commends the statements made by the Secretary-General
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. We also thank the presidency for preparing the
concept note (S/2014/572, annex), which gives members
the foundation we need to participate in this debate and
support the adoption of resolution 2171 (2014).

The primary objective of the United Nations is
to ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security under a system of collective security. To that
end, the Charter of the United Nations, which created
the Security Council, provided a range oftools designed
to prevent the emergence of new conflicts and enable
action when they do occur. Historically, however, it
appears that the Council's efforts have been confined
almost exclusively to reacting to ongoing conflicts
rather than to anticipating them.

Clearly, the United Nations in general, and the
Security Council in particular, can and should do more
to ensure that international peace and security are
maintained. Regarding that task, we should note that
Article 99 of the Charter empowers the Secretary-
General to call the Council's attention to any matter
that, in his opinion, represents a threat to international
peace and security. We therefore consider it appropriate
that the Secretary-General, as he has done in several
cases, send his special representatives and personal
envoys to collect information on potential early-
warning indicators that can enable them to anticipate
possible areas of conflict and report on their findings
to the Council.

We are currently witnessing a number of
international and internal conflicts around the world.
They have not arisen spontaneously but for various
reasons, many ofthem deep and structural, that in some
cases have been incubating for long periods of time.
Economic inequality and social exclusion - along
with the lack of an environment that, through the rule
of law, ensures that all individuals experience the
full and effective enjoyment of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms - are common causes of the
conflicts that we are unfortunately seeing.
In my delegation's View, we therefore have an
unquestionable and urgent need for a comprehensive
and integrated approach to security and peacekeeping
that incorporates an investigation of the root causes
of violence and the social and economic situations
on the ground. In that connection, we must also
abandon outmoded, compartmentalized approaches
and strategies that differentiate between situations of
conflict and the absence of such conflict. The United
Nations should have a complementary and synergistic
approach to the maintenance of peace and international
security that includes preventive diplomacy and
support for conflict-resolution processes by peaceful
means, and that prevents relapses into conflict and
enables peacebuilding. Similarly, due consideration
should be given to security considerations and early
warnings signalling the need for conflict prevention in
the strategies and actions of all agencies in the United
Nations system.

In such an integrated arrangement, I would
like to emphasize the importance of the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission - a body in which Peru
participates and the body responsible for supporting
States that have suffered the consequences of
conflict - in implementing the policies developed by
national Governments according to their priorities,
with a focus on the interdependence of security and
development. That will enable us to break the cycle of
conflict by attacking its underlying causes directly. We
have appealed to States to make a positive contribution to
the review process of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture planned for 2015.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance that Peru attaches to preventive diplomacy
and the peaceful settlement of disputes, and that, as we
succeed in developing and implementing measures that
enable us to prevent conflict and reduce the risk that
they may recur or reappear, we will be fulfilling the
mandate of the Charter of the United Nations.

