Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, my delegation aligns itself with the statement
made on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and welcomes the fact that, by a majority vote,
Palestine will have the technical capacities to exercise
the chairmanship of the Group of 77 and China, for the
benefit of not only that consensus-seeking group but of
the entire membership.

We thank you, Madam President, for convening
this debate. The Security Council's regular meetings
on this matter illustrates the importance of keeping this
issue on the agendas of the Council and the General
Assembly. It also demonstrates the importance that the
international community attaches to it and the need to
find solutions, for the question of Palestine is a pending
responsibility of the international community.

Our delegation thanks the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his briefing. We commend his invaluable
efforts in the work carried out with all the parties
concerned, in particular with the Palestinian Authority,
Egypt and Israel, to avoid escalation in Gaza, support
reconciliation among Palestinians and address all
humanitarian problems.

Likewise, we express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his report entitled "Protection
of the Palestinian civilian population" (A/ES-10/794),
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
ES-10/20, of the same title and adopted by the General
Assembly in June by an affirmative vote of 120 States. It
is worrisome to note that the many protection initiatives
that the United Nations is implementing are not enough
to address the concerns regarding the protection of the
Palestinian civilian population under Israeli occupation
mentioned in Assembly resolution ES-10/20.

Three months ago, during the Council's third
quarterly debate on this issue (see S/PV.8316), most
Member States expressed deep concern about the grave
situation in the Middle East - in particular in the Gaza
Strip, which could result in another escalation - and
about the need for preventive diplomacy and a peaceful
solution to the question ofPalestine, a need that Member
States reaffirmed in General Assembly resolution
72/14, entitled "Peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine", which highlights the urgency of salvaging
the prospects for realizing the two-State solution of
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security within recognized borders, based on the pre-
1967 borders. In that regard, Ecuador again urges that
we should make tangible progress in advancing a final
and just political solution for the parties in the region,
based on the existence of two States, Palestine and
Israel, as the only way to achieve peace and stability in
the Middle East.

A humanitarian snapshot of Palestinian victims in
the besieged Gaza Strip covering the period 30 March
to 4 October and published by the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
asserts that Gaza

"has witnessed significant increase in Palestinian
casualties in the context of mass demonstrations
taking place along Israel's perimeter fence with
Gaza and in the context of hostilities. The large
number of casualties among unarmed Palestinian
demonstrators, including a high percentage
of demonstrators hit by live ammunition, has
raised concerns about excessive use of force by
Israeli troops."

On 2 October, Michael Lynk, an independent
human rights expert and Special Rapporteur appointed
by the Human Rights Council to monitor and report on
the human rights situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, announced that while protests continue at
the Gaza border against Israeli policies, so do deaths
and injuries among Palestinian protesters, including
children, by Israeli security forces. In that regard, we
trust that the independent international commission of
inquiry initiated in May by the Human Rights Council
will be able to conduct a thorough investigation into the
deaths and injuries in Gaza during the past six months.

Year after year the facts do not change: the
humanitarian crisis worsens, food insecurity increases,
the destruction of infrastructure continues and living
conditions deteriorate. The Security Council meets
routinely to gain awareness about the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine. Each
meeting highlights the worsening of the humanitarian
situation due to violations of human rights, international
humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
the Child. Palestinian children are particularly affected
by the arrests and actions to which they are subjected,
in contravention of the latter. Israel's adoption of new
exclusionary and discriminatory legislation and its
continuation of settlement activity allow for a dangerous
continuation and increase of this ever-present latent
threat to international peace and security.

Ecuador once again reiterates its full adherence to
the letter and spirit of the resolutions of the General
Assembly that have consistently affirmed the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and the Assembly's
determination that any actions taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration on the Holy City of Jerusalem are
illegal, and therefore null and void and have no validity
whatsoever, while also reiterating the Council's call
on Israel, the occupying Power, in its resolution 1322
(2000) to abide scrupulously by its obligations and
responsibilities under the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War.

Israel's continued expansion into Palestinian
territory puts at risk international peace and security as
well as the two-State solution, to which the Council is
committed. We reiterate that it is imperative and urgent
that the Council no longer remain indifferent and that
it fulfil its responsibility and work to implement the
necessary measures to comply with its own resolutions.

In conclusion, Ecuador stresses the fundamental
need to combat impunity for violence in time of conflict
in an independent, impartial and effective manner.
Even more important, however, is combating the causes
of conflicts themselves, for therein lies the possibility
for building genuine peace.

