Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting ost. Federica Mogherini, High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, and thank her for her briefing on cooperation
between the United Nations and one of the world's
largest regional organizations.

Just the other day, on 7 March (see S/PV.8479), we
discussed the cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, at a meeting in which every single member
of the Security Council supported developing and
improving United Nations cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations on the basis of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. That
applies equally to the European Union (EU), the
African Union, the Eurasian Economic Union, the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and all the rest ofour regional
organizations, inasmuch as today's world requires
that we solve problems together based on the relative
advantages of each individual intergovernmental body.
All of those regional organizations deserve respect and
can contribute to strengthening international stability
and cooperation.

We have noted and share the European
Union's determined focus on strengthening global
multilateralism with the United Nations taking a
leading role. There can be no question that in that
regard our interests fully coincide. However, we are
alarmed by a dangerous trend that has recently become
increasingly apparent 4 attempts to replace our system
based on international law with some sort of a new so-
called rules-based order, which of late we have been
hearing about constantly from EU representatives. But
those rules are created based on the particular needs
of like-minded groups. Those who agree to submit to
them are considered to be supporters of multilateralism,
while any dissenters are deemed opponents.

There is no question that the European Union
is a major political and economic player in the
international arena, contributing significantly and
sometimes decisively to solving many international
problems. It more than carries its weight in the Security
Council, considering that at present one third - five
countries - of Council members are part of the EU,
two of them with veto power. Despite the differences
that persist between Russia and the EU, our cooperation
in many areas continues uninterrupted, and we see
great potential there, particularly with regard to global
challenges such as terrorism, religious extremism, drug
trafficking, transnational crime and illegal migration.

Russia and the EU have accumulated solid
experience of close and productive cooperation
with regard to a settlement in the Middle East in the
framework of the Quartet of international mediators.
In 2016, in particular, we were able to prepare a report
together containing clear recommendations on the
resumption of the political process that still remain
relevant.

We value the EU's role in helping to reach agreement
on Iran's nuclear programme, an area in which Russian
diplomacy also did a great deal of work, and we are
hoping to see EU States contribute constructively to the
international efforts promoting a political settlement in
Syria. However, it will be important to refrain from
politicizing humanitarian assistance and reconstruction
in the Syrian Arab Republic.

The EU plays a major role in assisting United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts,
including in Africa. It can count on our support in that
area. The European Union member States make major
contributions to assisting international development
and implementing the Sustainable Development Goals
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In the past few years, however, there have been a
number of reasons to question the EU's ability to play
a constructive role both in Europe itself and in the
world in general. We are left with the impression that
this major, economically powerful entity somehow
cannot manage to define its own independent political
direction. Increasingly often, its cornerstone seems
in solidarity with Euro-Atlantic interests and a bloc
mentality. And we have seen what that leads to in the
examples of Libya, Syria, Ukraine and most recently
Venezuela and a number of other States. The models
proposed for resolving domestic political issues in
these countries often simply do not work. We must
not burn our bridges, or there may soon be no need for
mediation. A recent example is the stalemated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina and the EU's inability to
convince the Kosovo Albanian authorities to end their
provocative policies.

In today's world, unfortunately, restrictive
measures and sanctions have virtually become a key
foreign-policy instrument, and the European Union
is also guilty of that. The effect of such unilateral
steps is highly questionable and further weakens
developing States that the international community
really should be helping. It appears that our European
partners have obediently swallowed the unreliable
United States claims about Russia's alleged violations
of what is a foundational agreement for Europe, the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, which we
tried to save until the last moment. The result is that a
pillar of European security is collapsing before our very
eyes. And because of that same bloc solidarity, Europe
is marching in lockstep with any or all of the ridiculous
accusations against Russia, as rubber-stamping them
has pretty much become the done thing politically.

Despite all of that, we remain optimistic. Russians
believe that all prevailing circumstances will be
overcome and we will once again be able to speak of
the strategic partnership that is so important to our
shared neighbours and to many African, Asian and
Latin American States. We have not lost hope in the
possibility that through our joint efforts we will be
able to heal the cracks that have appeared in the Euro-
Atlantic space and prevent the emergence of new ones.
We are interested not in a European Union that is
fragmented and weak, as some often try to portray it,
but in an independent, strong European Union that has
an important role to play in world affairs and a vision
of a collective future for Europe from the Atlantic
to Vladivostok.

