Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I wish to thank you
personally, Madam President, for the goodwill,
initiative, energy, creativity and consideration you have
shown over the last few weeks and especially over the
last few days towards the convening of this meeting.
Israel knows that this meeting is convened by people
who want peace and who genuinely desire to see peace
in our region.

However, as some members know, including you,
Madam President, Israel was unsure, practically until
the last minute, whether to attend this meeting. Our
experience has shown that this forum is not always
helpful in advancing peace, but rather, that it may
generate acrimony. I have been instructed nevertheless
by my Minister to update you on developments from
our perspective.

As you know, just a few days ago, Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Tzipi Livni
met with Chairman Abbas in what was a very good
meeting in which we agreed to re-energize the dialogue
between us and create a permanent channel to pursue
ways to advance the process together. We agreed also
that progress must be based on the road map and the
principles for peace that have been agreed between the
parties. We believe that we reached this understanding
because, knowing the many difficulties we currently
face, both sides recognize that we do not need another
forum for acting out our differences and that the only
forum for resolving them is the bilateral negotiating
table.

We all know that there is a common vision for
peace that binds together Israelis, moderate
Palestinians, the moderates in our region and the
international community. It is embodied in the road
map endorsed by the international community, and it
was reaffirmed only yesterday by the Quartet, of which
the United Nations itself is part. At its heart is the
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security. Yesterday Foreign Minister
Livni spoke before the General Assembly and
reaffirmed Israel's belief in that vision and the
principles of peace that stem from it. Israel is
committed to being a partner for peace. Believe me,
nobody wants peace more than we do. The people of
Israel have shown that time and again. We know that
the dangers to peace will not be overcome by military
means alone. Stagnation is not in our interest, and it is
not our policy. We want to realize the two-State vision
as envisaged in the road map. It is for that reason that
we embarked on the painful process of disengagement
last year, in order to create opportunity for progress.
But sadly - tragically - what we received in return
was terror.

It is for that reason that we are committed to the
process of dialogue with all Palestinians who believe in
mutual compromise and historic reconciliation. If we
have not yet turned that vision of peace into reality it is
not for lack of meetings in the Council. It is not for
lack of agreements or resolutions or international
conferences. I want to believe that all those gathered at
this table know the true obstacles to progress. I believe
they know, as we do, that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is the consequence, and not the cause, of the
ideology of intolerance and hatred that plagues our
region and has taken control of the Palestinian
Authority in the form of Hamas.

That is not a reality that can just be ignored. It
cannot be swept away by vague formulations and half
measures. The road map and the three international
conditions are designed precisely to confront the
enemies of peace and ensure that the future Palestinian
State envisaged by the two-State solution is not a terror
State that perpetuates the conflict, but a peaceful State
that ends it. Discarding the building blocks of peace
will not speed up the process, it will simply ensure that
the edifice of peace will crumble and fall. Our goal
must be to rekindle the road map process without
reigniting the conflict. That requires that we act with
urgency, but not with recklessness. It requires that we
not confuse paper with progress or form with
substance. And, most of all, it requires genuine
consultation, negotiation and agreement between the
parties themselves. There is no other way. Any
progress begins with a genuine dialogue among those
committed to peace. It begins with the release of Israeli
hostages and an end to all terrorist attacks. It begins
with a renewal of our commitment to the two-State
solution and an acceptance of the basic principle that
each people's rights are to be realized in their own
homeland, not in the homeland of others.

There is much those in the region can do to
support that process, but it is not about more initiatives
or United Nations meetings. It is, first and foremost,
about commitment to prepare the people of the region
for the price of peace, to accept the true meaning of the
two-State solution and to teach all the children of the
Middle East the values of tolerance and the blessings
of coexistence.

Sometimes tragedy is not just the pain we suffer
but also the opportunity we miss. The contours of the
agreement we have to reach are clear, and have been
for decades. The tragedy is that the lack of genuine
commitment to true coexistence means that the people
of the region are still waiting, when we could have
enjoyed the benefits of peace long ago. But it is not too
late, if we have the courage to see that there is more
that binds us together than tears us apart. It is not too
late to turn hope into reality. It is not too late to march
on that road to peace, but only if we have the strength
to defend its agreed principles and the courage to
confront its enemies.

