Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I will be relatively brief
because we are basically turning in circles in View of
the previous discussion that we had here (see S/PV.8557)
and because I will align myself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Croatia on behalf of
the States members of the European Union.

I would like to first start by expressing my support
for the United Nations. I heard and would like to refer
to what Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo said in her briefing. I
fully subscribe to what she said, and I must say that
I was also very struck by what she said about the
negative trajectory in which we find ourselves. She
talked about Violence, settlements, demolitions, rockets
and provocative rhetoric, among others.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a political
one and will be resolved only by a political solution.
Germany supports a negotiated two-State solution,
based on internationally agreed parameters and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

I would like to respond in that regard to what
the representative of the United States just said. As
the Ambassador of Germany, I must say that, for us,
international law is relevant; international law is not
futile. We believe in the United Nations - that is why
we sought to become a member ofthe Security Council
for a two-year term. We believe in Security Council
resolutions; for us, they are binding international law.

As I said, we believe in the force of international
law and we do not believe in the force of the strongest.
For us, international law is not an a la carte menu. On
other occasions, United States representatives have
insisted on international law and on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions, such as those on North
Korea. We absolutely support that and, as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), we work very hard to implement Security
Council resolutions word by word. For us, resolution
2334 (2016) - to name the most recent Security Council
resolution - is binding law and that is the international
consensus. It is the United States that has withdrawn
from the international consensus on resolution 2334
(2016).

With regard to the situation, Germany participated
in the Bahrain workshop, because we are interested in
sensible measures that promote peace and boost the
economy. But I think that one thing is clear - prosperity
will be elusive as long as it is not firmly embedded
in a political framework. A lot has been said about
settlements, although not by the representative of the
United States in his intervention. For us, settlement
activities are illegal under international law. They
undermine the prospects for a negotiated two-
State solution. The rhetoric has gone beyond talk of
settlements. We now hear rhetoric alluding to the
possible annexation of parts of the West Bank. We
are extremely concerned. Germany will not recognize
changes to the 1967 lines, including to Jerusalem;
we will recognize only changes that are the result
of negotiations.

To go back to the issue of settlements, the approval
of construction and tenders for new housing units in
the West Bank and Jerusalem, Germany is particularly
concerned about the demolition and seizures of
Palestinian-owned structures across the West Bank
and evictions of Palestinians from their homes in
parts of East Jerusalem, such as Sheikh Jarrah, Silwan
and Wadi Al-Hummus. We have seen photos of areas
where demolitions are taking place as we speak. Such
activities affect the Palestinian-owned structures
located in Areas A and B and set a precedent that
severely undermines the Oslo Accords. We therefore
call upon Israel to end the expansion of settlements, the
legalization of outposts, demolitions and seizures of
and evictions from Palestinian-owned structures.

Let me go back to international law and, more
specifically, to resolution 2334 (2016), which does
not refer only to settlement activities. The resolution
also mentions terrorism, violence against civilians,
incitement, provocative actions and inflammatory
rhetoric. Germany deeply condemns all attacks on
Israel. The firing of rockets from Gaza by Hamas or
other groups is unacceptable. Germany stands steadfast
in its commitment to Israel's security as a Jewish and
democratic State. We will not remain silent when Israel's
security or right to exist is questioned or compromised.
For the international community, peace is best served
by observing international law. That holds true for
resolution 2334 (2016) and others. It also holds true
with regard to the crisis in the Gulf and Iran. I reiterate
that the implementation by everyone of resolution 2334
(2016) would be a step in the right direction.

Lastly, I would like to refer to what my Kuwaiti
colleague just said. As we worked on resolution 2334
(2016), we believed that the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) was indispensable to meeting the basic needs
of Palestinian refugees. Germany is proud to have been
the largest bilateral donor to UNRWA last year.

