Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer of the European Union on behalf of its member States. I would like to make some additional remarks in my national capacity, focusing on lessons that can be learned from the Croatian experience. If I were to single out the most important lesson, it is that transitional justice is a process that takes time. Transitional justice activities started in Croatia as early as the first half of the 1990s, during the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, and some are ongoing, a quarter of a century later. Both national and international criminal proceedings against some of the alleged perpetrators of war crimes started during the conflict but are also continuing to this very day. Croatia was a strong supporter of the establishment of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). We have placed our trust in the Tribunal to serve as an impartial international justice institution that will help to establish the truth, punish the perpetrators of the worst war crimes, provide justice for the victims and shield populations from future brutalities. Although it did not deliver as much as we had optimistically hoped for, the Tribunal played an important role in giving a voice to the victims. It has demonstrated that crimes will not go unpunished and that the international community has found a means through which to react. Following the ICTY, other ad hoc tribunals, as well as the International Criminal Court, were established, learning from the ICTY's best practices and its shortcomings. Croatia's judicial system has also made significant progress in its ability and willingness to deal with war crimes. Public opinion towards war crimes has also evolved. Some initial one-sided views have been gradually replaced by the universalist paradigm that all crimes should be punished, no matter the affiliation of victims or the perpetrators. The clear lesson is that if in the heat of the moment mistakes are made, we must be brave enough to acknowledge and correct them. For various reasons, including cultural ones, it may take a long time for some victims to speak up and ask for help, if they do it at all. It especially concerns victims of sexual violence. Transitional justice also includes an acknowledgement of the fact that victims have been harmed and that they are entitled to an effective remedy and adequate reparations. In Croatia, some victims of sexual violence, their families and communities are still coping with devastating and lasting consequences. In 2015, the Croatian Parliament passed the Act on the Rights of Victims of Sexual Violence during the Military Aggression against Republic of Croatia, which grants reparations that may include financial compensation, a monthly stipend, access to free counselling, as well as legal and medical aid. Those benefits can be obtained through an administrative process. A court sentence is not required, which makes reparations faster and more accessible. The response of victims was good, and a number of them were finally compensated. Lessons were learned. First, to be able to compensate victims effectively, we need a victim- centred approach and, secondly, we should tailor restitution mechanisms accordingly. Comprehensive transitional justice policy, if designed and implemented with broad and inclusive participation, in line with resolution 1325 (2000) and following resolutions, has the potential to provide recognition to victims, strengthen the rule of law, foster trust, empower women and promote social integration and reconciliation. It helps societies to heal and decreases the likelihood of future conflicts. However, transitional justice is a process. Sometimes we may have to be patient, especially with regard to individual accountability, but we should never quit. It may take decades, but Al-Bashir, Mladi¢ and others who enjoyed impunity for their crimes while holding positions of power must finally be brought to justice.
