Mr. Neo (Singapore): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the important issue
of the threat posed to international peace and security
by acts of maritime piracy. We also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his briefing.

The security of the world's sea lines of
communication is the responsibility of all stakeholders,
including coastal States, user States and the shipping
industry. Piracy is a transnational problem, and the
tactics of pirates evolve over time. The international
maritime community has a better chance of tackling
piracy successfully if we do so collectively.

Against this backdrop, Singapore remains a strong
supporter of international efforts against piracy. We
contribute to the development of the guidelines of
the International Maritime Organization (IMO) that
help Governments and industry to deter, prevent and
suppress piracy. Singapore also supports international
counter-piracy naval operations in the Gulf of Aden.
Over the past four years, Singapore has sent more than
700 sailors, soldiers and airmen over the deployment
of four Task Groups and one maritime patrol aircraft
detachment to Combined Task Force 151. We have also
taken command of the Combined Task Force twice
over the same period. Singapore also participates in
discussions at the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia and chaired the ninth plenary session
of the Contact Group in July 2011.

The latest reports from the IMO show a sharp
decline in pirate attacks and hijackings in 2012 as
compared to 2011. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/783) attributes this to actions by naval forces,
both at sea and on shore, to disrupt pirate operations;
improved implementation of the IMO guidance and
industry-developed Best Management Practices for
Protection against Somali-based Piracy; and greater
self-protection measures by merchant ships. This
underscores that positive results can be achieved
when the international community comes together.
Nevertheless, piracy off the coast of Somalia remains a
serious threat to the safety and freedom of international
navigation.

Singapore notes with concern the resurgence of
piracy off the opposite coast of Africa, particularly in
the Gulf of Guinea. This year, there were two reports
of Singapore-flagged ships there being boarded by
unknown personnel. Fortunately, neither incident lasted
long and no one was hurt. We commend the countries of
the region for their anti-piracy efforts and for bringing
the situation to the Security Council's attention in 2011.
Singapore also thanks Nigeria for its proactive efforts
to protect merchant shipping in the Gulf of Guinea.
Singapore cannot overemphasize the paramount
importance of maritime security cooperation in
combating piracy and safeguarding international
sea lines of communication. In this regard, regional
initiatives and mechanisms have proven effective
in tackling piracy and armed robbery. Singapore,
Malaysia and Indonesia - the littoral States of the
Straits of Malacca and Singapore - launched trilateral
maritime patrols to combat the increase in piracy in
2004. We also embarked on broader maritime security
cooperation initiatives with other countries within and
outside Asia.

The Regional Cooperation Agreement on
Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against
Ships in Asia (ReCAAP) is one example of such
maritime security cooperation. ReCAAP is a regional
Government-to-Government agreement to promote
and enhance cooperation against piracy and armed
robbery in Asia. ReCAAP entered into force in
November 2006 and currently has 18 contracting
parties, including China, India, Japan and the United
Kingdom. The ReCAAP Information Sharing Centre
(ISC) in Singapore facilitates the swift exchange
of information, which allows member countries to
improve their incident response and analysis of piracy
statistics. The ReCAAP ISC also conducts research
on piracy trends, helps to improve awareness of the
piracy situation, and encourages best practices among
Governments and shipping communities. This has led
to a significant reduction in the incidence, severity and
economic impact of piracy in Asia.

Similar information-sharing centres, modeled on
the ReCAAP ISC, have been set up in Yemen, Kenya
and Tanzania under the IMO's Djibouti Code of Conduct
concerning the Repression of Piracy and Armed Robbery
against Ships in the Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf
of Aden. The ReCAAP ISC, in cooperation with the
IMO, has conducted two workshops in Singapore to aid
Djibouti Code countries in the building of anti-piracy
information-sharing capacity. The ReCAAP ISC will
conduct a third workshop in Tokyo, Japan, in early
December.

Singapore remains committed to international
efforts to combat piracy. For a small, open-trading
nation like Singapore, maritime security cooperation
is critical to safeguarding the international sea lines
of communication that underpin the survival of our
country and our continued economic prosperity.

