The Secretary-General: I would like to thank
the Government of Nigeria for convening this debate,
and I commend the Security Council for its continued
engagement on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

The wilful targeting of civilians, disproportionate
attacks, sexual violence, forced displacement and the
denial of humanitarian access remain widespread in
armed conflict and are often carried out with impunity.
Ongoing or recent events and conditions in
Kyrgyzstan, Gaza, the Sudan, Sri Lanka, Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and elsewhere
remind us that the protection of civilians remains a
huge common challenge.

The Council has adopted important measures
designed to put civilians first. It has been especially
encouraging to see the institutional steps that the
Council has taken to improve its ability to respond.
The aide-memoire (S/PRST/2009/J, annex) is bringing
greater consistency to efforts to address protection
concerns. The informal expert group that has been
established has become a valuable forum for providing
the Council with essential and timely perspectives from
the humanitarian community. But there is more that the
10-43853
Council can, and must, do. With that in mind, today I
will focus on specific aspects of the core challenges I
identified in my report of May 2009 (S/2009/27fl. 
The first is to maximize the impact of
peacekeeping missions in protecting civilians. I
welcome the Council's efforts in designing
peacekeeping mandates to increase emphasis on the
protection of civilians. However, in order for
peacekeeping operations to successfully implement
those challenging mandates, it is essential that the
Council provide missions with the sustained political
support they require. The Council's engagement is vital
to make certain that peacekeeping operations are
adequately resourced and to ensure that mission
leadership is fully empowered to take forward that
complex mandated task on the international
community's behalf. Similarly, troop and police
contributors must arrive to the mission area with a
common understanding of what protection of civilian
mandates entails, and with the capabilities and
willingness to implement them.

As we seek to protect civilians from the effects of
violence, it will also be critical to manage
expectations. Certainly, we would like to be able to
protect all people from all threats at all times. But that
is a very difficult task even for national Governments
in times of peace.

The dialogue on those issues has made positive
progress within the Council, as well as within this
year's meeting of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. The recently published joint
independent study by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations also offers important
suggestions for bridging the gaps between mandates
and action on the ground. I count on Member States'
support as the Secretariat continues to address the areas
in which its performance vis-a-vis the protection of
civilians must be improved. Developments in two
missions warrant particular attention.

In Chad and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, respectively, we face the withdrawal and
drawdown of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
While I welcome the wish of host Governments to
uphold their sovereign responsibilities to their civilian
populations, we must fully consider the effects of a
premature drawdown in situations that are still fragile.
Clear benchmarks should be set for the achievement of
10-43853
civilian protection goals. Once set, they should be
achieved before peacekeepers leave.

A second core challenge is increased compliance
by non-State armed groups with international law. With
non-State armed actors figuring in every armed conflict
today, there is clearly a need to engage such groups on
humanitarian issues. Let us recognize the distinction
between dialogue for humanitarian purposes and for
political ones. This is necessary so that States can
overcome their reluctance to engage for fear that doing
so is tantamount to according recognition or status to
such groups. It is also essential, since even armed
groups that violate basic international norms as a
matter of routine can and should be brought into
dialogue for purely humanitarian purposes, including
humanitarian access.

Indeed, States and non-State actors alike must be
encouraged to provide and permit greater humanitarian
access. In too many cases, States lack capacity or,
worse, are inclined to deny their responsibilities, deny
the existence or degree of humanitarian need, and
construct unnecessary bureaucratic obstacles.

This brings me naturally to another core
challenge: accountability. Violent crimes are not the
only ones that harm civilians. Acts of omission,
including the hindering of humanitarian access, can be
just as or even more damaging. Those who create such
obstacles must also be held accountable, be they State
or non-State actors. This is a crucial part of our
work - to rid the world of zones where humanitarian
needs go unmet.

There have been significant advances in the
normative capabilities of national and international
systems. Much of this progress derives from the work
of the International Criminal Court and its beneficial
effects, including the integration of the Rome Statute
crimes into national legal systems. But here, too, more
must be done to increase the expectation that violators
will have to face the consequences of their actions.

Earlier this year, and in consultation with
regional organizations, I dispatched a commission of
inquiry to Guinea to help bring accountability for
crimes committed during violence there in September
2009. In Sri Lanka, I have emphasized the importance
of an accountability process for alleged violations of
human rights and humanitarian law by all sides to the
conflict that ended there in 2009. I have appointed a
panel of experts to advise me on these issues.
Over the past decade, the protection of civilians
agenda has advanced considerably, thanks in great part
to the work of this Council. While the conduct of
hostilities and their immediate consequences must
remain a major focus, that alone would mean treating
symptoms rather than causes. Armed conflict,
particularly the intra-State disputes that are now the
norm, is often the result of a lack of good governance,
competition for scarce resources, or the complex
interaction of factors, including ethnicity, or all of
these combined. Climate change, desertification and
land disputes can be additional drivers of conflict, and
a lack of effective security and rule of law mechanisms
can exacerbate the problems.

These are the broader challenges the Security
Council must address with determination to prevent
and resolve conflicts. That, in the longer term, is the
best way of bringing about real protection for civilians.

