Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. I also thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
this morning.

I have the honour to address the Council on behalf
of the Group of Arab States. I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened today's open debate as a part of a
process that should continue until we attain a
comprehensive and just settlement of the Middle East
crisis based on the well-known terms of reference for
peace, first and foremost among them Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

In recent months we have witnessed much
progress in strengthening the Middle East peace
process that should put an end to the Israeli-Arab
conflict, which poses a threat to international peace
and security. In November 2007, the Annapolis
conference gave fresh momentum to the peace process.
The Arab Group and the Quartet continue their efforts,
as does the Secretary-General, to strengthen the
implementation of the Road Map, through a series of
meetings. Indirect talks have begun between Syria and
Israel, under Turkish auspices, aimed at finding
common ground so that direct negotiations can begin in
the future.

But we regret that, at a time when we are
speaking of these unique new opportunities to attain
peace, and at a time when the Arab side is taking every
opportunity to reaffirm its sincere commitment to
peace, the Israeli side has opted for practices and
policies in the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories,
including East Jerusalem, that feed the spiral of
violence and escalation. That shows the absence of any
sincere will or commitment to peace on the part of the
Israeli Government. Despite the hundreds of
international resolutions and appeals condemning the
occupation and the settlement activities that have been
undertaken since 1967 in the occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories, including East Jerusalem, Israel, the
occupying Power, has continued to ignore those
resolutions and appeals. That is an insurmountable
obstacle to the peace process.

On the question of the illegal settlements, only
days ago Israel's Ministry of the Interior authorized the
construction of 1,000 new housing units in the Jebel
Abu Ghneim community in East Jerusalem and in other
parts of the occupied Palestinian territories. Moreover,
the Israeli authorities continue to build the illegal racist
separation wall four years after the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice, which stipulated the
illegality of the wall.

The consequence of this is serious harm to the
Palestinian people. Israel and the international
community must shoulder their responsibility and
provide compensation. Israel's continued policies of
siege, targeted assassination and the excessive use of
force do not address threats to Israel's security. Those
policies are harming international peace and security.
All of this exacerbates the situation in the region. If the
Israeli Government were serious about peace, it would
end the expansion of settlements and the building of
new ones and the construction of the separation wall.

The Israeli Government should cease using
military force against civilians, should stop talking
about its plans for invading Gaza, should open up
crossing points to permit the free movement of people
and goods, and should comply with the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. We call on Israel to withdraw
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the 4 July 1967
border. The Security Council must ensure that Israel
complies with resolution 497 (1981), which rejects
Israel's decision to annex the Golan and which has not
been implemented since its adoption 27 years ago.

The Arab Group also expresses its solidarity with
and support for the people and the Government of
Lebanon within the framework of the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006), which calls for the recovery
of Lebanese lands still occupied by Israel, including
the northern part of the village of al-Ghajar, the
Shaba'a farms and the Kfar Shouba Hills. We reaffirm
our support for the efforts of the Government of
Lebanon to extend its authority over its entire territory.

The Arab Group calls on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities and force Israel to put an
end to its daily violations of Lebanese airspace and its
diversion of Lebanese water supplies. Israel must
provide maps showing the locations of mines and
cluster bombs, which have claimed many civilian lives.
It must also cease its aggressive actions and implement
the ceasefire. The Arab Group welcomes the release of
Lebanese detainees from Israeli prisons. We thank the
Secretary-General for his efforts in that regard.

In the Gaza Strip, the world is witnessing one of
the worst humanitarian tragedies in history, caused by
Israeli policies that have turned that area into an
immense prison through outrageous acts of aggression
against the defenceless Palestinian people, in flagrant
violation of international law, including international
humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War. All of those acts, combined with the rise in global
food prices and the inability of humanitarian workers
to enter the Palestinian territory, are increasing the
suffering of the Palestinian people.

These illegal practices by Israel, the occupying
Power, are an affront to the efforts being made
internationally, particularly those by the United States,
to advance the peace process between Palestine and
Israel. It is high time for serious pressure to be exerted
on Israel to compel it to return to the peace process and
take genuine measures in that regard - measures that
go beyond attending meetings. As we call upon Israel
to immediately end its aggression against the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories, we
reiterate our appeal to the Council to deal with these
challenges and to shoulder its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in

08-4326]
order to protect civilians from murder, destruction and
human rights violations.

Once again, we call upon the Security Council to
treat this crucial issue, which has serious regional and
international repercussions, with the importance that it
requires. The fact that the Council is standing idly by
as a motionless observer of Israeli policies that run
counter to a comprehensive, just and lasting peace,
particularly its illegal settlements policy, in no way
serves the peace process.

At a time when the Security Council has no other
choice but to adopt a draft resolution that would end
the Israeli settlement policies, which run counter to the
will of the international community and which threaten
international peace and security, it must be recognized
that the Arab Group has shown great flexibility with
regard to the Arab draft resolution on the settlements in
the occupied Arab territories; we have demonstrated a
sincere desire to serve the peace process. Thus, it is the
responsibility of Council members to echo those good
intentions and to support that draft resolution, which
emphasizes the illegal nature of those settlements
under recognized international law.

Therefore, we reaffirm that, as everyone is aware,
in the Middle East, as in any other region of the world,
peace and stability cannot be imposed by force. Peace
cannot be the outcome of policies of repression or
exclusion. From that perspective, the Arab Group
believes that the recent efforts by members and leaders
of the League of Arab States, including Qatar, which
assisted in bringing about the Doha agreement of 21
May 2008, helped to resolve the political crisis in
Lebanon. Since Lebanon was able to reach that
agreement, it has elected General Michel Sleiman as
President of the Republic, a Government of national
unity has been formed and an electoral law has been
agreed upon. We note also that all relevant Lebanese
actors have returned to the national dialogue, thereby
preventing the use of force to settle internal political
disputes.
Another element that has demonstrated the
important role of neutral good offices is the Arab role,
played in particular by the Governments of Yemen,
Egypt and Syria, in narrowing the differences among
Palestinians. Efforts were also made recently by the
Arab Republic of Egypt to achieve a truce in the Gaza
Strip last month - a truce that is currently being
violated by Israel. All of this demonstrates that, as a
regional institution, the Arab League has succeeded in
playing a role supplementary to that of this
Organization in maintaining international peace and
security, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. It also demonstrates that
dialogue is the only way to bring about a solution to
the Middle East crisis. In particular, we see this in last
week's exchange of Israeli and Lebanese prisoners.

The current situation underscores the need for the
international community to make efforts and exert
pressure in order to achieve a peaceful, comprehensive
and lasting settlement of the Middle East crisis, at the
heart of which is the Palestinian question, particularly
with regard to, inter alia, the status of Jerusalem,
refugees, borders, settlements and water, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, the Road Map and the Arab
Peace Initiative. All of that was reaffirmed by the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs during
his briefing to the Council today.

In conclusion, we reaffirm that unjust occupation
is one of the major causes of the scourge of terrorism,
which targets innocent people and is spreading to the
extent that it is becoming difficult to control. We must
avoid comparing that scourge to the legitimate right of
peoples to fight for freedom and liberation.

