Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are very pleased to
see you, Mr. Minister, presiding over this important
meeting. We also wish to welcome the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands and of Ukraine.
We thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller and Chief Monitor Apakan
for their respective briefings on the latest situation in
eastern Ukraine.

We note the statement issued by the Special
Representative of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Chairperson-in-Office in
Ukraine and in the Trilateral Contact Group seven days
ago expressing concern on the recent surge in combat
activity along the line of contact in eastern Ukraine.

We also understand the impact of the deteriorating
security situation on civilians and critical infrastructure,
and hence the need to respond to the humanitarian
needs on the ground. We believe the implementation of
the ceasefire regime, agreed to by the parties, is vital
in de-escalating the increasing tension and helping
address the needs of the civilian population. We also
note the discussion on the possibility of deploying
a peacekeeping mission, although there are major
differences on the scope and mandate of the mission.

There is no doubt that the resolution of the
situation in the eastern region of Ukraine can be
achieved only through a peaceful settlement. That is
why it is absolutely imperative that the parties remain
fully committed to the implementation of the Minsk
agreements and strictly adhere to resolution 2202
(2015), which endorses the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements.

It has been a while since the parties met in the
Normandy format. We believe that the holding of
the Normandy quartet could facilitate important
discussions on the implementation of the Minsk
agreements and help tackle outstanding issues in that
regard. We note the bilateral meetings held recently by
the Russian Federation with France and with Germany
at the highest level. We hope they will pave the way for
the convening of the Normandy quartet soon.

Finally, on the issue of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17, the continued cooperation of all States
and actors in the region in bringing the matter to a
conclusion remains extremely important, in line with
resolution 2166 (2014), which the Council adopted
unanimously. Let me end by saying that knowingly
downing a civilian aircraft is totally incomprehensible
to us and is a truly terrible crime.
