Mr. Vieira de Mello (Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator):
On behalf of the Secretary-General and, indeed, of all heads
of agencies, members of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee on humanitarian affairs, let me express the
gratitude of the Secretary-General and of the humanitarian
community as a whole for the Council's generous reception
of the report. In particular, I thank you personally, Sir, as
well as Ambassador Fowler and your respective countries
for the particular role you played in bringing this debate
about.

We welcome the draft resolution before the Council,
which reaffirms the role of the Council in responding to
situations in which civilians are targeted, as has so often
been the case in countries that have been affected by
conflict in the last decade.
I thank the Security Council members for the rich and
varied debate, as well as the non-members for their
contributions yesterday and today. The seriousness of the
membership's responses reflects the recognition by the
Council - and more largely by the membership of the
Organization - that the protection of civilians goes to the
very core of the mandate of this and other organs of the
United Nations. I am particularly grateful that, both in
the presidential statement of February and in comments
today, this concern is not one that is limited to the legal
protection of civilian populations, but includes their
physical protection, which is often what is lacking.

We note with particular satisfaction that the Council
gave particular consideration and support to the following
issues. First, it has addressed the culture of impunity and
the issue of ensuring accountability for breaches of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.
It was recognized that it is a duty of all States to hold
accountable, through their national legal systems and
through effective international tribunals, those responsible
for the most heinous crimes. In particular, member States
emphasized the importance of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and its need to step in where national judicial
institutions fail to act. Several members called for
compliance with the existing ad hoc tribunals and the
possible creation of others, pending the establishment of
the ICC. The effectiveness of an international court will
depend first, obviously, on its coming into being and
thereafter on the support given by member States. There
was a recommendation that action be taken by the
Security Council to deal with States that do not cooperate
with the international tribunals, which we have noted.

Secondly, the Council addressed the issue of
inducing the compliance of non-state actors with
international law, including private-sector companies and
private security firms. In this context, we welcome calls
for States to ratify the Additional Protocols to the Geneva
Conventions, particularly since the obligations which they
create for non-state actors under international law are
those that are most frequently violated in conflicts of the
new generation.

Thirdly, regarding enforcement action, we were
pleased that several members referred to the need to
develop and apply objective criteria, ensuring consistency
in the Security Council's action. Needless to say, the
Secretary-General, when requested, will be prepared to
assist.

Fourthly, in terms of comprehensive peacekeeping
mandates, it was encouraging to hear members emphasize
the changing perception of peacekeeping operations and
the recognition that modern peacekeeping entails more
comprehensive operations with extremely complex,
multifaceted programmes and, indeed, more robust
enforcement mandates, as has been discussed in this
Council in recent days.

We were particularly encouraged by the recognition
of the need for a rapid deployment capacity, including of
a preventive nature, both in terms of headquarters as well
as actual contingents. This is something we have been
striving for over the years, and it should, in our opinion,
include, in addition to military, also civilian components,
including humanitarian civilian police and others.

Fifthly, as for the need to control the flow of small
arms and, I might add, of heavy and more sophisticated
weaponry and equipment, often in violation of this
Council's decisions, this is something we have flagged in
the past. We are extremely happy to see that most of the
members of the Council recognized it as an important
priority in terms of protecting civilian populations. We
welcome the suggestion by one of the members that arms
embargoes be imposed as soon as a party to a conflict
begins to target civilian populations.

 

Sixth is the question of the Convention on the
Protection of United Nations and Associated Personnel. As
you can imagine, this theme is very close to our hearts,
almost on a daily basis. We are grateful for yet again
overwhelming support for action to strengthen the
protection of United Nations personnel. Only yesterday in
Somalia a senior programme officer, a UNICEF medical
doctor, was murdered in an ambush, adding his name to a
very long and sad list of fatal casualties among civilian
staff working for humanitarian organizations. I welcome the
support expressed by some for an additional protocol to
ensure better protection of all humanitarian personnel, not
just those from the United Nations.

On the question of sanctions, we were pleased to hear
several speakers give priority to the development of
targeted and smart sanctions so as to penalize those directly
responsible for wrong-doing, rather than aggravating the
suffering of civilian populations. This is an area in which
my office has attempted to actively support decision-making
by the Council.

Other issues that were also mentioned included raising
the age of recruitment for participating in hostilities; the
suffering of all civilians, but particularly of women and
children; the question of access; and more cooperation by
the Council with other United Nations bodies and regional
organizations. We are in full support of those.
In conclusion, the plight of civilians can no longer be
set aside because of other interests that might be at play.
The initiatives taken in this Council are heartening. Their
plight should indeed be of central concern. We should treat
all conflict situations around the world equally. The best
way to protect civilians is, however, as was stressed, to
prevent conflict, and in this context, development and
combating poverty is an indispensable tool to achieve
sustainable peace and stability in conflict- and post-conflict
areas.

One Security Council member said the Secretary-
General had done his job and it was now up to the Council
to implement his recommendations. Let me assure you,
however, that the Secretariat remains ready to provide every
support for the mechanism which the Council will establish
to follow up on the recommendations.

We did not include, in responding to some of the more
critical observations, reference to all continuing conflicts.
Rather, we tried to focus on those which have been most
acute and have had the most acute impact on civilians in
recent years. Regarding the list of countries or situations
that were mentioned in the report in which United
Nations personnel have lost their lives, although we are,
needless to say - and I know something about that, most
unfortunately - greatly concerned at the loss of life
among United Nations peacekeepers. Paragraph 22 of the
report lists only the countries in which United Nations
humanitarian staff and other humanitarian personnel have
died.

I also note that two delegations believe that the
Secretary-General's proposals invite the Security Council
to go beyond its mandate as contained in the Charter. But
the Charter, we believe, was not intended to be a static
document. It is alive. Moreover, the Secretary-General
was responding to the Security Council's February request
to submit concrete proposals on how to improve its ability
to provide civilians with legal and physical protection. We
attempted to respond to that call - your call - in an
imaginative yet balanced manner. Needless to say, not
everything we have suggested is the sole prerogative of
the Security Council. These recommendations are
addressed to the membership as a whole and to other
organs of the Organization, as well as, obviously, to other
actors on the international and regional scene. Do not
blame us, therefore, for having attempted to respond to
your own request, which provided us with immense
encouragement, as did the debate in this room.

Let us not forget that the Charter begins not with the
words "We the States" but "We the peoples".
