Mr. Sautter (Germany): Today we are discussing the situation in the Sudan, and for the first time we are discussing the work of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). I wish to underline that the notion of assistance stands for the spirit of a new chapter in the relationship between the Council and the Sudan, a chapter based on genuine cooperation and partnership. This support is crucial. I am confident that I speak on behalf of all of us when I say that we want the Sudanese Government to succeed. We want the Sudanese people, as has been said, to cash in on the peace and democracy dividend. That is why we hosted, together with the United Nations, the European Union and the Sudan, the High- Level Sudan Partnership Conference in Berlin in June, mobilizing $1.8 billion in assistance to the Sudan and marking the beginning of a new political partnership between the Sudan and the international community. We welcome the agreements reached with parts of the armed groups in Juba and look forward to the signing of the agreements next week. It is crucial that the implementation of the agreed provisions start swiftly. We welcome the ongoing talks with parties that have not yet joined the process, and at the same time we urge those who continue to stand outside of this process to become part of the solution. Partnership also means being frank about the challenges ahead. As noted in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/912), an unstable economic situation, the need to ensure justice for past crimes and violence, including the massacre of 3 June 2019, and increasing humanitarian needs are all aggravated by the impact of the coronavirus disease. I am not suggesting that UNITAMS can overcome those immense challenges immediately, but we are convinced that UNITAMS can make a significant difference on the ground. For that to happen, UNITAMS needs to be fit for purpose. The purpose of the Mission is clearly defined in resolution 2524 (2020) and entails four strategic priorities. We hope and expect UNITAMS to be able to work on all of those, including adequate resources for civilian protection and human rights. In that context, we feel it is very important that the position of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General be filled soon. While we appreciate the update by the Secretariat on the planning process, we would like to mention that the Council had also requested information about the geographical deployment of the Mission. I heard important remarks on that from Rosemary DiCarlo. In particular, we are looking into the footprint in Darfur and the components that will be represented in the specific offices. We expect that United Nations police will be represented in all Mission offices. We would also like to reiterate that the Council has asked the Secretariat that UNITAMS make use of lessons learned from the State liaison functions concept, and that a mechanism based on them should be established in Darfur, including in Jebel Marra and the Two Areas. I would like to call on the Secretariat to be both realistic and ambitious in its planning. We welcome what we have seen so far. Germany will continue to support the build-up of UNITAMS, including by making available additional voluntary contributions and personnel. We encourage other Member States to also consider doing so. Let me make a remark on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The Council will soon have to make a decision on the future of UNAMID. We note with concern that the report in front of us points at a deterioration of the security situation in Darfur. This is an alarming signal. We are looking forward to more analysis and data in the special report mandated by the Council. That report should contain an assessment of the capacity of the Sudanese Government to protect civilians, as foreseen by resolution 2525 (2020). In conclusion, the response of the Security Council to the historic change and transformation in the Sudan is a very good example of what the multilateral system can muster in support of the aspirations of the people. Around the same time last year, during the high-level week of the General Assembly, Prime Minister Hamdok said here in New York that the Sudanese people were "marching resolutely towards the future as a friend and partner on equal footing with all peace-loving nations" (A/74/PV.10, p. 37). I am convinced that the Security Council will continue its strong partnership with the new Sudan and its peace-loving people.
