Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): At the outset, I should
like to join previous speakers in thanking Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing. I also extend
my thanks to you, Mr. President, for organizing and
chairing today's debate. We are pleased that Minister
of State Howells was able to open the debate.

Recently, we have been witnessing a very useful
and constructive exchange of ideas regarding the
developments in the Middle East, both here in the
Security Council and in the region - accompanied,
moreover, by relentless efforts and concrete steps
undertaken by international and regional actors to
revive the peace process. Slovakia is encouraged by
those developments and shares the prevailing sense
that more progress is needed in promoting a
comprehensive and lasting settlement to the Arab-
Israeli conflict in general and to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in particular.

Although the results achieved remain modest -
and we have noted the concerns expressed by
Mr. Pascoe about the security situation - we believe
that important and positive momentum has already
been built. That momentum must be seized and further
enhanced through concrete and immediate action,
including confidence-building measures.

In that regard, we are encouraged by the outcome
of the Arab League Summit held last month in Riyadh
and the positive reactions to it by many key actors,
including Israel. We support the reaffirmed Arab Peace
Initiative as a major element in moving the peace
process forward, and we welcome the recent decision
by the Arab Ministerial Committee indicating increased
engagement with a view to establishing a constructive
dialogue between Israel and the Arab side.

We welcome the meeting between Israeli Prime
Minister Ehud Olmert and Palestinian Authority
President Mahmoud Abbas on 15 April reflecting and
fulfilling their commitment to meet on a regular basis.
We consider such direct talks to be instrumental and
decisive in solving the many complex issues of the
dispute. We hope and expect that such discussions
between the two leaders will continue with the aim not
only of contributing to the effective and sustainable
solution of many day-to-day problems, but also of
leading to meaningful negotiations on the final status
and peace settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
We remain convinced that such a settlement can and
should be achieved only through peaceful negotiations
and the full implementation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions and the principles defined by the
Quartet and the road map.

In that regard, we are convinced that the Quartet
still represents the most appropriate mechanism for
advancing the peace process and the road map to be the
most efficient plan for achieving a lasting peace
settlement to the conflict. Speaking of the Quartet and
its role, we have repeatedly encouraged the
Palestinians to seize the moment of national unity to
form a Government that would be committed to the
Quartet principles and whose political platform would
enable early engagement as well as the continuation of
dialogue on a solution to the Middle East conflict. We
continue to evaluate the policy and actions of the
Palestinian National Unity Government and express
our readiness to cooperate with those of its members
who reflect and accept those principles.

As for daily developments on the ground, we
remain concerned over the economic and humanitarian
situation in the West Bank and Gaza. Slovakia
therefore welcomes the extension of the Temporary
International Mechanism for a further three months,
which will enable resources to be channelled and
assistance delivered directly to the Palestinian people.
To that end, we urge Israel to resume transfers of
withheld Palestinian tax and customs revenues, directly
or through the Mechanism. We also call for the full
implementation of the Agreement on Movement and
Access and for all border crossings to be reopened and
remain open.
07-31853

We reiterate our call for an immediate end to
Violence by Palestinian factions as well as attacks on
Israel, notably the launching of rockets against Israeli
population centres, and for the release of the abducted
Israeli soldier Shalit and BBC reporter Johnston. We
support the efforts and leadership of President Abbas in
that regard and commend also the efforts of partners in
the region to that end. We also hope and expect Israel
and Palestinians to exercise the utmost restraint and to
do everything possible to sustain and further
consolidate the mutually agreed ceasefire in Gaza.

For its part, we expect the Israeli Government to
continue its commitment to peace based on principles
laid out in the road map and to refrain from taking such
steps and activities that might be contradictory to the
principles of international law.

I now turn to Lebanon. Slovakia continues to
closely follow developments in that country and we
remain concerned. The country faces a number of
challenges. There is an urgent need for the situation to
be stabilized and for the end of the current deadlock,
which we believe serves no one's interests. Lebanon
needs to be reconstructed and further developed, and
that can be done only in a peaceful and stable
environment.

We are convinced that the comprehensive
national dialogue is the only way to find a consensus
on a number of issues. The presidential statement that
we adopted last week is, in our View, an important
signal that the international community, and especially
the Security Council, is paying serious attention to the
whole region. It also underlined the need for progress
in a number of areas, including on the issue of the
release of two Israeli soldiers kidnapped by Hizbollah
last July. Steps towards confidence building have to be
undertaken by all relevant actors inside and outside
Lebanon.

The sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Lebanon have to be respected by
everybody. Resolution 1701 (2006) presents a good
basis for a comprehensive solution, and it has to be
fully respected and implemented by all relevant actors.
The Israeli overflights have to stop, the Lebanese
Government has to have the sole monopoly on the use
of force within its territory, and the Lebanese
authorities and army have to strengthen their position
and authority throughout the whole country, with
special focus on border control, in order to successfully

implement the arms embargo in accordance with
resolution 1701 (2006). Resolution 1559 (2004) on the
disarmament of all militia in Lebanon has to be
implemented as well.

Finally, we believe that the normalization of
relations between neighbours in the region would
significantly contribute to the stabilization of the
situation throughout the Middle East. There is a need
not only for justice, but also for compromise and good
will from all relevant sides. Only thus, through
dialogue and cooperation, can the solution be found,
step by step, to all outstanding issues.

