Mr. Rock (Canada): I am pleased to address the
Council on behalf of Canada, Australia and New
Zealand. At the outset, I would like to reaffirm our
strong support for the call to action that we heard today
from Emergency Relief Coordinator Jan Egeland.

Our Governments continue to attach the highest
importance to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and to the attention that the Security Council
has rightly focused on increasing the physical and legal
security of war-affected populations.

Last December (see S/PV.5100), our
Governments highlighted six key issues that should
form the basis of future Council action on protection
issues. These included: putting a greater emphasis on
conflict prevention; systematically pursuing lessons
learned with respect to past civilian protection
mandates; strengthening monitoring and enforcement
mechanisms for targeted sanctions; more proactive
engagement on the issue of natural resources and
armed conflict; and reinforcing the capacity of country
teams to respond to protection concerns. In addition,
we placed important emphasis on the need for the
Council to reach agreement on how it will apply
Chapter VII of the Charter in response to attacks
against civilians, particularly in internal conflict,
consistent with resolution 1265 (1999).

We continue to believe that those issues must be
the focus of Council efforts in the months ahead and
must be reflected in the Secretary-General's next
report. Today, however, we will focus on just a very
few of the additional concerns that have been noted by
Mr. Egeland.

The appalling and endemic use of sexual abuse
and violence as a weapon of war demands our urgent
attention. It is clear from what we have seen in the
horrors of Bosnia, Rwanda and Sierra Leone and from
what is evident today in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Sudan that a more robust and better
coordinated international response is required. States
affected by conflict, their justice systems and their
local communities must be engaged as a matter of
priority to ensure that perpetrators of sexual violence
are brought to justice. The international community
can do more to marshal and coordinate support for
local-level judicial reform, capacity-building and the
overall strengthening of the rule of law as a critical
investment. In that respect, we strongly support the
proposed Peacebuilding Commission. We note the
good work of the Challenges of Peace Operations
Project on these issues and look forward to the
finalization of its phase-II report later this year. Where
serious crimes amounting to war crimes, crimes against
humanity or genocide cannot or will not be addressed
locally, the International Criminal Court becomes the
appropriate forum to turn to.

In addition, United Nations agencies and other
humanitarian, development and human rights agencies
must strengthen their efforts to promote prevention of
sexual exploitation and to increase accountability,
including within their own work. We also believe it
would be useful for the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to consider how United
Nations peace support operations with protection-of-
civilians mandates might be better designed to ensure
greater physical security for women and children at
risk of sexual or gender-based violence. We must look
to troop-contributing countries to follow through on the
work initiated by Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein
and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, to ensure that peacekeepers do not
contribute to gender-based violence and that individual
peacekeepers are held accountable if they commit such
acts.

As we have seen in recent months, regional
organizations can play an important role in providing
timely, appropriate and effective responses to
protection crises. The leadership that the African
Union has shown in Darfur is an example of what may
be possible in that respect. We encourage continued
strong links between the United Nations and regional
organizations on civilian-protection issues. The
international community must make concerted efforts
to build and enhance regional crisis response capacity,
including through political, material and financial
support when required.

We must also continue to recognize that key
elements of the civilian-protection agenda have
important regional dimensions, such as the abduction,
recruitment and use of boys and girls as child soldiers,
and forced displacement.

As was evident in West Africa, failure to
effectively put our collective resources into
programmes of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) that assist in the reintegration and
rehabilitation of children renders them vulnerable to
re-recruitment with consequences for national and
regional stability.

In that regard, I would also like to draw the
Council's attention to the domestic and regional
implications of the continued abduction and
recruitment of children in northern Uganda. That
region presents a continuing tragic cycle of
displacement, violence and child abduction: an
appalling situation that has lasted for almost 20 years.
We urge the Security Council to request continuing
reports on the humanitarian and human rights realities
in Uganda and to look for the appropriate moment to
put that conflict on its agenda so that it might explore
all possible means to hasten the day when the violence
stops.

We strongly support Mr. Egeland's emphasis on
the rights and needs of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). Their deliberate dispossession is among the
most visible and devastating symptoms of conflict
today. We reaffirm the responsibility of Governments
in the first instance to ensure that the needs of IDPs on
their own territory are met, including by facilitating
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian agencies.
Certainly the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement provide a useful framework, and the
international community has a key supporting role to

play.

This year has been a difficult one for the
dedicated United Nations staff and humanitarian
personnel who work tirelessly in the field to help those
in greatest need. The kidnappings of United Nations
and non-governmental organization staff in
Afghanistan are, regrettably, only the most recent
reminder that those who seek to protect civilians
urgently need our support if they are to continue their
work. All parties to conflict must respect the principles
of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence
that govern the efforts of those agencies. It is
imperative that they also be allowed to advocate on
behalf of conflict-affected populations and not fear
reprisals from Governments for raising concerns about
violations of international law.

In addition to condemning attacks against those
who perpetrate violence against aid staff, the Council
can take concrete action by encouraging the General
Assembly to rapidly reach a conclusion on the
expansion of the scope of the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel and
to remove the exceptional risk requirement so that it
can cover all United Nations and associated staff
whose work, by its very nature, renders them
vulnerable to attack. Every day that we spend
deliberating on the scope of a new legal instrument
puts them at further risk.

(spoke in French)

We welcome the progress report provided by
Under-Secretary-General Egeland on the improvement
of monitoring and reporting with respect to the
protection of civilians. This work must continue. In
addition, we urge him to continue to use his office to
bring civilian protection concerns to the Council's and
our collective attention. This includes situations of
which the Council may not yet formally be seized.

In the end, our message is simple: we must
continue to move forward robustly on the initiative
regarding the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We call on the Security Council to commit itself to
continuing to attach high priority to the protection of
civilians and to expanding its consideration of the
subject to issues that had not been identified five years
ago. The issues we outlined in December 2004 and
today must continue to be addressed as part of the
Council's deliberations on the development of
multidimensional integrated mission mandates and
should be reflected in a new Security Council
resolution on the protection of civilians. We look
forward to discussion of these elements in coming
months.

