Mr. Nkurlu (United Republic of Tanzania): Allow
me at the outset to extend to you my delegation's
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of August. It is a pleasure to
see the manner in which you have been discharging the
heavy responsibilities entrusted to this Council. We
equally pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador
Alain Dejammet of France, who did remarkable work in
guiding the deliberations of the Council last month.

Sharing a common border with Burundi, my country
has over the years witnessed this endemic problem
simmer until it reached a cruel and destructive ethnic
violence, claiming the lives of thousands of innocent men,

 

women and children, destroying property and causing
massive numbers of refugees and displaced people. This
situation has not only brought misery, insecurity, instability
and a sense of pessimism to the subregion, it has also
caused ecological and environmental damage to the area.
Most conflicts of this nature transcend borders, and
our border is no exception. My country has been adversely
affected by this conflict, both socially and economically.
Thus, the positive developments of July 1993, when
Burundi, under a multi-party democracy, elected Melchior
Ndadaye President, were followed with keen interest,
optimism and relief in Tanzania. The Government, and
indeed the people of Tanzania were delighted that at long
last there was a permanent solution in the neighbourhood.

The present report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Burundi, contained in document S/1996/660,
emphasizes the culmination of the brutal 1993 assassination
of President Ndadaye and the subsequent massacres only a
few months after power changed hands. The political
maturity displayed during and after the general elections by
Pierre Buyoya, who gracefully handed over power to the
victor, was unceremoniously shattered once again, giving
way to a difficult situation which has left the country
fragmented and has compounded the problem of mistrust
among conflicting parties.

We are all aware of the concerted efforts made by
former President Julius Nyerere to engage the Burundi
political parties in dialogue in an endeavour to find a
lasting solution to the problems in the country. The report
of the Secretary-General aptly points out that President
Nyerere's efforts were undermined by some factions inside
and outside Burundi, in spite of the support he enjoyed
from President Ntibantunganya, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and the international community at large.

It is against this backdrop that the coup of July 25,
1996 has to be condemned in the strongest terms, as it has
deliberately reversed the democratic process in the country,
basically returning Burundi to its state prior to the 1993
elections. Any attempt to condone this coup will send the
wrong signal to the current regime in Burundi and to the
international community in general. We should be
categorical and send a clear message that, whatever the
circumstances, any coup is illegal and, in any case, it is an
outmoded and obsolete way of assuming political power.

Talking to the press in Windhoek last week, President
Benjamin Mkapa rightly observed,

 

"the issue of derailing the Burundi democratic
process and peace negotiations was not only a matter
of concern to the East and Central African region,
but also to the entire world community."

We have every reason to be concerned with the turn of
events in Burundi, which have jeopardized the democratic
process and the peace process. Our greatest fear is the
further deterioration of the situation into a full-fledged
civil war with tragic and disastrous consequences.

My delegation, at this juncture, would like to express
its satisfaction and total support for all the decisions taken
during the Arusha regional summit on 31 July 1996
which, among other things, decided to impose economic
sanctions on Burundi and appealed to the international
community to support its decisions. We fully subscribe to
the objectives of the sanctions, which are aimed at
restoring constitutional order and at creating conditions
for genuine negotiations encompassing all parties to the
conflict, in accordance with principles and objectives
enshrined in the first Arusha regional summit. Members
of the Council will recall that the Arusha "peace plan",
which emphasizes democracy and security for all the
people of Burundi, was endorsed by the Organization of
African Unity summit in Yaounde.

Let me take this opportunity to reiterate and
underscore the salient decisions unanimously agreed to at
the Arusha summit. First, the Bujumbura regime should
immediately undertake specific measures aimed at
returning constitutional order, including the immediate
restoration of the National Assembly, which is a
democratic institution of legality that has derived its
mandate from the Burundi people, and the immediate
unbanning of political parties in the country. Secondly,
the regime should undertake immediate and unconditional
negotiations with all the parties to the conflict. These
negotiations should include parties and armed factions
inside and outside the country. Thirdly, the framework of
these negotiations should be the Mwanza process,
reinforced by the Arusha peace initiative, under the
auspices of Mwalimu Nyerere, which seeks to guarantee
security and democracy for all the Burundi people.

A misguided concept is currently being floated by
the Bujumbura regime that the Arusha decisions,
especially the imposition of sanctions, are interference in
the sovereignty and internal affairs of Burundi. We are
firmly of the view that these decisions are the only viable
means to assist the people of Burundi to settle their
differences amicably. We therefore call upon the Buyoya

 

regime to make a deliberate and genuine move to fully
implement the demands of the second Arusha summit in
order to pave the way for peace negotiations to commence.

Tanzania would once again like to appeal to the
international community, especially to the members of the
Security Council, to support the regional efforts on
sanctions on Burundi since it is the only viable way of
restoring constitutional order in the country. These
sanctions are meant to shape the future prosperity of the
people of Burundi. They are meant to articulate the
fundamental principles of democracy in the country and,
above all, they are meant to stop genocide by asking the
Buyoya regime to retrace its footsteps to constitutional
governance.

