Mr. Hattrem (Norway): At the outset, let me thank
France for assuming the presidency of the Council
this month.

Norway is concerned about the recent military
escalation in northern Iraq. We urge all parties to resolve
the conflict by peaceful means. Further escalation will
only exacerbate the difficult humanitarian situation for
millions of Iraqi civilians. It is now vital that we remain
united in our efforts to combat the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL). ISIL has lost most of its territory
in both Iraq and Syria, in great part due to the efforts
of the Global Coalition Against Da'esh and its partners.

In Syria, the latest development in Raqqa is
promising. At the same time, humanitarian access
continues to be difficult, despite the establishment of
de-escalation zones. We therefore call on the Council
to ensure that humanitarian actors have access to all
areas throughout Syria where assistance is needed. We
also call on the Council to help secure a viable political
resolution of the conflict, as only this can bring a
sustained reduction in violence and prevent new wars
in the future.

Durable peace, security and prosperity for Israelis
and Palestinians alike can be achieved only through a
negotiated two-State solution. Norway welcomes the
ongoing United States efforts to restart talks and stands
ready to support a political process. The situation
is fragile because the political process has been at a
standstill for a long time. The international donor group
for Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination ofInternational Assistance to Palestinians
(AHLC), met in New York on 18 September to take
stock of the Palestinian State-building process and to
provide support to a negotiated two-State solution. The
AHLC discussed ways of improving the Palestinian
economy and addressed the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Gaza. Our strategic priorities as the Chair of
the AHLC remain threefold: the fiscal sustainability of
the Palestinian Authority's budget, sustained economic
development with a focus on energy and water, and the
recovery of Gaza.

Norway welcomes the agreement signed by Fatah
and Hamas in Cairo on 12 October. This is an important
step towards a full return of the Palestinian Authority
to Gaza. We commend the efforts of Egypt, and we
urge all parties to seize this opportunity. Efforts to
improve the humanitarian situation for the people of
Gaza are vital.

We are deeply concerned by the deteriorating
situation in Yemen. All parties must respect universal
human rights and international humanitarian law,
especially as regards the rights and needs of children.

