Mr. Moragas Senchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to start by thanking the Prime Minister of
Sweden for his presence in today's important debate. I
also welcome the Special Representative, the Executive
Director of UNICEF and Ms. Yenny Londofio, whose
presence here demonstrates the importance of working
with non-State actors and investing in reintegration.
The Swedish delegation is doing an excellent job
chairing the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. We congratulate Sweden on this invaluable
contribution and for the consensus adoption of
resolution 2427 (2018), which my country is proud to
have co-sponsored.

My country aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union, as well as that
delivered by the representative of Argentina on behalf
of the group of countries endorsing the Safe Schools
Declaration. We would like to add a few remarks in our
national capacity.

The issue of children and armed conflict is much
more than an agenda item of the Council. It represents
a collective responsibility of Members of the United
Nations and as human beings. Confronted with the
recruitment of minors, the bombing of schools and
hospitals, abductions, violations, the killing and
maiming of children, and the denial of humanitarian
access, we must be inflexible and demand strict
compliance with international law. I would like to focus
on four issues.

First of all, I stress the importance of preserving
existing institutional capacities in peace operations
in order to monitor, report and respond to grave
violations against children. Indeed, ifwe wish to secure
an accurate and credible list of those responsible for
that type of violation and abuse, we need to maintain
and strengthen child protection advisers. We cannot
expect results from this mandate if the right tools are
not in place. We must also pay special attention to the
cross-border component of many violations and their
connection to the trafficking of children.

Secondly, we welcome the preventive approach of
the resolution adopted earlier. Safeguarding children's
rights and ensuring their protection from the moment
there is a risk of conflict can contribute to the solution.
Post-conflict protection must also not be neglected.
Therefore, we agree that implementing an action
plan must entail establishing frameworks to prevent
future violations and abuses, including mechanisms
to empower children and young people. There are
also positive examples, such as those of Colombia or
Nepal, that show that a timely commitment on the part
of the parties in this area can substantially contribute
to the creation of confidence-building measures within
the framework of a new peace process. Therefore, we
believe that this agenda must be at the core of prevention
efforts and sustainable conflict resolution.
Thirdly, we express our support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, UNICEF
and specialized civil society organizations for their
commitment to reintegration. There is little point in
achieving the demobilization of children if they do
not find an alternative to end the spiral of violence.
Perhaps as donors we should introduce that notion in
our contributions.

Finally, we all know that the denial or hindering
of humanitarian access particularly affects children.
They are also especially vulnerable to the destruction
of civilian infrastructure that provides basic services,
such as medical and educational facilities. My country
prioritizes those two issues because they have very
negative short- and long-term consequences and they
are an example of the multiple challenges faced in the
sphere of protection, humanitarian emergency services
and the development of peaceful societies.

In April, we organized a retreat focused on the
protection of health care in armed conflicts. We are
now working on a General Assembly initiative that will
contribute towards the implementation of resolution
2286 (2016). Moreover, we are signatories of the
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated
with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Lucens
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from
Military Use during Armed Conflict, the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, and the Safe
Schools Declaration.

In this regard, I would like to finish by saying
that I must remind the Council that Spain will host the
third Safe Schools Conference at the end of May 2019,
less than a year from now, following the conferences
previously organized by Norway and Argentina. We
will work to expand the number of countries that
support the Safe Schools Declaration and to deepen
best practices, including those focusing on women's
and girls' access to education.
Let me now conclude with a final point. The
Security Council and all Member States must make
use of all the tools at their disposal to ensure that
serious violations of children's rights are investigated,
that those responsible are identified, and that there is
accountability. I repeat: investigation, identification
and accountability. In our View, this is the best tool for
prevention, and it is the least that the victims deserve.

