Sheikh Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to observe that in this Chamber
today, there are two prominent sons of West Africa -
specifically of Ghana - who bear the responsibility of
high posts in the Organization: the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council. Both of them
have demonstrated courage, energy, vitality,

06-4607]
commitment and leadership in carrying out their
weighty responsibilities.

The topic before us today centres on the vital
region of West Africa and its quest for the
consolidation of peace. It is noteworthy that West
Africa and my own region share a common
denomination and are very much alike: both are rich in
human and natural resources, yet are consumed by
bloody conflict. Both regions have been denied the
peace and stability that are necessary for their peoples
to benefit from their riches.

Peoples and Governments in West Africa have
suffered greatly over the years in terms of death and
destruction, economic hardship, flows of refugees and
displaced persons, and much more. It is both heart-
warming and reassuring that the Vital region of West
Africa is now witnessing a resurgence of hope and
stability. West Africa is closer than ever to
consolidating regional peace. That achievement is, to a
large extent, the result of political will and
commitment at the national level, the support of
regional organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
African Union, and the successful efforts of the
Secretary-General, a citizen of West Africa. Moreover,
the summit of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to be held in Senegal in 2009 will give us
another opportunity to enhance the role of international
organizations in that regard.

It is extremely critical that the international
community support the Governments of Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau, Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia in their
difficult transition from a state of war to consolidating
the conditions for peace. We note with gratitude that
considerable progress has been made in both political
and constitutional terms, and we applaud the peoples
and the leadership of West Africa for that.

Yet diligence and success in the areas of politics
and governance do not by themselves lead to the
consolidation of peace, stability and human security.
Peace consolidation is a prerequisite for sustainable
peace. When the contemporary history of West Africa
is written, it must record not only the millions who
have died, but also the thousands who have been
displaced and the hundreds of instances of destroyed
infrastructure and property.
West Africans, in conjunction with the
international community, must create new roads to

06-4607]

stability and recovery; it is also essential that West
African States strive for social and economic
reconstruction. That is the essence of peace
consolidation. The journey to peace in West Africa will
be long and hazardous if the region is easily
destabilized. Therefore, utmost attention must be paid
the socio-economic dimensions of peace, in order to
prevent a recurrence of violence and further
destabilization.

Peace consolidation requires a creative approach
by the international community. The following are key
prerequisites for sustainable peace. New institutional
frameworks must be created to galvanize national
policy, in particular infrastructure and social
institutions that inculcate a sense of belonging and
responsibility towards family, community and country.
Secondly, human resource development in West
African countries must be reviewed, with a focus on
the central role of the family in enhancing social
integration, and addressing the critical issues of youth
unemployment, the brain drain, the hosting of refugees
by neighbouring States and refugee flows. Thirdly, a
creative look at rebuilding the education systems must
be undertaken within a national strategy of nation-
building. Finally, there must be a mechanism to
capitalize on peace initiatives and to support existing
regional activities and enhance coordination between
them and international peacebuilding mechanisms. A
partnership between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the West Africa Network for Peacebuilding is also
of utmost importance.

For all its current successes, West Africa needs
considerable financial support from the international
community at large, and particularly from the donor
community. It is not enough to allocate funds in the
areas of governance, the rule of law, the conduct of
free and fair elections and the promotion of democracy
and human rights. Peace consolidation requires the
mobilization of resources in social sectors such as
health, education and welfare. It is through those social
sectors that, when adequate financial resources are
allocated, we will be able to address the problems of
child soldiers, the disabled, orphans and refugees.
Addressing the needs of those social groups is a
strategic priority for the Governments of West Africa.
In this era of interdependence and globalization, the
developed countries have a moral obligation to assist in
such efforts.

This high-level open debate has once again
shown that the Security Council must recognize
education as a vital tool for enhancing and
consolidating peace, security and stability. It is time for
education to be part of a peace and security strategy,
and for it to assist in the transition of societies from
war to peace.

It is our hope and expectation that in years to
come West Africa will see a rising sun of possibilities
and a prosperous future for its peoples. The State of
Qatar has extensive relations with the countries of West
Africa and will strengthen its economic, political and
cultural ties in order to contribute to the consolidation
of peace in that region.

