Ms. Museminali (Rwanda): The Rwandan
delegation applauds the initiative of President Mbeki of
South Africa to strengthen the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union (AU), in the maintenance
of peace and international security. More particularly,
it could not have come at a more appropriate time than
at this moment, when people all over the world are
remembering the over 1 million Rwandans who lost
their lives 14 years ago in circumstances that could
have been prevented or halted later on. This forum thus
offers us an opportunity to review mechanisms by
which we can prevent and effectively intervene in
future conflicts in Africa and other parts of the world
with greater coherence and effectiveness.

What we need to do is direct our efforts towards
creating a mechanism that will address effective and
efficient coordination of both organizations in order to
deliver peace and security where it is needed most: in
conflict areas. AU member countries have taken up
their responsibility. They have shown goodwill and a
readiness and willingness to actively engage in
peacekeeping and security maintenance, mainly on the
African continent but also in other parts of the world.
What we expect from the Security Council, which is
mandated by the Charter to maintain international
peace and security, is the realistic, timely and
predictable provision of adequate resources to
accomplish those missions. Timely intervention has
been hampered by the inefficient provision of
resources, which in turn leads to missions being
ineffective.

AU member countries are capable of raising
sizable numbers of professional military and police
personnel for peacekeeping, but they are still largely
incapable of properly equipping them. The United
Nations therefore needs to agree to effectively maintain
its central role of sustaining peacekeeping forces in
conflict areas by equipping them effectively and by
making available the logistical support they need to
perform their duties.

In our view, this meeting offers us an opportunity
to forge a greater mutual partnership to address
regional conflicts by putting in place a joint team from
both organizations to work together to deal with
practical issues that have hampered our effectiveness in
the past. We are grateful that this has been provided for
in the draft resolution before the Council.

Greater participation by regional organizations in
conflict resolution needs to be tapped more and more,
given the fact that those regional organizations have
greater proximity to conflict areas and a better
appreciation of the political and cultural issues.
Therefore, it is urgent to institutionalize relations
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly the African Union, in the areas of conflict
resolution and peacekeeping by building the AU's
capacity to implement initiatives that are in fact
possible but that seem impossible at current resource
levels.

My delegation therefore wishes to propose, inter
alia, the following measures, some of which have
already been mentioned by other delegations. We wish
also to support all the proposals set out in the draft
resolution before the Council. These measures include
the following.

First, AU peace and security measures taken to
resolve conflicts should be considered pivotal and
should be reinforced and supported by the Security
Council.

Secondly, we feel that the United Nations should
work on more predictable ways to fund peacekeeping
operations. More reliable funding should be considered
through assessed contributions by Member States,
because we find that these resources are more
predictable and therefore facilitate better planning and
contribute to greater efficiency. Current fundraising
measures need to be reviewed.

Thirdly, as most African nations willing to
contribute to United Nations peacekeeping operations
do not have the matching resources, we feel that,
whenever regional organizations undertake peace and
security roles, the United Nations should work out
ways to immediately prepare light and heavy support
packages to ease the transition from operations by
regional organizations to United Nations operations, in
order to avoid the costly delays that have plagued some
of the missions in the region, such as those in Somalia
and Darfur. Consider how much the former African
Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) - the current African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) - would have been able to achieve with
better mobility, better logistics and well-paid, well-fed
forces provided with proper health care.

Rwanda is happy to contribute to the promotion
of international peace and security through its military
and police contributions to United Nations and African
Union peacekeeping missions in the Sudan, Liberia,
cote d'Ivoire, the Comoros and Haiti. We are
committed to continuing these contributions for as long
as they are required, and as our meagre financial
resources permit.

We are committed to this quest for a working
partnership to spread peace because, more than
anybody else, we have tasted the lack of peace and
security, and we know what the lack of peace means
for a country and a region. The failure to address the
threat posed by genocidal forces such as the members
of the former Rwandan Armed Forces and
Interahamwe, also known as the Forces de'mocratiques
de liberation du Rwanda, has perpetuated conflict in
the Great Lakes region. My delegation therefore
welcomes the recent adoption by the Security Council
of resolution 1804 (2008), which aims to address the
threat posed by those forces not only to Rwanda but
also to the entire Great Lakes region. Any delay in the
response to this threat undermines us all. It allows the
international supporters of those forces to increase
their activities of destabilization, which are manifested
in the current blatant activities and international
conferences aimed at genocide denial. Genocide denial,
as a last stage of the implementation of the genocidal
ideology, is a formidable threat to peace and security,
as it energizes perpetration.

We all need to watch out for masked political
manoeuvres aimed at undermining peace and stability.
This poses a serious threat to peace and security, and
we urge the Security Council and regional
organizations to discourage and deal with the threat.
Today in Rwanda we face a situation where, ironically,
those who stopped the 1994 genocide are being
labelled as perpetrators by those seeking to manipulate
the international system; these allegations are based on
misinformation provided by perpetrators still at large
or by their sympathizers.

Our painful experience in Rwanda taught us that
peace comes at a huge price. There can be no peace
without reconciliation and without recognition of the
rights and interests of all people, including the right of
States to exist and the right of self-determination. We
have learned that no community's rights can or should
supersede another's. We have learned the value of
sharing, the value of communities finding and
consciously forging ways to promote living side by
side in peace and mutual respect. It is these initiatives
that this joint meeting needs to recognize; it needs to
enhance mechanisms to help nurture and enhance long-
lasting peace and stability.

In conclusion, I express the hope that the
outcome of this meeting will be a firm and clear
mechanism to strengthen the mechanisms for
institutionalizing relations between the United Nations
and regional organizations, particularly the African
Union, in the crucial areas of conflict resolution and
peacekeeping. Once again, an opportunity is before us
to translate our many challenges and opportunities into
a shared destiny of peace, security and prosperity for
all.

