The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing. I would also
like to thank the Force Commanders of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations for their briefings on
the four subjects under consideration, which show the
difficult reality and operational challenges they face in
implementing their mandates.

I would like to refer specifically to the ability of a
peacekeeping operation to fully meet all the goals that
are assigned to it by the Security Council. Unfortunately,
we see that many of the current missions have serious
operational difficulties in fully accomplishing their
tasks. We must therefore ask ourselves why the missions
are facing these kinds of difficulties and what can be
done to remove them.

With respect to the reasons why, we can identify
various situations: Security Council mandates are not
sufficiently clear or achievable; the human resources
and equipment available for the missions often do not
correspond to the tasks assigned or to the reality on the
ground; the States or parties in control of the territory
where the operations are being carried out impose or
limit their full functionality through restrictions of
movement or bureaucratic obstacles or, among other
things, actions that constitute clear violations of
status-of-forces agreements; the collapse or lack of
an ongoing political process among the parties to a
conflict, which leaves peacekeeping operations without
room to manoeuvre and prevents them from being
able to fully carry out their tasks; or specific cases
of low staff performance or inadequate equipment,
which negatively affects the fulfilment of mandates. In
such situations, responsibility is shared between four
principal stakeholders - the Security Council, the
States or parties in control of the territory where the
operations take place, the troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. The Council has multiple
responsibilities for ensuring the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.

The design and deployment of peacekeeping
operations should always be guided by political
solutions, just as political momentum should always
be maintained. For that, the political strategies on
which peacekeeping operations are based must have
the support of a united Security Council. On the other
hand, even when the Security Council does present
a united front, the United Nations cannot do much if
the national actors do not show real commitment to a
peaceful settlement to the conflict.

Another responsibility of the Security Council is to
ensure that peacekeeping operations are more flexible,
that they have clear mandates based on appropriate
priorities and that they are able to adapt to changing
realities on the ground. We have seen efforts made
in that regard in the past few months in the renewals,
for example, of the mandates of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, which have
established tasks based on clearly defined priorities.

Much remains to be done, however. Also, once an
operation has deployed under its current mandate, it
is the host State's responsibility to ensure full respect
and compliance with the terms of the status of forces
agreement. The agreements protect the personnel
that countries voluntarily contribute to peacekeeping
operations and any violation of them prevents a mission
from functioning properly and is therefore unacceptable.

As a country that has participated actively in
numerous peacekeeping operations for many years,
Uruguay considers the responsibilities of troop- and
police-contributing countries extremely important,
since it is they who are doing the work on the ground
and implementing operational mandates. It is crucial
to ensure that peacekeepers are adequately equipped,
trained and prepared to carry out all the tasks in their
mandate. In that regard, issues such as the existence
of national restrictions - so-called caveats - that are
announced ahead of time or, worse, not announced; a
lack of effective command and control; refusals to obey
orders; failure to respond to attacks on civilians; and
inadequate equipment cannot be tolerated, since they
undermine the shared responsibility for the effective
fulfilment of mandates. That is why States signed
the Kigali Principles, and we urge the major troop-
contributing countries to review and abide by those
commitments, which are aimed at improving the quality
of troop contingents.

The Secretariat also has a crucial role to play in
providing advice and recommendations on compliance
with mandates and the necessary adjustments to be
made. We acknowledge the efforts that have been
made in this area, particularly through the preparation
of periodic reports on attacks on Blue Helmets or
violations of status of forces agreements.

In conclusion, I have a question for MONUSCO's
Force Commander. When the Mission's mandate was
renewed, on 31 March, a decision was made to reduce
the number of troops deployed. I would like to know the
Force Commander's views on what the consequences
have been for carrying out the Mission's mandate
considering the current instability in the country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the briefers to respond to
the questions and comments, starting with Mr. Lacroix.

