Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the pleasure to speak
on behalfofthe European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. The following countries align themselves with
this statement: Albania, Montenegro, Serbia, Turkey,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, which are
all candidate countries to join the European Union; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process

and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Georgia, Republic of Moldova and Ukraine.

Allow me to thank you, Sir, for having taken
this initiative and the good concept note (S/2016/428, annex).

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
explicitly recognizes and encourages the role ofregional
arrangements in peace and security and strengthening
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We very much welcome and support
the expansion and intensification of United Nations-
African Union (AU) peace and security cooperation
over the past 10 years since the launch of the Framework
for the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for
the AU in 2006. For its part, the European Union has
always been committed to effective multilateralism
and to intensifying its cooperation with the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union.

We have also invested in strong triangular
cooperation among the EU, the AU and the United
Nations to face immediate challenges and build
capacities in a comprehensive and long-term
perspective. The added value of that cooperation is
clearly illustrated by the results of our joint efforts
in Somalia, Mali and the Central African Republic,
as well as in other parts of Africa. We welcome the
recommendations of the United Nations reviews on
peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture and
resolution 1325 (2000), and expect that follow-up work
will include concrete steps to enhance the overall
effectiveness of the global security architecture, in
full recognition of the role of regional organizations
and the AU-United Nations partnership. The EU also
promotes the improvement of engagement of the United
Nations and regional organizations with civil society in
peacebuilding, conflict prevention and mediation.

Improved cooperation and coordination with and
among regional organizations is indeed a priority.
We are pleased, in that regard, with the long-standing
and fruitful partnership that we have developed with
the African Union. We strongly support the African
aspiration and commitment to ensuring peace, security
and stability on the continent, in the framework of the
African Peace and Security Architecture, in order to
improve the African capacity to prevent or respond
to crises, we are committed to operationalize the
multidimensional African Standby Force and recognize

the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises
as a transitional and complementary tool to the African
Standby Force for further enhancing the AU capacity
to respond rapidly to crises and reinforce the support to
the Continental Early Warning System.

Consultations were held last year to identify
common priorities for capacity-building support for
2016 to 2018. The EU also funded a command and
control coordination information system designed to
manage AU-led peace support operations, which will
be fully operational in 2017.

We also welcome the progress that has been made
to date in enhancing the capacity of the African Union
to manage crises on the continent. We value the positive
role that the African Union has played in the context of
several electoral crises on the continent and in recalling
very clearly the principles of the African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Good Governance. In that
context, we especially welcome and appreciate the
intense participation of African countries in peace
support operations on the continent - be it in United
Nations missions or hybrid or African Union-led
missions. Every day, like many others from around the
world, those peacekeepers are putting their lives at risk
to fight insurgents, protect civilians and try to prepare
the ground for peace. They deserve our support, and the
EU has been providing just that.

Within the framework of the EU's comprehensive
approach to tackling conflicts and its causes, and
building on the experiences of our Common Security
and Defence Policy missions and operations, such as
those in Mali, the Niger, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia and the Central African Republic,
the EU is committed to working in close collaboration
with Africa in the framework of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, in support of African-led
peace operations and, more generally, with African
efforts in such areas as security sector reform,
border management, peacebuilding or post-conflict
reconstruction or reconciliation, through the provision
of advice, mentoring and training.

The EU and its African partners have laid the
foundation for cooperation on a number of security
challenges with several regions in Africa - for
instance, in the Sahel, the Gulf of Guinea and the Horn
of Africa. They all address security threats and forms
of organized crime, including trafficking in arms,
drugs and persons and the issue of piracy.

On an institutional level, the EU Political and
Security Committee and AU Peace and Security
Councils hold an annual joint meeting and retreat,
where the two Councils have an opportunity to engage
in constructive dialogue on issues of mutual interest.
Regular contacts between the Chairs of the EU and
Councils also contribute to deepening the political
dialogue between the two bodies, which also undertook
a joint field visit to Mali last year. In that regard, we
welcome the regular meetings between the Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council.

The EU has provided substantial financial support
for African peace operations. In the 10 years since
2004, the EU has provided nearly €2 billion to AU-led
peace operations through its African Peace Facility,
by which, among others, we support the efforts of the
African Union Mission in Somalia against Al-Shabaab,
and the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism in
South Sudan led by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), as well as the multinational
joint task force against Boko Haram and the Economic
Community of West African States Security mission in
Guinea-Bissau.
Other EU instruments and programmes are
increasingly involved in that area, in particular the
eleventh European Development Fund Regional
Indicative Programme and the instrument contributing
to stability and peace, which supports regional mediation
efforts by IGAD in South Sudan and the East African
Community in Burundi. The EU's emergency response
mechanism is used to support early civilian and/or
military interventions such as ceasefire monitoring and
verification mechanisms. It recently helped fund the
deployment of AU human rights and military observers
in Burundi.

In July 2015, EU member States addressed the
sustainability challenges of the African Peace Facility.
They agreed on an increase to the African Peace Facility
envelope from €750 million to €900 million. A further
agreement was reached recently for €710 million to
ensure funding for the African Peace Facility for
the period 2016-2018. At the same time, the EU also
realized that it was necessary to gradually reorient our
support towards more practical, physical capacities such
as logistics and deployment, and decided to reorient
the African Peace Facility to that effect. That will not
suffice, however. Some of the new threats, such as the
fight against terrorist groups, will require significant
resources and take time. The situation warrants urgent

additional support from African and non-African
partners and the United Nations to effectively support
African-led peace support operations.

The African Peace and Security Architecture is
an African-owned process. Long-term sustainability
and African ownership are intrinsically linked. The
heavy dependence by the AU and African regional
organizations on international partners and on EU
funds limits African ownership and the establishment
of lasting African capacities to address Africa's
peace and security issues. The recent appointment of
the highly respected former President of the African
Development Bank, Mr. Donald Kaberuka, as AU High
Representative to the AU Peace Fund is an important sign
of the AU's commitment to tackle financial challenges.
Mr. Kaberuka visited Brussels last week, where he
exchanged views about his plans for the implementation
of financial commitments made by AU leaders at recent
AU summits and about his deliberations on setting up
the AU Peace Fund with sustainable and predictable
financing. We look forward to further cooperation with
Mr. Kaberuka in that regard.

In conclusion, we remain strongly committed to
an ever-stronger partnership with the AU, as well as
increased triangular cooperation among the EU, AU
and the United Nations, in order to fully achieve the
establishment of lasting African peace and security
capacities in full respect of African ownership.

