Mr. Rosenthal (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having invited me to participate
in this open debate of the Security Council and for
the concept note (S/2016/104, annex) that you have
presented to us. Speaking first in a personal capacity,
I am pleased to be back in the Chamber, where my last
appearance was as a representative of a Member State,
a little over two years ago.

I shall now speak on behalf of the seven members
of the Advisory Group of Experts.
(spoke in English)

In a five-minute statement, I can touch only on
some of the most salient features of what is now known
as the report (see S/2015/4990) of the Advisory Group
of Experts. As will be recalled, the report was initiated
by Member States through a joint resolution of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. That is
as it should be, because what we conventionally think
of as peacebuilding has roots in the mandates of not
only the Council but also of the two other principal
inter-governmental organs. We will also recall that the
review of the peacebuilding activities of the United
Nations contemplated two phases. Our report provides
the collective and unvarnished opinion of seven
independent specialists on how the United Nations
is performing its peacebuilding activities. Our rather
critical conclusions and recommendations are aimed
at improving that performance. What are our main
conclusions?

First, we need to rethink what we mean by
peacebuilding. Both of the previous briefers touched
upon that. In fact, in the agenda items of the Council the
term is always preceded by the adjective post-conflict.
In spite of the fact that the Council recognized as early
as 2001 that peacebuilding can and should occur during
the full cycle of conflict -before, during and post- we
keep addressing the matter as something that should
occur after the guns fall silent, which unfortunately has
meant its relegation to the end of the line in priority-
setting. We propose the term "sustainable peace" as
preferable and as the needed evolution in mindset,
but any other expression will do. The main point is
that the United Nations as a whole must put a much
greater accent on preventive measures. In fact, much
of the present peacebuilding efforts aim to address root
causes in the broader context of pre-empting a lapse or
relapse into violent conflict. The determination in 2005
was to ensure that such efforts became central. But we
found that, regrettably, that has not been the case.

Secondly, what makes that broader view somewhat
dysfunctional in relation to the present arrangements
regarding the purview of each of the principal
inter-governmental organs is that we seem to live in a
culture of virtual silos. As we all know, the Security
Council deals with international peace and security,
and the General Assembly and Economic and Social
Council address, among other aspects, issues that fall
in the domain of the human rights and development
pillars. But distinct areas of preventing conflict
or dealing with post-conflict situations fall within
the purview of different organs. In our report, we
stress the need for all three organs to discharge their
responsibilities in a coordinated and coherent manner,
each keeping within the confines of its mandates.
We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission, in its
capacity as an advisory body to all organs, can play
a key role in proposing how that coordination can be
brought about in operational and practical terms. Those
include regularly convening a broader array of actors
for inclusive conversations about the challenges of
sustaining peace over the longer-term and distilling
that advice for the use of all organs.

Thirdly, our discussions on peacebuilding centre
too much on the institutional and organizational
aspects in New York, when building sustainable peace
can happen only on the ground - where we found that,
in spite of some progress achieved towards delivering
as one, the United Nations still faces very serious
challenges in enhancing its effectiveness and relevance.

Fourthly - and this is something obvious, but
not always sufficiently understood - reconciliation,
capacity-building, institution-building and strategic
planning can take only place in situ, led by domestic
stakeholders through what we call inclusive national
ownership. The United Nations can enable, but it cannot
build, peace on its own.

Fifthly, the United Nations is usually not the only,
or even often the most important, external actor in
peacebuilding situations. It must improve its capacity
to partner with regional organizations, as well as
with bilateral and multilateral financial institutions.
It must also interact with non-State actors that are
present at the request of the host Government and with
domestic stakeholders.

Sixthly, peacebuilding requires long-term development
financing, which will invariably be a good investment
owing to its intrinsic benefits and to the degree that it
contributes to preventing conflicts. The United Nations
will not be called upon to be a source of significant
financial assistance, but clearly it can be hugely
important as a catalyst for such assistance, especially
through more intense use of the Peacebuilding Fund.

Finally, the report includes numerous specific
recommendations to round out the points I have
mentioned, but I cannot delve into those owing to
the lack of time. I should mention, however, that our
recommendations are not limited to the institutions
established in 2005; they cover as well detailed
policies to make the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office useful elements in a systemic approach on
the part of the United Nations to achieve what we
call sustainable peace. I should end by stating that
our conceptual framework is very much consistent
with Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). In
other words, we place peacebuilding in the broader
context of the United Nations central mission.

