Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin my statement today by thanking Ukraine
for organizing this open debate and by congratulating it
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish it every success. We also thank the
briefers for their statements. In Jordan we too welcome
the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) today, which
will undoubtedly represent an important addition to the
current state of work in combating terrorism in general
and in increasing protection for critical infrastructure
in particular.

Terrorism continues to be one of the most important
threats to world peace and security. The horrendous
attacks around the world by entities such as Da'esh and
the growing phenomemon of foreign fighters are proof
of the global nature of terrorism, which now targets
critical infrastructure as well as individuals. We have
seen the targeting of tourist sites and airports, seaports,
oil facilities, energy plants, water facilities, bridges and
roads and information systems. These all directly impact
other service sectors and lead to a situation of fear and
distrust towards State institutions. Therefore we cannot
separate the protection of critical infrastructure from
the general framework of countering terrorism, and we
must protect infrastructure as an integral part of all
efforts aimed at improving security and the protection
of all potential targets.

That should be done by implementing the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in addition
to including and developing national plans on counter-
terrorism to include protection of critical infrastructure.
In that context, we must emphasize the importance of
strengthening international and regional cooperation
in responding to that threat, and of protecting lives
and infrastructure more effectively through moving
forward in developing the mechanisms that could
build capacities in countries so that they can protect
their infrastructure, and through sharing information,
experience and intelligence between the United Nations
and other organizations, such as INTERPOL.

In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
Secretary-General in establishing an office for
countering terrorism. We hope that it will strengthen
United Nations efforts, increase their coherence
in countering terrorism and guarantee a balanced
implementation of the United Nations Strategy. We
reiterate the importance of continuing the Working
Group on Infrastructure Protection so that it can
continue to support countries to combat terrorism in an
international context, by activating public and private
sector partnerships and by developing an expert panel
on information systems in this connection.

We believe that human resources are the most
important factor in countering terrorism and protecting
infrastructure from armed attacks or through social
networks. In alliance with NATO, Jordan heldaworkshop
on investing in human resources as a most important
priority to counter terrorism through spreading values
of coexistence and tolerance, particularly in the minds
and hearts of youth.

In conclusion, I emphasize Jordan's continued
approach to counter-terrorism in seeking to uproot
terrorism from its sources. We have always emphasized
the importance of increasing cooperation among
all parties to confront this scourge, because we are
convinced that terrorism can be eliminated only
through a common international effort and the sincere
political will of all parties.

