Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey
Feltman and Ambassador Adamson for their briefings
today. We would also like to thank Permanent
Representative of Italy Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi
and the team working with him this year for the
impeccable work they have carried out as Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

Bolivia echoes the statement of the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2017/1030) that the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is the best
way to ensure the exclusively peaceful nature of the
nuclear programme of the Islamic Republic of Iran. We
are pleased to learn about the progress detailed in this
fourth report on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), in particular that the Islamic Republic of Iran
has been fulfilling its nuclear-related commitments
under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, as well as
confirmation that Iran continued to provisionally apply
the Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement.

Bolivia underscores that, since the JCPOA is
recognized as a genuine success story of multilateral
diplomacy and cross-cutting dialogue among the parties
involved, it should be implemented in a constructive
environment based on mutual respect. Likewise,
the parties must refrain from unilaterally applying
sanctions outside the scope of the JCPOA, since such
sanctions could directly affect the implementation of
the agreement.

Moreover, the delegation of Bolivia is pleased
to learn that the European Union is upholding its
commitment with regard to the full and effective
implementation of all parts of the JCPOA, which is a
positive addition to the statements by other Member
States in support of the Plan.

It is encouraging that since 20 June - the date when
the previous report (S/2017/515) was submitted - eight
new proposals have been put forward to undertake or
allow initiatives with the Islamic Republic of Iran for
civilian purposes, both nuclear and non-nuclear, in
compliance with the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General. Therefore, we urge Member States to
make greater efforts to promote appropriate information
on the procedures of the Procurement Channel.

Bolivia is convinced that, in order for the JCPOA
to fulfil all of its intended objectives, all parties must
diligently comply with their obligations, especially to
foster trust among the parties involved. Non-compliance
by any of the parties to the Plan will set a negative
precedent and could undermine the chances for
reaching any agreement on non-proliferation in future.
As on previous occasions, Bolivia expresses its desire
for future reports to also make reference to annex A,
since both annexes are integral and complementary in
effectively implementing resolution 2231 (2015).

Finally, as a pacifist nation, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia reaffirms its commitment to preventive
diplomacy, multilateralism, non-interference and
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of States, based on the understanding that
those are universal principles recognized by the
international community.

