Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
listened attentively to today's briefings.

Under the leadership of President Touadera, the
political process in the Central African Republic
has recently made positive progress, but the security
situation in the country remains fragile. There are
still violent clashes between armed groups and the
realization of lasting peace and stability in the Central
African Republic continues to face challenges. China
welcomes the efforts of the Government of the Central
African Republic to strengthen the deployment of
national security forces, advance security sector reform
and enhance capacity-building. We call on parties in
the Central African Republic to proceed based on the
interests of the country and its people to concretely
advance disarmament and the peace and reconciliation
process and resolve differences through dialogue
and consultation.

China appreciates the important role of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
in maintaining stability in the Central African
Republic and supports the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
and the whole of MINUSCA in actively fulfilling
their mandates and carrying out their activities.
China also supports MINUSCA in enhancing its self-
defence, security and early-warning capabilities. The
Secretariat should fully heed the legitimate concerns of
the troop- and police-contributing countries and take
concrete and effective measures to ensure the safety of
the peacekeepers in order to improve the effectiveness
of MINUSCA.

China notes the Secretary-General's assessment of
the work of MINUSCA and the relevant recommendation
of adjustment in his latest report (S/2018/922). We will
actively participate in the consultations on relevant
draft resolutions of the Security Council and will
play a constructive role. Regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the
Economic Community of Central African States, as
well as the countries of the region, all play an important
role in advancing the peace process in the Central
African Republic. The United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, such as the African
Union, should strengthen their coordination with
the Government of the Central African Republic to
promote peace, reconciliation and dialogue and jointly
help the Central African Republic to realize peace
and development at an early date. China calls on the
international community to continue to provide support
to the Government of the Central African Government
in its efforts to enhance national capacity-building and
provide necessary assistance to the Government in its
efforts to maintain social security and stability, deal
with the humanitarian crisis and resolve the root causes
of the conflict.

