Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like, in turn, to welcome the presence
of the President of the Republic of Djibouti, Mr. Ismail
Omar Guelleh, in our discussion and to thank him for
his address. I also wish to thank our colleague, the
Ambassador of Eritrea, Mr. Desta, for the presentation
that he has just made spelling out his country's
position.

Belgium shares the concern of the Republic of
Djibouti in the face of the complete absence of any
progress since the clashes with Eritrea last June.
Belgium also welcomes the moderation and restraint
that the Republic of Djibouti has shown thus far, and
we encourage it to continue to adopt that approach.

In June, our Council condemned the military
action conducted by Eritrea in Ras Doumeira and on
Doumeira Island. At the same time, it encouraged both
States to cooperate by offering the assistance of the
United Nations, potentially in cooperation with the
other offers, particularly from the African Union and
the League of Arab States.

Eritrea refused that dialogue with Djibouti, and
that is what has led Djibouti to bring the issue before
our Council. Today, we are forced to note that Eritrea
seems no more inclined to engage in dialogue with the
United Nations, the African Union, the League of Arab
States or any other mediator.

Eritrea tells us that it is not occupying any parcel
of Djibouti territory, unlike its Ethiopian neighbour,
which is occupying large areas of Eritrea across a
border very precisely delineated by an arbitral
decision.

Last July, the United Nations decided to withdraw
from the border between Ethiopia and Eritrea, having
been unable to help the two States to find common
ground, despite having left no stone unturned to
achieve that. Here too, neither the good offices of the

Secretary-General nor the constructive proposals
presented to the parties by the Security Council were
able to make any progress. Rather than building on an
arbitral ruling in its favour, Eritrea chose the path of
isolation.

Eritrea is a Member State of this Organization
and must, therefore, comply with its obligations under
the Charter. The peaceful settlement of disputes and the
non-use of the threat of or the use of force lie at its
very core. There is a need to remind Eritrea that those
obligations are the counterpart of its rights and
privileges as a Member of the Organization.

Even if a solution to the border dispute with
Ethiopia could, we all agree, stand to benefit the whole
of the Horn of Africa, there can be no question of
linking that dispute with that with Djibouti. For
Ethiopia, an arbitral ruling exists, and the recognized
solution is to implement that ruling following a very
precise road map. For Djibouti, there would be merit to
delineating the border carefully, and our Council
should invite the parties to start such a process.

There will be no solution without dialogue.
Therefore, Eritrea must be invited to accept such a
dialogue and to establish the necessary conditions for it
as soon as possible. Our Council should revisit that
issue.

Insofar as four months have passed since the June
presidential statement, it is our duty to spare no effort
to ensure that calm rapidly returns to that hotbed of
tension.

Belgium continues to believe that the hand held
out to Eritrea by the international community will in
the end be seized for the good of the people of that
region, which is well understood. However, to achieve
that, the Council will have to continue to involve itself
and the Secretary-General will have to step up his
efforts, so as to establish the conditions for that
normalization.

