Mr. Vamos-Goldman (Canada): I would like to
join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Annabi for his
briefing.

First, I would like to express Canada's
condolences over the lives lost in the recent flooding in
East and West Timor and to congratulate the joint
efforts of aid agencies, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
Indonesian Government.

Turning to the issue of refugees, we are
encouraged by the decision of the Indonesian
Government to establish a transitional period beyond
its 31 March 2000 deadline for the return of East
Timorese refugees in West Timor. Canada believes that
the early and voluntary return of these refugees or their
permanent resettlement in Indonesia is necessary for
their own security and for the stability of both East and
West Timor.

While refugees continue to register to return to
East Timor, we are concerned by the increasingly slow
pace of this process resulting from the frailty of
essential services and infrastructures in returnee
communities, the unresolved question of pensions
owed to former East Timorese civil servants and the
continuing presence of militia and related
misinformation campaigns in the camps of West Timor.

We welcome the recent establishment by the
Indonesian Government of a panel to investigate the
allegations of human rights violations in East Timor
raised by the Indonesian Commission of Inquiry into
Human Rights Violations in East Timor and by United
Nations reports. It is important that the findings of
these reports be investigated and prosecuted by
independent and impartial judicial processes, consistent
with international legal standards. It is equally
important that those responsible for atrocities in East
Timor be held accountable. In this regard, we also
welcome the recent memorandum of understanding
between UNTAET and the Indonesian Government,
which provides for mutual assistance in investigating
human rights violations.

Finally, like previous speakers, I should like to
note the progress made by UNTAET to date in spite of
difficulties on the ground. Canada supports UNTAET's
strategy of consulting and involving the East Timorese
closely in the rebuilding and administration of the
territory. In this regard, we are encouraged by the
recent decision to establish district advisory councils,
which will bring together representatives from East
Timorese civil society and the United Nations
Transitional Administration at the local level.

