Mr. Prosor (Israel): Let me begin by thanking
you personally, Madam President, for your outstanding
leadership of the Security Council this month.

Churchill once said that in the time it takes a lie
to get halfway around the world, the truth is still
getting its pants on. In the barren deserts of the Middle
8

East, myths find fertile ground to grow wild. Facts
often remain buried in the sand. The myths forged in
our region travel abroad - and can find their way,
surprisingly, even into this Chamber. I would like to
use today's debate as an opportunity to address just a
few of the myths that have become a permanent
hindrance to our discussion of the Middle East here at
the United Nations.

Myth number one is that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is the central conflict in the Middle East. If
you solve that conflict, you have solved all the other
conflicts in the region. Make no mistake; it is
important for Israel and the Palestinians to find a
resolution to our long-standing conflict for its own
merits. Yet the truth is that conflicts in Syria, Yemen,
Egypt, Bahrain and many other parts of the Middle
East have absolutely nothing to do with Israel.

It is obvious that resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict will not stop the persecution of minorities
across the region, end the subjugation of women or
heal sectarian divides. Obsessing over Israel has not
stopped Al-Assad's tanks from flattening entire
communities. On the contrary, it has only distracted
attention from his crimes. Even this morning's debate
has lost any sense of proportion. Thousands are being
killed in Syria, hundreds in Yemen and dozens in Iraq.
Yet, this debate once again is repeatedly and
obsessively focused on the legitimate actions of the
Government of the only democracy in the Middle East.

Dedicating the majority of this debate to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, month after month, has not
stopped the Iranian regime's centrifuges from spinning.
Iran's ambitions for nuclear weapons are the single
greatest threat to the Middle East and the entire world.
The Iranian nuclear programme continues to advance at
the speed of an express train. The international
community's efforts to stop it are moving at the pace of
the local train, pausing and stopping at every station
for some nations to get on and off. The danger of
inaction is clear. We cannot allow the diplomatic
channel to provide another avenue for the Iranian
regime to stall for more time, as it inches closer and
closer to a nuclear weapon.

Myth number two is that there is a humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip. In fact, numerous international
organizations have said clearly that there is no
humanitarian crisis in Gaza, including the deputy head
of the Red Cross office in the area. Gaza's real gross
12-30484
domestic product grew by more than 25 per cent during
the first three quarters of 2011. Exports are expanding.
International humanitarian projects are moving forward
at a rapid pace. There is not a single civilian good that
cannot enter Gaza today. Yet, as aid flows into the area,
missiles fly out. That is the crisis in Gaza, and that is
what keeps Gaza from realizing its real potential.

It is a simple equation. If it is calm in Israel, it
will be calm in Gaza. But the people of Gaza will face
hardship as long as terrorists use them as human
shields to rain rockets down on Israeli cities. Each
rocket in Gaza is armed with a warhead capable of
causing a political earthquake that would extend well
beyond Israel's borders. It will take only one rocket
landing in the wrong place at the wrong time to change
the equation on the ground. If that happens, Israel's
leaders will be forced to respond in a completely
different manner. It is time for everyone in the
Chamber to finally wake up to that dangerous reality.
The Security Council has not condemned a single
rocket attack from Gaza. History's lessons are clear.
Today's silence is tomorrow's tragedy.

Myth number three is that settlements are the
primary obstacle to peace. How many times have we
heard that argument in this Chamber? Just this month,
the Human Rights Council proposed yet another fact-
finding mission to Israel. It will explore - surprise,
surprise - Israeli settlements.

Today I would like to save the Human Rights
Council and the international community some time
and energy. The facts have already been found. They
are plain for all to see. The fact is that, from 1948 to
1967, the West Bank was part of Jordan and Gaza was
part of Egypt. The Arab world did not lift a finger to
create a Palestinian State, and it sought Israel's
annihilation when not a single settlement stood
anywhere in the West Bank or Gaza. The fact is that in
2005, when I was Director General of Israel's Foreign
Service, we took every settlement out of Gaza and got
only rockets on our cities in return. The fact is that the
Israeli Government put in place an unprecedented
10-month moratorium on settlements. The Palestinian
leadership used that gesture as an opportunity to take
Israel and the international community on another ride
to nowhere. For nine of those 10 months, it rejected the
moratorium as insufficient, and then demanded that we
extend it. As former United States Special Envoy
George Mitchell said, "What had been less than
12-30484
worthless a few months earlier became indispensable
to continue negotiations" to the Palestinians.

The primary obstacle to peace is not settlements.
The primary obstacle to peace is the so-called claim of
return and the Palestinians' refusal to recognize Israel's
right to exist as the nation State of the Jewish people.
We will never hear Palestinian leaders say "two States
for two peoples". We will not hear them say "two
States for two peoples" because today the Palestinian
leadership is calling for an independent Palestinian
State, but insists that its people return to the Jewish
State. That would mean the destruction of Israel.

Some might say, "Oh Ambassador, but the
Palestinians know that they will have to give up that
claim; that is what they whisper quietly at the
negotiating table". The Palestinian leadership has never
said publicly - either to the Palestinian people, to the
Arab world, to the international community, or to
anyone else - that it will give up the so-called claim
of return. Since the Palestinian leadership refuses to
tell the Palestinian people the truth, the international
community has the responsibility and duty to tell them
the truth. The international community has a duty to
stand up and say that the so-called claim of return is a
non-starter.

Instead of telling the Palestinian people the truth,
much of the international community stands idle as the
Arab world tries to erase the Jewish people's historical
connection to the land of Israel. Across the Arab world,
and even at this table, we hear claims that Israel is
"Judaizing Jerusalem". To my mind, those accusations
come about 3,000 years too late. It is like accusing the
National Basketball Association of Americanizing
basketball.

Like many nations around this table, the Jewish
people have a proud, age-old legacy of kings and
queens. In our case, however, the tradition goes back a
few years earlier. Since King David laid the
cornerstone of his palace in the tenth century BC,
Jerusalem has served as the heart of our faith.

In debate after debate, speakers sit in this
Chamber and say that Israel is committing ethnic
cleansing in Jerusalem, even though the percentage of
Arab residents in the city has grown from 26 per cent
to 35 per cent since 1967.

The holiest sites in Jerusalem, the eternal capital
of the Jewish people, were closed only to Jews from

1948 until 1967. Everyone could come to see those
sites except Jews. There was absolutely no freedom of
worship. The world did not say a word about the
situation in Jerusalem at that time. Since Israel unified
the city, it has thrived under the values of tolerance and
freedom. For the first time in centuries, sacred places
that were once sealed off along religious lines are now
permanently open for worship by all peoples. That is a
principle grounded in our values, our actions and our
laws.

There is another great truth that the Organization
has completely overlooked for the past 64 years. In all
of the pages that the United Nations has written about
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in all of its reports and
fact-finding commissions, and in all the hours
dedicated to debate about the Middle East, there is one
great untold story. Or, to be more specific, there are
more than 850,000 untold stories.

More than 850,000 Jews have been uprooted from
their homes in Arab countries during the past 64 years.
Those were vibrant communities dating back 2,500
years. On the banks of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers,
Babylonian Jewry produced many of Judaism's holiest
books and thrived for two millenniums. In the great
synagogues and libraries of Cairo, Jews preserved the
intellectual and scientific treasures of antiquity into the
Renaissance. From Aleppo to Aden to Alexandria, Jews
stood out as some of the greatest artists, musicians,
businessmen, and writers. All those communities were
wiped out. Age-old family businesses and properties
were confiscated. Jewish quarters were destroyed.
Pogroms left synagogues looted, graveyards desecrated
and thousands dead.

The pages that the United Nations has written
about the Palestinian refugees could fill up soccer
stadiums, but not a drop of ink has been spilled about
the Jewish refugees. Out of over 1,088 United Nations
resolutions on the Middle East, one will not find a
single syllable regarding the displacement of Jewish
refugees. There have been more than 172 resolutions
exclusively devoted to Palestinian refugees, but not
one dedicated to Jewish refugees. The Palestinian
refugees have their own United Nations agency, their
own information programme, and their own department
within the United Nations. None exists for the Jewish
refugees. The expression "double standard" does not
even begin to describe that gap. That discrepancy is
very convenient for some in this Chamber, but it is not
right.

The time has come for the United Nations to end
its complicity in trying to erase the stories of 850,000
people from history. The time has also come to speak
openly in these halls about the Arab world's role in
maintaining the Palestinians as refugees for more than
six decades. Jews from Arab countries came to refugee
camps in Israel, which eventually gave birth to thriving
towns and cities. Refugee camps in Arab countries
gave birth to more Palestinian refugees. Israel
welcomed its Jewish refugees with citizenship and
unlocked their vast potential. As they rose to the
highest levels of society, our refugees lifted the State of
Israel to new heights.

Let us imagine if Arab countries had done the
same with their Palestinian refugees. Instead, they have
cynically perpetuated their status as refugees,
generation after generation. Across the Arab world,
Palestinians have been denied citizenship, rights and
opportunities. Those are facts that must be neither
forgotten nor overlooked as we look to moving forward
on the path to peace.

I have saved the most obvious myth for last -
the myth that peace between Israelis and Palestinians
can somehow be achieved by bypassing direct
negotiations. History has shown that peace and
negotiations are inseparable. Direct negotiations are
the only tool, the only way and the only path to
creating two States for two peoples. Last January in
Amman, Israel offered a clear proposal for restarting
direct negotiations. We presented the Palestinian
delegation with negotiating positions on every major
issue separating the parties.

That proposal, filled with Israel's vision for
peace, continues to gather dust as Palestinian leaders
continue to pile up new pre-conditions for sitting down
with Israel. They are everywhere except at the
negotiating table. It is time for them to give up
unilateral efforts to internationalize the conflict and to
take up the real path to peace.

This week, we will observe the two most
significant public holidays in Israel: our Day of
Remembrance and our Day of Independence. On
Wednesday, sirens will sound across Israel. For two
minutes, everything will come to a halt. People will
stop in their tracks, cars will pull over to the side of
highways, and the entire country will pause to
remember the more than 22,000 Israelis who have been
killed by wars and terrorism in our nation's short
history in our region.

On Thursday, we will celebrate the rebirth of the
Jewish nation and our 64 years as a free people in our
ancient homeland. Against persistent threats and
overwhelming odds, Israel has not only survived but
thrived. I walk the halls of the Organization tall and
proud of my extraordinary nation of just 7 million
people, which has produced 10 Nobel Prize laureates,
sends satellites up into space, puts electric cars on the
road and develops the technology needed to run
everything from cell phones to solar panels to medical
devices.

We intentionally commemorate these two days
one after the other. As we, the Israeli people, celebrate
our independence, we carry the heavy weight of great
sacrifice and suffering. The lesson we take from these
days is clear. We can never turn a blind eye to the
dangers around us. We cannot pretend that we live in a
stable region filled with Jeffersonian democracies. But
there is another lesson that will fill the hearts of
Israelis this week. We can never, ever give up the hope
of lasting peace. The price of conflict is too high. The
evil of war is too great. That is the fundamental truth
that guides our leaders.

In the dangerous uncertainty of a turbulent
Middle East, the Security Council has never had a
greater responsibility to separate myth from truth and
fact from fiction. The clarity of candour has never been
more valuable. The need for honest disclosure has
never been clearer. It is time for the Council to sweep
out the cobwebs of old illusions and to plant the seeds
for a truly open debate on the Middle East. The
challenges before us demand nothing less.

