Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (spoke in Arabic): I start my statement by extending to you, Sir,
on behalf of my delegation, our congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We thank you for convening
this open meeting. We would also like to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby of Norway,
for his excellent conduct of the work of the Council
during the month of March.

A few days ago, the Council considered the
serious situation resulting from the reoccupation by
Israeli forces of the territories of the Palestinian
Authority, their barbaric practices and their siege of the
resistance hero, President Yasser Arafat. It was
possible to adopt resolution 1402 (2002), which called
for Israeli withdrawal from all territories under the
authority of the Palestinian Authority, in accordance
with agreements signed between the Israeli and
Palestinian parties. It also called upon Israel to lift the
siege on President Yasser Arafat and to return to the
negotiating table. That was an expression by the
Council of its responsibility to play its full role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Now
more than ever before it must shoulder its
responsibility and fulfil its duty in accordance with its
Charter mandate.

The stifling siege of the Palestinian people in the
occupied territories exposes the lives of innocent
women, children and elderly people to a tragic
humanitarian catastrophe that should be rejected and
resisted by all possible means. My country demands a
full and immediate withdrawal by Israeli forces, a
return to the Madrid framework and the unconditional
implementation of all resolutions of international
legitimacy, particularly Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

I would also like to reiterate the need for
international observers to protect the unarmed
Palestinian people. The Government and the people of
Mauritania express their total solidarity with the
brotherly, heroic people of Palestine, which is
struggling for its legitimate inalienable rights, and with
the Palestinian Authority under the leadership of
President Yasser Arafat - may God protect him.

President Arafat has repeatedly been asked to
take further measures while he is under siege and
without water or power; this represents total disregard
for Arab and Islamic feelings. This seriously
deteriorating situation, which threatens peace and
security in the entire region, requires immediate
Security Council measures to implement its
resolutions, particularly resolution 1402 (2002), which
the Council adopted last Saturday.

