Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I should like to thank Ambassador Takasu
for his briefing on the progress in the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) over the 90-day reporting
period. We should like to thank him for his efforts
since he assumed the Chairmanship of the Committee.

China has always supported the international
non-proliferation regime. We are opposed to nuclear
proliferation and do not wish to see any new instability
in the Middle East. China is in favour of the peaceful
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue through
diplomatic negotiations.

Recently, there have been new developments on
the Iranian nuclear issue. It has been noted that Iran

09-642 1 7
has various views regarding the supply of nuclear fuel
for the Tehran research reactor. However, the path
towards a resolution of the issue is not completely
blocked. Iran is still willing to engage in further
consultations with the parties concerned to resolve the
issue together. This shows that there is still the
possibility that the diplomatic efforts of the
international community will see talks resume. That
may require more time and patience on all parts.

We also note that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) recently adopted a new resolution on
the Iranian nuclear issue. We support the IAEA's
playing a larger and more constructive role in order to
properly resolve the Iranian nuclear issue and to
promptly resume negotiations. We also hope that the
parties concerned will strengthen the dialogue and
cooperation with the IAEA and avoid taking further
action that could complicate the present situation.

We believe that resolving the Iranian nuclear
issue through diplomatic negotiations is the best
option. It is also in the common interest of the
international community. In the current circumstances,
it is particularly important that the parties concerned
continue to be patient and to exercise restraint so as to
leave sufficient time and space for the ongoing
diplomatic efforts.

We hope that the relevant Security Council
resolutions on this issue will be effectively
implemented. China will continue to participate
actively in the work of the 1737 Committee. We will
support and cooperate with the efforts of the Chair of
the Committee and work to ensure that the Committee
plays a constructive role in the due handling of the
Iranian nuclear issue.

