Mr. Machimura (Japan): I thank you very much,
Madam, for convening this important meeting today
under the Philippines presidency.

In the fight against terrorism, there are three
important areas in which the international community
must intensify its efforts.
First, priority must be placed on the strengthening
of measures to prevent terrorist acts. For its part, Japan
adopted an action plan for the prevention of terrorism
last December and is in the process of reviewing both
its legal institutions and Government practices.

Secondly, it is important to enhance international
legal frameworks, as well as to improve our domestic
legal system. Tomorrow, Prime Minister Koizumi will
sign the International Convention for the Suppression
of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism here at the United
Nations. I call upon all Member States to show their
utmost flexibility so as to ensure the early conclusion
of the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism.

Thirdly, we must increase assistance for capacity-
building against terrorism.

I believe that the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, has the capacity to play a greater role
in each of those areas, as exemplified by the resolution
adopted today.

Resolving the conflicts in Africa is a global
challenge. In that regard, Japan welcomes the
establishment of a proposed peacebuilding
commission. We hope that the commission will be able
to play an invaluable role in ensuring seamless
assistance in post-conflict situations. Japan completely
concurs on the importance of having a comprehensive,
all-inclusive strategy, as stressed in today's Council
resolution.

I would also like to stress the importance of the
concept of human security, which Japan has been
advocating for some time. The perspective of human
security, which focuses on fully developing the human
potential of individuals and local communities, is
indispensable as an integral part of the needed
comprehensive strategy. Moreover, human security is
an important guiding principle in transitional
situations.

Let me also take this opportunity to formally
announce that Japan, under the auspices of the Tokyo
International Conference on African Development, will
soon hold an international conference on issues arising
in post-conflict situations in Africa. I am sure that the
conference will contribute to enhancing discussions on
ensuring the smooth transition from post-conflict to
reconstruction and development.

In addressing such global challenges as anti-
terrorism and conflict prevention in Africa, the
Security Council must play a key role. To that end, the
Council needs to be reformed so that it can reflect
today's realities. I would like to conclude my remarks
by stressing that Japan will continue to make every
effort to realize Security Council reform.

