Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency, and I
would like to wish you the greatest success. You can
count on our full cooperation. I would also like to
express our gratitude and extend our warm regards to
Ambassador Levitte and his entire team for the
excellent manner in which they conducted our work
last month. Also, I would like to thank the delegation
of the United Kingdom for having introduced this draft
resolution and for the leadership displayed in the
efforts to find a peaceful solution to the conflict in
Sierra Leone.

Argentina fully supports this draft resolution. It is
not designed to punish the Government of Sierra
Leone. On the contrary, it is directed against the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and is a clear-cut
measure to safeguard the legitimate interests of the
people of Sierra Leone. Setting up a fully operational
certificate of origin regime for Sierra Leone diamonds
is consonant with this purpose and with the ultimate
objective of bringing about a peaceful and lasting
solution to the conflict in Sierra Leone.

Therefore, Argentina trusts that this draft
resolution will help to achieve a two-fold purpose. On
the one hand, it will protect the legitimate resources of
the people of Sierra Leone; on the other, it will prevent
a situation in which resources generated by illegal
traffic in Sierra Leone diamonds continues to fuel the
armed conflict in that country.

We appeal for the contents of this resolution to be
fully implemented, as well as paragraph 2 of resolution
1132 (1997) on the arms embargo and travel
restrictions. It is only through concerted efforts within
the international community, including the
neighbouring countries in particular, that it will be
possible to break the illegal traffic in arms and
diamonds - the damaging impact of which is familiar
to all of us - throughout the region.

We appeal to the Government of Sierra Leone to
set up as soon as possible a certificate of origin regime
for Sierra Leone diamonds that will be fully
operational and effective. We are convinced that
countries with long experience in this field will provide
the necessary assistance to this end.

Argentina supports the principle of clear
limitations on sanctions regimes and the need for
periodic review of sanctions regimes. This is why we
are particularly satisfied to see both principles
enshrined in this text. However, in this particular case,
where the prescriptive measures were expressly
requested by the Government of Sierra Leone and
target a rebel movement notorious for its unusual
cruelty against the civilian population, we would have
preferred the initial period to be rather longer, since
this, in our opinion, would have made the regime more
functional and effective.

