Mr. Alasania (Georgia): First of all, I should like
to express my appreciation for the convening of this
meeting. I should also like to extend my thanks to the
representatives of the Department of Political Affairs
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for
their briefings.

My request to the President of the Security
Council was forced by the illegal, unilateral actions of
3
the Russian Federation with regard to two Georgia
provinces, namely, Abkhazia, Georgia, and South
Ossetia, Georgia. On 26 August 2008, the President of
Russia, Mr. Medvedev, made a statement on the
recognition of the independence of the so-called
republics of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, created on
the territories occupied by the Russian forces. By
recognizing the independence of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia, the Russian Federation is violating and
violated the principles of the equal rights of self-
determination of peoples, non-interference in the
internal affairs of another State and respect for human
rights and the fundamental freedoms enshrined in the
United Nations Charter and the Helsinki Final Act,
which constitute the foundational principles of
international law.

Russia acted in contravention of the principles
and values that the Organization was designed to
protect in order to ensure the independence and
integrity of its Members. The Russian Federation's
decision to formally recognize the independence of
Georgia's breakaway regions is a breach of the
fundamental norms and principles of international law
regarding the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
inviolability of State frontiers.

Russia's actions directly contradict all the
resolutions on Georgia adopted by the Security Council,
and Russia, as a member of the Council, has consistently
reaffirmed the commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders. The
unilateral declaration of independence and its recognition
are incompatible with the provisions of the Helsinki Final
Act, which clearly specified the principles of the
inviolability of the frontiers and the territorial integrity of
States and allowed changes to State frontiers only in
accordance with international law, by peaceful means and
as the result of an agreement.

After all, these acts are manifestly illegal and
irrelevant by virtue of their unilateral nature. Any
State, any subject of international law, any responsible
actor in international relations must show valour in the
face of Russian pressure, to which they will definitely
be subjected. The international community has already
expressed and continues to express its strong
condemnation with regard to the measures Russia has
taken. We appreciate that unanimous support, and we
believe that the Russian side should be sent a very
strong message. Otherwise, it would mean that foreign
sponsored groups around the world could use violence
and ethnic cleansing to achieve their ends and be
rewarded with independence.

I am sure that the Russian side, after its military
aggression and against invasion of a sovereign State,
will cynically appeal to the same universally accepted
principles and norms to which I have referred. But we
are accustomed to the fact that the Russian Federation
puts its own spin on the facts. Despite that, I would
like the Council to focus on what brought us to the
situation that we are witnessing today.

In the process of gaining independence from the
colonial regime of the Soviet Union, all ethnic groups of
the Georgian population, which took part in the
referendum on 31 March 1991, voted in favour of the
restoration of Georgia's territorial integrity and
independence on the basis of the Independence Act of
26 May 1918, which represented, inter alia, the freely
expressed will of the population to live in an independent
State. The international community - including the
Russian Federation, by the way - confirmed the
democratic character of the referendum by recognizing
Georgia's independence. The referendum involved more
than 90 per cent of the population, 99 per cent of whom
voted in favour of Georgia's independence.

Therefore, all claims by the Russian Federation that
Georgia's international legal status was defined in
disregard of the will of the Abkhaz and Ossetian people
are absolutely groundless. The 1991 referendum was held
throughout the territory of Georgia, including in Abkhazia
and South Ossetia, which implies that those national
minorities were also involved in the process. The destiny
of a concrete territory can be decided only by its
indigenous population, and the indigenous population of
the autonomous Republic of Abkhazia is composed not
only of those who survived the ethnic cleansing and now
remain and live in the territory of Abkhazia, but also of all
the internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees who
became the targets of brutal ethnic cleansing and
persecution. That ethnic cleansing was confirmed and
recognized at the summits of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe held in 1994, 1996
and 1998 and in Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. The results of the plebiscite held on
28 November 1996 indicate that an absolute majority -
99 per cent - of the internally displaced persons from
Abkhazia unanimously support the determination of the
territory's status only in the event that territorial integrity
is restored.

From the very beginning, the Russian Federation,
after instigating those conflicts almost two decades
ago, has dominated the peacekeeping and negotiation
processes in both breakaway regions of Georgia.
Through its participation, the Russian Federation has
ensured that no tangible results have been achieved and
no progress made possible in those negotiations. The
Georgian side has warned the international community
of that country's real intentions numerous times.

The Russian Federation can finally come out of
the shadows of surrounding the long war that has been
carried out against Georgia since our independence.
Russia has clearly identified itself as a party to
the conflicts in Georgia. We are witnessing the results
of the Russian Federation's policy of territorial
expansion. That expansion is being carried out at the
expense of another State's territorial integrity, in
complete disregard of international law and the lives
and aspirations of hundreds of thousands of Georgia's
citizens. Russia is moving forward, altering the
post-1991 borders, with unpredictable implications for
the wider region, whereas, according to Russia's
perception, most of those borders are challengeable and
are now being challenged.

Several hundred thousand people of various ethnic
origins are suffering from a humanitarian disaster in the
wake of the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia. That has now
been replicated in the Tskhinvali region, where more than
150,000 people have become IDPs and refilgees owing to
the recent military intervention of the Russian Federation
and its militias. The overwhelming majority of those
Georgian citizens are being subjected to unbearable
suffering and to deprivation of their fundamental human
rights and freedoms. Denied access to their homes, they
are being forced to live in exile. Those who have stayed
behind are exposed to constant fear of insecurity and
poverty and, most shocking, possible execution just for
being Georgian.

We hear constantly from both separatist regimes
that they will not allow the ethnically Georgian
population to return to their homes. The regimes'
declarations are implemented by their paramilitary
gangs, which are continuously destroying houses and
property belonging to ethnic Georgians. Those actions
are part of a systematic plan to ethnically cleanse
Georgians from the Tskhinvali region, as previously
happened in Akhazia.
08-49297

The recognition of the separatist regimes by the
Russian Federation constitutes nothing less than full
and unequivocal support for the separatist insurgents,
who are the direct perpetrators of ethnic cleansing. I
would like to remind the members of the Council that
Georgians will no longer be seen in these regions as a
result of brutal and forcible displacement.

The people responsible for these actions - the self-
proclaimed governors of these territories - are widely
welcomed in the corridors of the Kremlin and applauded
with cheers in the chambers of Russian legislative bodies.
That brings us to the new reality in which the Russian
Federation has used its peacekeeping shield to occupy the
sovereign, independent State of Georgia and completely
cleanse ethnically Georgian citizens from the separatist
areas. As has happened before, the few civilians who have
remained in those regions have been given Russian
passports, in violation of international law and norms,
which makes a mockery of the principle of the right to
protect.

We are addressing the Security Council and the
Secretary-General and urge you to act, and act
promptly, to determine the humanitarian situation on
the ground, to further relieve the plight - brought on
by aggression - of the people living in these regions
and to ensure the maximum participation of the United
Nations and other organizations in the process. All
allegations of mass atrocities must be verified and
addressed through appropriate and credible human
rights institutions. Many have expressed the
willingness to help ease the consequences of the war
for the people who have suffered most. Unfortunately,
however, the Russian Federation has directly blocked
the delivery of and access to humanitarian aid.

The Russian Federation has disregarded its
commitments with respect to the six-point ceasefire
plan that was agreed through the mediation of the
European Union presidency - France - and
particularly through President Sarkozy's personal
efforts. Russia has failed to comply with the provision
in this plan to withdraw its forces, as was very evident
today from the Secretariat briefing, and it has
predetermined for itself the outcome of the
international talks for lasting security and stability that
were required by the agreed peace accord. Russia
continues to occupy territory of Georgia, ensuring
maximum damage to the stability and the economy of
my country.

For our part, we are complying with the ceasefire

agreement and fully commit ourselves to it. We

demand the same action from the other parties to the

conflict. The Russian Federation has to withdraw its

forces from Georgian territory to the pre-conflict
locations.

Along with the full respect for territorial integrity
and the sovereignty of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders, which cannot be
questioned, Georgia stands ready to accommodate any
legitimate security concerns that Abkhaz and Ossetian
populations of Georgia may have, through direct
dialogue and unbiased international mediation.

In conclusion, I would like to state the following.
First and foremost, this step by the Russian Federation
has no international legal consequence; it has no
impact on the internationally established borders of
Georgia and will not change in any way the
international community's stand on the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of Georgia.
However, this unacceptable and unjustifiable act of
recognition further enflames an already difficult
situation.

Russia's self-destructive act contradicts the very
principle of territorial integrity upon which the modern
State depends for its existence. There is no place in
today's world for attempting to redraw boundaries of
our modern international order. It is brutally evident
that today we are dealing with a Russian-Georgian
conflict instigated by Russian territorial ambitions
against my country. The present situation and wars that
took place in recent memory, and common sense,
suggest that, unless confronted by the international
community, Russian policies will eventually force a
military confrontation elsewhere. These bleak
prospects are all the more unfortunate given the
region's, and particularly Georgia's, recent political
and economic progress.

Georgia has been invaded and is occupied, but
my nation is not conquered. We will repair the
damaged infrastructure. We will rebuild the economy,
we will solidify democracy and we will find the way,
as we have done throughout millennia of history,
towards peaceful coexistence of Georgians, Ossetians
and all other members of the multi-ethnic community
of my ancient country.
