Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): The difficulties experienced by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in stemming the activities
of the rebellion and members of the former military junta
in Sierra Leone show that the situation there remains
fragile and that the progress that has been achieved
remains threatened. These uncertainties should not prevent
us, however, from welcoming the re-establishment of the
constitutional Government of Sierra Leone or from being
gratified by its manifest intentions to undertake reform,
especially regarding the state of law and the restructuring
of the State.

The presence of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) should help to
stabilize the situation and allow the legal authorities of
Sierra Leone to consolidate their authority. We were
therefore particularly pleased by the initiatives undertaken
by several members of the Council to establish, organize
and gain approval for the Observer Mission. This will be
the second new operation to be created in three months
by the Security Council in Africa. In this decision, we see
proof of the interest of the Security Council and the
international community in assisting Africa to prevent and
settle crises.

The establishment of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Sierra Leone allows both the military and
civilian dimensions of the conflict to be addressed. The
diversity of the tasks assigned to the Mission reflects
these aspirations. These include monitoring the
programme for demobilizing and reintegrating former
combatants; assisting in monitoring respect for
international humanitarian law, as was just emphasized by
the Ambassador of Sweden; monitoring the programme to
restructure the police force; and providing technical
assistance to help the Government of Sierra Leone to
cope with the needs of the country in the field of human
rights.

UNOMSIL is also an interesting, promising and
potentially fruitful experiment in coordination between a
regional operation - that of ECOMOG on behalf of
ECOWAS - and a United Nations operation. We
welcome the important contribution this experiment will
make to stabilization in that country. UNOMSIL' s success
will therefore depend on tangible cooperation between the
two missions: the primary mission of ECOMOG and the
complementary one of UNOMSIL. Once again, however,
this cooperation must be along the desired lines between

 

the United Nations and the regional organizations in which
we place our trust.

UNOMSIL falls within the political framework of
genuine national reconciliation. Once again, we are gratified
by the intentions expressed by the Government of Sierra
Leone in this respect. We therefore hope that UNOMSIL
will be able to support all initiatives, in particular those of
the Government, to restore the democratic process and to
speed up Sierra Leone's reconstruction and recovery.

