Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin my statement by honouring the memory
of the 10 Chadian Blue Helmets of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) who lost their lives on Sunday in
northern Mali. I offer my condolences to the families
of the victims and to the people and the Government of
Chad. The heroic sacrifice of those soldiers places on
obligation on all of us. It reminds us of how MINUSMA
operates in a difficult security environment. and of
the key role it plays in preserving Mali's stability and
supporting the implementation of the Malian peace
process. In the face ofthe enemies ofpeace, our resolve
must remain strong.

I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for
his persuasive and once again alarming briefing, as
well as for his daily commitment on the ground. I would
like also to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia here today.

To echo what several of my colleagues - namely,
from Germany and the United Kingdom - just stated,
the undeniable truth so often observed in the Council
remains more relevant than ever: the illusion of a status
quo masks the daily deterioration of the situation, which
could devolve into a fresh conflict at any given moment.
The violence that marked the end of 2018 - in Gaza in
November and the West Bank in December - should
serve as a warning. It must also remind us that when
peace recedes on the ground, it recedes also in people's
minds and in rhetoric.

Twenty-five years after the Oslo Accords, less than
half of Palestinians and Israelis still believe in a two-
State solution. Generation after generation, Palestinians
and Israelis are losing hope for a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. It is therefore more important than ever
for the Israeli and Palestinian authorities to seek to
preserve an open, pluralist space within their respective
civilian populations that fosters the possibility of a true
dialogue between them.

The President of the Palestinian Authority
addressed the United Nations on 15 January during
the start of his chairmanship of the Group of 77. His
alarmist comments give us an idea of the gravity of the
crisis and situation that we are currently experiencing.

First, I would like to return to the situation in Gaza.
In mid-November, the Gaza Strip was on the brink of
sliding into another deadly conflict, as has happened
in the territory three times over the past decade. That
threat remains today; we must take full measure of its
seriousness, in a volatile regional context marked by
renewed tensions in northern Israel.

The humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip remains
essentially the same, despite occasional improvements
in the area of energy supply. In that catastrophic
humanitarian situation, there have been repeated
outbreaks of violence in Gaza for almost a year now, at
a rate unprecedented since 2014.

The toll of the demonstrations along the
separation barrier has been heavy, with more than
180 Palestinians killed and 6,000 shot and injured
since 30 March - individuals who gathered in
demonstration out of despair. France has condemned
the disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force
and called on Israel to respect the right of Palestinians
to demonstrate peacefully. We have also denounced the
instrumentalization of the demonstrations by Hamas
and other armed groups.

In the political sphere, the stalemate of the
inter-Palestinian reconciliation process is worsening
the situation for the people of Gaza. The closure of the
Rafah crossing point between Gaza and Egypt, which
resulted from the withdrawal of Palestinian Authority
personnel, intensifies the blockade imposed by Israel
on the Gaza Strip for more than a decade.

To restore immediate hope to the people of Gaza,
we must first respond to the urgent humanitarian
needs. The efforts of the Special Coordinator and of
all United Nations agencies contribute significantly
to that response. The conditions for a swift reopening
of the Rafah crossing point must also be met quickly.
Ultimately, it is only through lifting the blockade,
along with providing the necessary security guarantees
for Israel, that it will be possible to meet the needs of
the people.

The role of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in that context is more crucial than ever,
in both Gaza and the region. The Agency is playing
a key role at the humanitarian level, in addition to
providing stability and security. Let us therefore
continue to mobilize to support UNRWA after the
American withdrawal; France has done so by doubling
its contribution to the Agency this year.

However, there can be no lasting response to the
crisis in Gaza without a restoration of Palestinian unity,
which should enable the Palestinian Authority to regain
all its prerogatives on the territory. We support that
objective as part of the efforts undertaken by Egypt,
which we once again commend. We call on all parties to
resume dialogue so as to relaunch the inter-Palestinian
reconciliation process. Beyond Gaza, the process will
require the holding of parliamentary elections, as
announced by President Mahmoud Abbas following his
decision to dissolve the Palestinian Legislative Council.
Those elections must be held in free and transparent
conditions, and all avenues must be explored for them
to take place throughout the Palestinian territories.

In the West Bank, the escalation from 9 to
13 December 2018, following the deadly attack on the
outskirts of the settlement of Ofra, which France
condemned in the strongest terms, also took place against
the backdrop of a gravely worsening situation caused by
the lack of any political horizon and the consequences
of settlement activities. Settlement policy, on which
Nickolay Mladenov briefed the Council last month (see S/PV.8429), continued in every aspect throughout 2018
at a sustained pace. In Jerusalem, it approached the
depressing 2012 record level in terms of the number of
announcements of new housing units. It was also seen
in the continued policy of evicting Palestinians from
the city's Arab neighbourhoods such as Sheikh Jarrah.
Such developments distance us every day further from
the goal of making Jerusalem the capital of the two
States - Israel and Palestine - living side by side in
peace and security.

In the West Bank, the implementation of the
settlement policy has also been pursued systematically,
with a succession of announcements concerning
new housing units in settlements that culminated
in the approval of nearly 2,200 such units on 24 and
25 December 2018. Last year's increased number of
announcements include isolated areas in the heart of
the West Bank and particularly sensitive sites such as
Hebron. Similarly, the recent decision by the Israeli
Government to allocate land for the construction of
the new settlement of Givat Eitam, in an area that
is important for ensuring the viability of the two-
State solution and the continuity of the Palestinian
territories to the south of Bethlehem, is a worrisome
new development. In addition, at another location
critical for ensuring the two-State solution near the E-l
area, we continue to wait for the decision to postpone
the demolition of the village of Khan Al-Ahmar to
be converted into a permanent one and for the Israeli
authorities to definitively abandon its demolition and
the forced displacement of its inhabitants. Finally, we
call for a halt to legislative initiatives aimed at the
normalization of unauthorized settlement outposts,
which are illegal even under Israeli law. In that regard, I
reiterate our condemnation of settlement activity, which
is illegal under international law and runs contrary to
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2334 (2016).

Against the backdrop of the situation I just
described, the Security Council was never able to
speak as one voice last year. With every passing day,
that deafening silence is increasingly incomprehensible
for the peoples of the region, as well as for the world
watching us. We therefore call for restarting and
re-energizing our efforts this year.

Moreover, it is urgent that we restore a credible
political horizon. Any negotiation must be part of an
internationally agreed framework based on international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. Such
parameters are not optional or to be chosen as one likes.
They are to be taken together as the indispensable basis
for any peace plan and future negotiations. We are close
to the point of no return. The fragmented territorial
landscape taking shape before our eyes is already
resulting in two peoples coexisting on unequal footing
on the same territory. Should that trend continue, for the
Palestinians it would mean abandoning their national
aspirations based on the establishment of a State, and,
for the Israelis, giving up the democratic character of
the State of Israel.

But as we all know, the destinies of Israelis and
Palestinians are intertwined. Neither of the two
peoples will lastingly achieve its aspirations if it is to
the detriment of the other. France is a friend to both
the Israelis and the Palestinians. President Emmanuel
Macron will meet with Israeli President Reuven Rivlin
during the latter's visit to France, which began today, and
Prime Minister Edouard Philippe met with Palestinian
Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah last month in Paris.
France has only one goal - the implementation,
through negotiations, of the two-State solution, with
two States living side by side in peace and security with
Jerusalem as their capital, as the only solution capable
of bringing about ajust and lasting peace. Rest assured
that we will continue to spare no effort in that regard to
foster peace.

