Archbishop Auza: The protection of children in
armed conflict is a grave universal concern, for which
the Holy See thanks the French presidency for having
convened this debate. The 2014 Secretary-General's
report on children and armed conflict (S/2014/339)
defined that year as the worst one ever for children
affected by armed conflict. The situation got worse,
as the data contained in the 2015 report (S/2015/409)
showed that the number of children caught up in armed
conflicts, as well as the scale and severity of violations,
surpassed those of 2014. In brief, the reports left no
doubt that the impact on children of our collective
failure to prevent and end conflict was severe.

The Secretary-General's 2017 annual report,
covering the year 2016 (S/2017/821), sadly points out
that the worsening trend continues, as the number of
children severely impacted by armed conflicts in many
countries was the highest ever recorded. Violations
include, the killing and maiming of children, rape
and other forms of sexual Violence, the recruitment
of children as child soldiers and suicide bombers, the
abduction and selling of children, attacks on schools
and hospitals, the denial of access to children of
humanitarian aid, as well as attacks or threats of attacks
against personnel protecting children. We condemn all
those heinous crimes in the strongest possible terms,

The fact that such crimes are rampant points to
a very wide gap that remains between provisions
already in place and their implementation. Respect
for international humanitarian law and the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict can go
a long way towards narrowing and eventually closing
this gap.

My delegation wishes to highlight the very
disturbing fact that the verified number of victims
mistreated by non-State groups is three times higher
than those by Government forces. This fact poses
serious challenges to stopping the perpetrators who
operate outside every rule of law and to holding them
accountable for their heinous acts.

Another deeply disturbing trend is that of the
increasing attacks on densely populated areas. Urban
centres have become battlefields, where schools,
hospitals and other civilian infrastructure are not
spared, but targeted as a tactic of war. The obligation
to respect the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution is even more pressing. Resolution
2286 (2016), on the obligation under international
humanitarian law to respect and protect medical and
humanitarian personnel, their equipment and means
of transport in situations of armed conflict, must be
observed by all the parties to a conflict.

During his recent visit in Colombia, Pope Francis
said that we can never accept that suffering children
are mistreated, that they are denied the right to live out
their childhood peacefully and joyfully, that they are
denied a future of hope. We all have the duty, according
to everyone's responsibilities and possibilities, to take
concrete measures that could better safeguard or save
the lives of children caught up in armed conflict. At
Government level, one such measure would be to
treat children involved in armed conflict primarily as
Victims, rather than combatants, and to hand them over
to civilian child protection actors who would provide
for their reintegration. At the grassroots level, some of
most useful measures would be initiatives to safeguard
children from being recruited or abducted and
programmes to help rehabilitate survivors and reinsert
them in their respective families and communities.

The Holy See and many Catholic institutions and
organizations throughout the world continue to be
fully engaged in such initiatives. In that regard, my
delegation fully supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation for the establishment of long-
term multi-year mechanisms for the reintegration
of recruited and used children. No child's tragic
story ends with his or her release from captivity. The
welcome of the family and the community at large is
vital to his or her reintegration and full recovery. There
is one indispensable and effective way to root out acts
of violence against children in armed conflict: the way
of peace.

