Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this emergency meeting this
evening. The presence of the Secretary-General at this
meeting is a clear indication of how dire the situation
is in the Gaza Strip. The violence over the past few
days in Gaza and in southern Israel has worsened to
such an extent that many innocent civilians have been
killed or injured. That makes it imperative that the
Security Council, which is entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security,
publicly voice its condemnation of the attacks and
demand that they cease immediately.

Four days ago, the Council, in a rare moment of
unity on issues related to the Middle East, issued a
press statement expressing serious concern at the
escalation of the situation in Gaza and calling for an
immediate halt to all military activities and violence.
The Council also called for all parties to address the
serious humanitarian and economic needs in Gaza and
to take necessary measures, including the opening of
border crossings, to ensure the continuous provision of
humanitarian supplies, including supplies of food and
fuel, and the provision of medical treatment. We are
disappointed that this call by the Council has yet to be
heeded.

The South African Government has expressed its
View that the Israeli air strikes using the most
sophisticated war machinery, such as F-16 planes, are a
Violation of international humanitarian law. My
Government has formally called on the Israeli
Government to stop the military onslaught in Gaza and
to immediately and unconditionally withdraw its forces
that are currently massing on the border of Gaza.

The Israeli air strikes represent a disproportionate
use of force by Israel. There have been almost
400 deaths, and hundreds more have already been
injured. We join the Secretary-General in reiterating
Israel's obligation to uphold international humanitarian
and human rights law, and we condemn the excessive
use of force, which is leading to the killing and
injuring of civilians.

We recognize the legitimate security concerns of
Israel resulting from rocket attacks. However, we do
not believe that Israel's right to self-defence entitles it
to violate the rights of innocent civilians, particularly
those civilians who have been living under 40 years of
foreign occupation.

We are further disappointed that the Israeli
Government has rejected international calls for a 48-
hour ceasefire in Gaza that would have allowed
humanitarian aid to go into an area which has been
besieged by an illegal blockade for many, many
months. Israel cannot expect security for its people and
political normalcy as long as it occupies Palestinian
lands and continues its attempt to impose permanent
rule over Palestinians through the use of military force.

The South African President has said in a public
statement on this matter that violence and counter-
violence will advance neither the cause of Israelis nor
that of the Palestinians and that thus neither strength
nor effort must be spared by the Palestinians and the
Israelis in an effort to find an amicable solution, which
can only result in two States living side by side and in
peace.

The Security Council should again demand an
end to both the Israeli attacks and the rocket attacks. To
do less would again call into question the credibility of
the Council in addressing the loss of innocent lives in
the Middle East. Avoiding action is no longer an option
for the Council.

It is for this reason that we fully support the draft
resolution that has been presented by the delegation of
Libya and hope that the Council will consider it in the
coming days. The draft resolution calls for three basic
things: the ending of the bombardment of Gaza; a
ceasefire; and the protection of innocent Palestinian
civilians. That is the least that this Council can do.

