Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Ms. Angela Kane for her briefing
and update on the current situation in Gaza, and you,
Mr. President, for organizing and chairing this meeting
to discuss, in a constructive manner, recent
developments in the region.

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative
of Finland on behalf of the European Union. I will
therefore limit my statement to the following remarks.
Slovakia is deeply concerned at the increased
violence that has recently been taking place in Gaza
and especially at yesterday's shocking Israeli military
operation which resulted in the death and injury of
dozens of Palestinian civilians. We strongly deplore
any action that causes such appalling civilian casualties
and call on Israel to undertake serious efforts to
investigate that tragic event. Concrete results are
urgently needed.

Although we believe Israel has the right of self-
defence against terrorism and its perpetrators, its
response must always be proportionate, and everything
possible must be done to avert the loss of innocent
lives. In that regard, we call on Israel to take every
possible measure to protect the lives of the civilian
population, in keeping with international humanitarian
law.

We also urge the Palestinian Authority to
undertake all necessary measures and make every
effort to find and release the kidnapped Israeli soldier,
as well as prevent further military and terrorist attacks
on Israel, notably the launching of rockets against
Israeli population centres. We support the leadership
and efforts of President Mahmoud Abbas to achieve
that goal and to foster national unity among the
Palestinians. We hope that the Palestinian Government
will cooperate towards that end.

We also note and support the many efforts made
by President Abbas to form a Government of national
unity. We expect that such a Government will be
committed to the Quartet principles and that its
political platform will enable early engagement as well
as the continuation of dialogue aimed at finding a
solution to the Middle East conflict.

We take this opportunity to reaffirm our support
for a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement to the
Middle East conflict based on all relevant Security
Council resolutions and negotiations between the two
sides. Slovakia fully supports the two-State solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In order to make
progress in implementing the vision of two democratic
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security, both parties have to accept previous
agreements and obligations, return to constructive
dialogue and take concrete actions aimed at building
and strengthening mutual confidence and trust.

We are convinced that the Quartet represents the
most appropriate mechanism for advancing the peace
process and that the road map, possibly in an updated
form reflecting recent developments on the ground, is
the most efficient plan for achieving a lasting peace
settlement to the conflict.

In conclusion, I would like to stress once again
that there is no military solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian dispute. The only way to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting settlement to the conflict is
through peaceful negotiations.

The international community, including the
Security Council, must remain actively engaged in the
peace process in the Middle East. Both parties to the
conflict, however, must do more and demonstrate clear
political will and a commitment to ending this
protracted conflict, which has threatened global peace
and security for more than half a century.

I would therefore reiterate our commonly shared
belief that there is a need to reinvigorate the peace
process. In spite of the latest wave of violence and
hostilities, we continue to believe that there a window
of opportunity still exists for the Israelis and the
Palestinians to put the peace process on the right track.
That window of opportunity must be taken advantage
of through concrete and immediate action leading from
mutual recognition of the right to exist to the mutual
peaceful coexistence of two viable States.

