Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): Let me begin by
extending to you, Sir, my delegation's congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. We are confident that your
outstanding capabilities, experience and wisdom will guide
the deliberations of the Council to a productive outcome. I
should also like to thank your predecessor, Ambassador
Albright of the United States, for her successful conduct of
the business of the Security Council during the month of
February.

My delegation notes with appreciation the Secretary
General's comprehensive report (S/ 1996/ 116) on the
situation in Burundi. It is heartening to note the Secretary
General's assessment that the situation has somewhat
calmed down lately in the country. Although this
welcome turnaround may be partly attributable to the
energetic campaigns which the Ambassador of Burundi,
in his statement made just a little while ago, characterized
as his Government's broad crusade to rally together the
population, the national army and the administration for
the return of peace in his country, we should certainly
take pride in the fact that the Security Council's adoption
of resolution 1040 (1996) on 29 January last has made an
impact in moving things in this direction. However, we
are mindful that the overall situation in Burundi remains
volatile and serious enough to warrant the continued
vigilance of the international community. We remain
deeply concerned at the persistence of violence, the dire
humanitarian situation and the continued incitement to
ethnic hatred by radio stations.

My delegation wishes to pay tribute to the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) for the prominent
role it has played in monitoring peace in Burundi under
trying conditions and with meagre financial resources. It
should be encouraged to strengthen its role there by
expanding its military observer mission, although the
OAU cannot be left alone to bear the onerous burden of
maintaining the peace there. Given the far-reaching
implications of the eruption of a humanitarian tragedy in
Burundi for the peace and stability of the entire Great
Lakes region, it is clear that the United Nations must
remain alert to ensure stability and peace in the region.

As the situation stands now, the international
community faces two crucial challenges in bringing
lasting peace and stability to Burundi. One is how to
forestall the recurrence of a humanitarian disaster of the
kind we witnessed earlier in Rwanda. The other is how to
bring about a lasting political settlement by addressing the
root causes of the conflict. We view the Secretary-
General's recommendations contained in document
S/1996/116 from this perspective. To deal with these
daunting challenges, the Secretary-General proposes a
two-track approach: the promotion of political dialogue in
the context of preventive diplomacy and a contingency
plan to avoid a catastrophe.

Political dialogue across the whole political spectrum
in Burundi is a sine qua non, and the ideal means to
resolve the simmering Burundian crisis. But the
international community needs a viable alternative in case

 

the track of political dialogue proves ineffectual in bringing
about the much-hoped-for mutual accommodation and
national reconciliation. Moreover, the two tracks of
dialogue and contingency planning are complementary and
reinforce each other. International efforts for a political
settlement of the crisis through dialogue have a better
chance of success if they are backed by a credible
contingency plan for a timely response in the event of a
serious deterioration of the humanitarian situation. Another
important merit of the idea is that good advance planning
often pays off by making actual intervention unnecessary.
It is our understanding that paragraphs 12 and 13 of the
draft resolution before the Council reflect in a balanced
manner the widely shared expectations and concerns of the
international community in acting upon the Secretary-
General' s recommendations.

My Government supports and welcomes the efforts of
the Secretary-General, the Organization of African Unity,
the European Union (EU) and former Presidents Nyerere
and Carter to promote political dialogue in Burundi. Given
the indivisibility of peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region, we recognize the importance of addressing the
fundamental causes of the internal conflict in Burundi in a
subregional context. In this respect, we support the holding
of a Regional Conference for Peace, Security and
Development in the Great Lakes Region and encourage the
Secretary-General to intensify his preparations for such a
conference in close consultation with Member States
concerned, the OAU and the EU.

My delegation stresses that international efforts to
facilitate dialogue in Burundi cannot replace the efforts of
the Burundian parties themselves to come to terms with one
another and to live in peace and prosperity. Since most
Burundian parties are currently represented in the Coalition
Government under a power-sharing arrangement, the
priority of the international effort should be to ensure that
all parties abide by the letter and spirit of the Convention
of Government so that the Coalition Government can work
as it should.

The international community can play a meaningful
role to this end by helping to organize a national debate
embracing Burundian leaders of all political persuasions and
by guaranteeing the implementation of any agreement
resulting from the debate. In this respect, we call upon all
parties in Burundi to put aside their factional interests and
exert political good will towards achieving mutual
accommodation and genuine national reconciliation.

My delegation wishes to join previous speakers in
expressing profound appreciation to the non-aligned
caucus for its hard work in producing the excellent draft
resolution before the Council today.

