Sir Ketumile Masire: I wish to express my
appreciation to you, Madam President, to Ambassador
Holbrooke and to our brother Kofi Annan, Secretary-
General of the United Nations, for inviting me to attend
this meeting of the Security Council to discuss the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

This meeting is being held against the backdrop of
the increasing threats to the peace and security of the
African continent, which continue to militate against the
socio-economic development of Africa. This
unprecedented series of meetings of the Security Council
dedicated to the discussion of African issues - on the
initiative of the United States presidency of the
Council - is not only welcome, but will help alleviate
suspicions, fears and concerns over the commitment of
the United Nations, and the wider international
community, to issues relating to peace, security and
stability on the African continent.

As we are all aware, the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, more than any other
contemporary crisis on the continent today, has pitted a
number of countries in the region against each other, and
therefore represents a real threat to peace and stability in
the Central African region, otherwise known as the Great
Lakes region. This is all the more reason why the
involvement of the Security Council is both timely and
welcome.

I wish also to express my profound appreciation to
President Frederick Chiluba of Zambia and his colleagues
in the region, as well as to the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), for spearheading
efforts to resolve the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and for facilitating the implementation of
the Ceasefire Agreement. It is gratifying to note that since
fighting broke out in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on 2 August 1998 the OAU, in collaboration with
the countries of the region and the United Nations, has
been at the forefront of efforts aimed at facilitating a
peaceful resolution of the conflict. This has not been an
easy task. However, the perseverance of all concerned
seems to be paying off at last, and we can, as diplomats
in the corridors of the United Nations are fond of saying,
claim to be "cautiously optimistic".

The origins of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are complex and reflect the
 

internal political, economic and social problems within the
country itself, as well as an external dimension relating to
the security concerns of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and those of the neighbouring countries. I wish to
highlight the fact that throughout the peace process, the
inviolability of the national sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
consistently reaffirmed by the OAU and the countries of the
region. Equally, there has also been a strong recognition of
the need to address the internal political problems within
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
security concerns of the neighbouring countries. Based on
these principles and concerns, the OAU, the countries of
the region and the United Nations brokered a Ceasefire
Agreement among the belligerents in the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

There are people present here who are more competent
than me to discuss the military aspects of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, permit me to
underscore the important linkages between the military and
the political aspects of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Indeed, I believe that it was
precisely in recognition of this linkage that the ceasefire
document itself underlined the need for inter-Congolese
political negotiations. I am fully aware of the commitment
of the parties as enshrined in the modalities for the
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement. The parties
agreed that on the coming into force of the Ceasefire
Agreement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, they
would do their utmost to embark on inter-Congolese
political negotiations, which should lead to a new political
dispensation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Furthermore, and in order to arrive at the new political
dispensation and national reconciliation emerging from the
political dialogue, the parties agreed upon a number of
principles elaborated in the Agreement and its annexes.

I believe that for the success of the all-inclusive
inter-Congolese political negotiations leading to national
reconciliation, I, as the facilitator, shall be responsible for,
among other things, making the necessary contacts aimed
at the convening of the inter-Congolese political
negotiations within a conducive environment for all
participants.

The Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement outlines the
framework and objectives of the inter-Congolese political
dialogue. In the Agreement the signatories have committed
themselves to a political process in which the Congolese
parties should agree, inter alia, on the timetable and the
rules of procedure of the inter-Congolese political
negotiations; the formation of a new Congolese national
army; a new political dispensation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular the institutions to be
established for good governance in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; the process of free, democratic
and transparent elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; and the promulgation of a new Constitution,
which will govern the conduct of affairs in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo after the holding of
democratic elections. I hope that the calendar of the
inter-Congolese political negotiations leading to the
establishment of new institutions will be limited to the
shortest possible time, bearing in mind the plight of the
Congolese people and given the resource constraints.

As would be evident from the foregoing, I am under
no illusion that the inter-Congolese negotiations will be
anything but a difficult and arduous process. I cannot
claim at this point to have answers to the problems in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and neither should
anyone in the international community be so
presumptuous as to think that we know more about what
is best for the Congolese people than they themselves. I
have come into the process with an open mind, but also
with a strong determination to work with my brothers and
sisters from the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
help them shape the destiny of their own country. The
responsibility to assist the Congolese parties to achieve
this noble objective is therefore a heavy and onerous
challenge for all of us.

I believe that the most critical challenge to
facilitating the political dialogue would be how to
determine the nature and the content of the dialogue and
the criteria for participation, and how to organize the
infrastructure that will provide the necessary backdrop for
the negotiations.

The current goodwill expressed by the international
community should be translated into concrete assistance
in order to enable the inter-Congolese dialogue to
commence while the commitment by all parties to the
ceasefire holds. More importantly, I am convinced that
international pressure should continue to be exerted on all
the parties to remain committed to resolving problems in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo through peaceful
means.

I also believe that for the inter-Congolese dialogue
to succeed, the international community should continue
to provide all the requisite resources for the successful
completion of the peace process in the Democratic

 

Republic of the Congo. While resources are needed to
sustain the military aspects of the Agreement, adequate
funding is equally critical for the inter-Congolese political
negotiations. If we falter in this regard, then the entire
peace process will be in jeopardy. I therefore see an urgent
need to ensure that a group of competent personnel is made
available to buttress the facilitation effort.

The period of the negotiations will entail extensive
travel and consultations with all relevant players, including
the mediator, President Chiluba, other regional leaders and
the parties to the conflict. I therefore wish to emphasize
that the entire process will be costly, calling for concrete
support by all countries of goodwill, for in the pursuit of
peace there should be no room for neutrality. This Council,
I believe, should move beyond pronouncements and
translate the goodwill gestures made so far into a collective
international undertaking. In making this appeal, I am
aware that time is not on our side. We should move with
greater speed than ever before. This meeting should
accelerate the peace process if our efforts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are to have any meaning for the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Once again, allow me to reiterate my appreciation for
having been associated with this momentous meeting of the
Security Council on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In undertaking this enormously challenging task, I look
forward to, and count on, the Council's strong support.

