Mrs. Smith (Norway): A debate on the situation
in the Middle East and the Palestinian question on
United Nations Day, 24 October, is highly symbolic.
The bid for Palestinian statehood goes back to the
United Nations partition plan of 1947, and even
further. In 1949, Norway voted in favour of admitting
Israel as a Member State of the United Nations. At the
time, we based our decision on the declarations and
explanations provided by Israel. Israel had persuasively
explained why recognition and membership should not
await the resolution of the outstanding final status
issues.

Since then, Norwegian policy has been based on
the vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security. Norway therefore
stands ready to recognize a Palestinian State.
Meanwhile, we support all international efforts leading
to a comprehensive agreement on the outstanding final
status issues, including the recent efforts of the Middle
East Quartet to resume substantive talks between the
two parties.

Norway has consistently stood by Israel and its
inherent right to self-defence in accordance with
international law. We have also supported the
Palestinian right to statehood and the building of the
Palestinian Authority.

At its last meeting in September, the donor
support group for the Palestinian Authority affirmed
the success of Palestinian institution-building. The
performance of Palestinian public institutions was
scrutinized by the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the United Nations. Their joint
conclusion was that the Palestinians were fully capable
of running a State. Prime Minister Fayyad has
succeeded in what he promised two years ago, namely,
establishing the necessary institutional foundation for
achieving international recognition of Palestinian
statehood.

In September, President Abbas reiterated before
the General Assembly the need to resolve the final
status issues through negotiations (see A/66/PV.19).
Moreover, he ensured the General Assembly of the
Palestinian Authority's commitment to comply with the
Charter of the United Nations, relevant United Nations
resolutions, democracy, the rule of law and human
rights.

We take note of the Palestinian application for
United Nations membership, which the Security
Council is now considering. We await the result of the
Council's deliberations. If, in due course, the
Palestinian authorities decide to go before the General
Assembly, Norway will consider all legitimate
demands put forward. The recognition of statehood and
accession to United Nations membership are issues that
are best addressed in the main United Nations bodies
here in New York.

A main obstacle to an effective Palestinian State
and full institution-building remains the occupation
and the continued building of Israeli settlements on the
occupied land. Norway is deeply concerned by the
grave effects on peace and security of recent plans such
as those for Mordot Gilo and Givat Hamatos, as well as
other planned settlement expansions. Such measures
are rapidly changing the territories around Jerusalem,
in East Jerusalem and in the West Bank. They
undermine negotiations and may soon render the two-
State vision unattainable. The Secretary-General, the
General Assembly and the International Court of
Justice have all rejected the legality of such unilateral
actions.

Norway welcomes the agreement on the release
of Gilad Shalit and the exchange of prisoners. The
family's long wait is now over. Norway's position all
along has been that Shalit's imprisonment was
unacceptable, and we have been among the countries
actively working for his release. We expect that
agreement to have implications for the situation in the
West Bank and Gaza over the next few weeks.

