Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Ambassador Fowler for his
informative briefing. We confirm that we very highly
value his work as Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established by Security Council resolution 864
(1993).

The Russian delegation expresses profound concern
at the continuing armed conflict in Angola. We reaffirm
our assessment regarding the main responsibility of
UNITA, headed by Mr. Savimbi, for the situation in the
country. We believe that the main reason for this latest
spiral in armed struggle lies in the fact that the leadership
of UNITA has deliberately thwarted the implementation
of the peace agreements. We are convinced that there is
no alternative to a peaceful settlement. Lasting peace in
Angola can be attained only by reviving the peace
process.

An important additional way to step up pressure on
Savimbi in order to bring UNITA back towards the
political settlement, we believe, lies in enhancing the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime. We note that there
is a direct link between violations of the sanctions regime
- which the expert panel to study violations of the
sanctions regime will be mandated to investigate - and

 

the ongoing threat in the region to international peace and
security.

It is from that standpoint that we view the report
submitted to us by the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee on his trip to a number of European countries
and to Algiers in order to elaborate proposals for possible
measures for more effective implementation of the Security
Council's enforcement action against UNITA. We endorse
the Committee's support for the recommendations of the
Secretary-General contained in his report on Angola, in
document S/ 1999/49, in particular that States should
provide appropriate information; that the Committee should
review the effectiveness of the sanctions following the Visit
of the Chairman to the region; that the Security Council's
attention should be drawn to noted instances of Violations;
that monitoring be improved in key ports and airports; that
the Secretariat should draw up a report on illegal arms
deliveries, petroleum products, on the export of diamonds
and also on the movement of UNITA funds.

With regard to the measures suggested by the
sanctions Committee within the context of improving its
activities, we support sending reminders to Member States
about the need for them to comply with the appropriate
resolutions of the Council. We consider the attention given
to illegal deliveries of arms to be justified, as they have the
most destabilizing impact on the situation in the country. It
is time to update the list of UNITA officials subject to
travel restrictions. Likewise, the process of drawing up a
full list of Angolan aeroplanes, which is necessary for the
effective implementation of the air sanctions, has not yet
been completed. We are prepared to discuss specifically
questions of combating the illegal export of diamonds,
which is one of the main sources of UNITA funding.

We support the active policy of the Chairman of the
sanctions Committee and his creative approach to
performing his duties. We express the hope that the expert
panels to study violations of the sanctions regime will
finally be established in the near future and will begin their
work so that the sanctions regime can be further improved.

