Ms. Jarbussynova (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian): First of all, on behalf of my Government,
I would like to express the most sincere condolences to
the people and Government of Afghanistan on the
earthquake, which has resulted in great loss of life.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Frechette,
for her excellent submission of the Secretary-General's
report on the item under consideration.

We support the major observations and
conclusions of the report, and we share the Secretary-
General's optimism with regard to the fact that, in spite
of the destruction of infrastructure and the great loss of
life resulting from decades of war, Afghans
representing all strata of society are prepared to take
upon themselves the responsibility for the restoration
of their long-suffering country. This thesis is confirmed
by the activities of the Interim Administration, headed
by Mr. Karzai, whose legitimacy is thus affirmed at the
international level and within the country. Under his
leadership, and in close cooperation with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Brahimi,
a rehabilitation process in post-conflict Afghanistan is
under way.

In Afghan society, there are positive changes
taking place. There has been a successful conclusion of
the campaign to return Afghan children to school. On
23 March, the new school year saw 1.5 million girls
and boys sitting at their school desks. A Special
Independent Commission for the Emergency Loya
Jirga has done significant work, working out rules and
procedures that pertain to the holding of a pan-national
conference of elders. In the near future, we expect the
establishment of a human rights commission. A
national seminar in Kabul on human rights is an
important step in the achievement of the provisions of
the Bonn Agreement, which pertains to human rights.

At the same time, we note the continuing problem
of ensuring security in the region. On the whole, the
lack of security is leading to understandable concern on
the part of the population of Afghanistan. Beyond
Kabul, there is inter-ethnic conflict, skirmishes are
taking place between political groups that are trying to
establish their own influence, crime is persisting and
the remaining Taliban and Al Qaeda fighters are
destabilizing the already fragile peace in the region.

All of these factors show that there is a need for
responsible measures to maintain the peace process.
We agree with the Secretary-General about the need to
extend the presence of the International Security
Assistance Force, which is currently in Kabul, to other
major cities, since the main threat to the Interim
Administration is from the provinces, and there is a
real possibility that, as the convening of a Loya Jirga
approaches, that threat will increase.

Furthermore, the multinational forces are a
temporary element. In connection with the Bonn
Agreement, responsibility for ensuring security lies
with the Afghan people themselves. In this context, we
are encouraged by steps undertaken by the United
States, Germany and other participants in the anti-
terrorist coalition to establish a combat-ready national
army and police force in Afghanistan for the
maintenance of law and order. In order for these very
important measures to be implemented in Afghanistan,
we need further effective international support to
ensure the proper conditions for future Afghan military
forces.

From the very outset, the Government of
Kazakhstan supported the appointment of Mr. Brahimi
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
the region. In our view, the format proposed for the
United Nations presence in Afghanistan - the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, headed by
Lakhdar Brahimi - will promote the successful
conclusion of the peace process. We believe that the
components that have been proposed will undoubtedly
have a positive impact on the comprehensive
rehabilitation of Afghan society.

Kazakhstan has always advocated the need for the
earliest possible settlement of the situation in
Afghanistan. Now, as the peace settlement process is
entering the practical phase, Kazakhstan will work to
take part in the political and economic phases of the
international community's activities aimed at restoring
Afghan society.

My Government is successfully cooperating with
the World Food Programme, through which Kazakhstan
is delivering to Afghanistan approximately 94,000 tons
of grain, worth $12 million. We are also preparing for
the possible participation of the Kazakhstan
peacekeeping battalion in international forces to assist
security efforts in Afghanistan.

