Mr. Opeloyeru: At the outset, I would like to
express our thanks and appreciation to the Government
of Senegal for having taken the initiative of organizing
this timely meeting. The fact that the Security Council
has agreed to convene today's meeting on cooperation
between the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation (OIC)
and the United Nations shows Clearly the importance
it rightly attaches to this event. I would like to also
underscore the significance of the excellent ideas
contained in the concept note prepared by the delegation
of Senegal (see S/2016/965), which further develops
this vital issue.

Allow me to avail myself of the opportunity to
congratulate Senegal on its outstanding performance
during its tenure as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council and the presidency of the Council for
this month. I wish to also convey my gratitude to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for the tireless efforts he has exerted to strengthen the
cooperation, which has now reached a strategic level,
between the United Nations and OIC. We share his
vision of the strategic cooperative relationship between
our two organizations. I would like to also congratulate,
on behalf of the Organization, Mr. Antonio Guterres,
for his election to become the next Secretary-General.

The goals and objectives of OIC and the United
Nations are broadly similar. Both organizations are
devoted to the cause of international peace, security
and development, and share common challenges in
all domains of human endeavour. The OIC vision,
which puts people first, aims to develop human capital
and achieve inclusive growth. It envisions its role as
an effective partner for peace and development in
the world.

Entrusted with a mission to defend the collective
interests and just causes of its member States, OIC,
based on its Charter, was established on the noble
principles of peace, harmony, tolerance, brotherhood
and equality of all human beings. The preamble of
its Charter reaffirms the commitment of its Member
States, which are all United Nations Members, to the
Charter of the United Nations. It has therefore, since
its establishment, set for itself as a primary task the
realization of the principles and purposes of the United
Nations, and has strived consistently to contribute to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
That is why OIC continues address on a regular basis
many issues that also top the agenda of the Security
Council, such as the Middle East, Syria, Somalia, Mali,
Libya, Afghanistan and the Central African Republic.

OIC and the United Nations have engaged in
successful bilateral coordination and exchanges,
which have been organized in Geneva and Jeddah, and
thereby enhanced our levels of cooperation and sharing
of best practices. In his recent statement, in September
before the annual coordination meeting of OIC Foreign
Ministers on the sidelines of the current General
Assembly session, the United Nations Secretary-

General highlighted the successful partnership that has
been developed by the two organizations in all areas
of mutual concern and interest. On our part, we attach
great importance to that relationship and are determined
to even further enhance it with the aim of promoting
peace, justice, human rights and development.

Based on our firm belief in the critical role that
international organizations play, OIC has deployed
tremendous efforts to build and sustain a network of
close cooperative relationships, not only with United
Nations but with other regional and subregional
organizations, in order to secure a broad and inclusive
platform for the benefit of global peace, security and
socioeconomic development.

The Organization ofIslamic Cooperation is anatural
partner of the United Nations in countering terrorism
and preventing violent extremism, the two of which
are increasingly threatening every society, as well as
international peace and security. OIC has consistently
been at the forefront in the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism. Cooperation with key international
and regional partners in combating terrorism is among
the key objectives ofthe OIC Charter. Adopting its code
of conduct, as well as the Convention on Combating
International Terrorism, in 1994 and 1999, respectively,
OIC was among the first to formulate a clear and
principled position against terrorism.

Fully committed to cooperating with the United
Nations Secretariat and its relevant agencies, the
OIC Secretary General welcomed the United Nations
Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism right after its release. Similarly, the OIC
Member States expressed their support to the Plan
of Action during the OIC Summit, held in Istanbul
in April.

OIC views the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy as a viable guideline for the
Member States to counter terrorism, and the Plan of
Action as a meaningful contribution to the effective
implementation of pillars I and IV of the Strategy. As
far as measures to eliminate the spread of terrorism are
concerned, OIC organized, jointly with the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), a workshop
back in 2013, to promote the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005). Currently, we are in talks with
CTED to organize a second workshop with a broader
scope, including the implementation of both resolution
1624 (2005) and resolution 2178 (2014). We are also in
talks with CTED to see how we can benefit from its
legal expertise as the OIC undertakes a revision of the
OIC Convention on Combating International Terrorism.

Similarly, we are discussing with the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force how we can
cooperate towards promoting the implementation of
the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism. In that sense, one of the concrete
projects under consideration is a high-level event on the
prevention of youth radicalization in the Middle East.

OIC believes that the first step in countering
radicalization and preventing violent extremism should
be to deprive terrorist groups of legitimacy in the
eyes of the people they exploit by repudiating the very
arguments they use to justify their criminal acts. On its
part and based on its commitment to fighting terrorism
and countering violent extremism, OIC works to
delegitimize terrorist ideologies by developing counter-
narratives to such extremist ideologies and propaganda,
and by elevating credible and authentic religious voices
that support tolerance and non-violence.

Earlier this month, in partnership with the Islamic,
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(lSESCO) and the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum,
OIC organized a workshop at ISESCO headquarters in
Rabat as part of its efforts to combat extremism and
promote a moderate Islamic narrative. The workshop
discussed the role of religious education in promoting
peace and combating violence. More specifically,
it discussed ways in which religious schools and
institutions can contribute to the broader education
experience in promoting a proper interpretation of
Islam and preventing children and youth from falling
into trap of extremists.

Moreover, on 3 October, the OIC established a
Centre for Dialogue, Peace and Understanding within its
General Secretariat, and officially launched its website
during the forty-third session of the OIC Council of
Foreign Ministers, held in Tashkent later in the month.
The Centre's primary mission is to counter incitement
to all forms of terrorism, violence and extremism,
particularly incitement through social networking
platforms, media and cyberspace. Accordingly, the
new OIC Centre aims to debunk extremist narratives
through counter-messaging over social media outlets,
as well as messaging on ideological subjects targeting
Muslim youth, and to produce videos and animations
exposing the reality of terrorist groups claiming to
be Islamic.

The OIC Programme of Action for 2016-2025,
entitled OIC 2025, is anchored in the provisions of
the OIC Charter, while the directions emanating
from the OIC forums provide the conceptual
framework for its development paradigm. It focuses
on 17 priority areas, which include peace and security;
poverty alleviation; trade, investment and finance;
employment, infrastructure and industrialization;
science, technology and innovation; climate change
and sustainability; moderation, culture and interfaith
harmony; the advancement and empowerment of women;
human rights, good governance and accountability;
information and communication technology and digital
structure, among others.

The OIC Programme of Action has also given
prominence to development programmes, including
physical and human capital development, poverty
eradication, the provision of social safety nets and
youth empowerment. It is therefore our strong belief
that OIC-2025 will serve to our member States as a
solid basis for the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals. Accordingly, in its capacity as one
of the leading intergovernmental organizations in the
area of South-South cooperation, OIC has developed
strong partnerships with the relevant institutions of the
United Nations for the implementation of its various
socioeconomic programmes aimed at promoting
peacebuilding and conflict prevention among its
57 member States.

As international peace and development are now
faced with many difficulties and challenges, it is
imperative to respond to them collectively at the national,
regional and international levels. In a rapidly changing
world, strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and OIC will both promote multilateralism and
boost the international collective security mechanism.
To that end, OIC has continued to play an important
role in the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts, promoting post-conflict reconstruction and
defusing humanitarian crises in its member States. It
has also been active in combating violent extremism
and terrorism, as well as in promoting socioeconomic
development, as important contributions to the global
efforts in the enhancement of international peace
and security.

In that regard, OIC has expressed on many occasions
that it stands ready to develop effective partnership
with the United Nations to strengthen cooperation in
all areas and to develop early responses to disputes
and emerging crises. Consequently, the OIC General
Secretariat has made sustained efforts to increase the
role ofthe Organization in the maintenance ofpeace and
security, conflict prevention and conflict resolution.
In that context, OIC has set up a Peace, Security and
Mediation Unit and a Department for Outreach and
Dialogue. It has just launched its messaging centre to
counter the narratives and discourse of extremists who
seek to disrupt global peace and security.

In that regard, OIC has made valuable contributions
to the work of the United Nations in the areas of
conflict prevention, crisis management, mediation,
humanitarian assistance, the promotion of human
rights, good governance, the rule of law and sustainable
development through the many political, economic
and social instruments and resources available to
it. Accordingly, OIC has hosted at its headquarters
in Jeddah a number of international contact groups,
such as those for Afghanistan and Somalia, as well
as regional organization mediation meetings and
counter-terrorism workshops. The United Nations-OIC
biannual consultation meeting provides an excellent
opportunity for both organizations to identify all areas
of cooperation, with a clear matrix and specific time
frame for implementation.

We look forward to more engagement with the
United Nations to enhance the capacity of OIC on the
basis of its needs and strategic priorities so as to enable
it to act as an effective partner to the United Nations
in addressing the immediate and future challenges that
face the Muslim world. The example of partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the areas of peace, security and development is a good
example to be followed in that regard.

In conclusion, I should like to renew the commitment
of OIC to remaining a strong and active partner of the
United Nations in addressing issues of mutual interest
and concern, as well as current and future challenges,
in defence and promotion of global peace, security and
development. We have achieved a great deal together,
but I believe that more remains to be done. And it is only
through close and coherent cooperation, collaboration
and coordination that both organizations can make our
world a more prosperous and secure environment for
all our peoples.
