Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank and
commend Ambassador Verbeke, Ambassador Arias and
Ambassador Burian for their respective briefings on
the work of the Committees established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), resolution 1373 (2001) and
resolution 1540 (2004). I would like to make the
following comments.

China appreciates the progress made in the work
of the 1267 Committee, which includes updating its
working methods, enhancing the quality of the
sanctions lists, further improving the sanctions
mechanism and ensuring the fairness and transparency
of listing and delisting procedures. We are pleased to
note that the Committee has further developed its
website, expanded the volume of information and
improved indexing methods. That has made the website
an effective tool to enable Member States to strengthen
their interactive exchanges with the Committee. The
Committee is also continuing to share information and
to cooperate effectively with the relevant international
and regional organizations - such as Interpol - as
well as to intensify dialogue and exchanges with
Member States through visits and seminars. We believe
that the Committee will continue to enhance its
efficiency and authority in the future and that, with the
support and cooperation of Member States, it will
effectively promote international cooperation to
combat terrorism.

With regard to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), we have noted that, since the
beginning of 2007, the Committee has made some
progress in improving its methods of work. In order to
reduce the burden of reporting, the CTC has adopted a
new approach - the Preliminary Implementation
Assessment - which has further strengthened dialogue
with Member States. China hopes that the Committee
will continue to improve its working methods in
practice, so as to fully reflect the principles of
transparency, fairness and consistency, as well as to
make it an effective means of monitoring and
promoting the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) and resolution 1624 (2005) at the level of
States.

China appreciates the fact that the CTC, with the
assistance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), is continuing to
effectively move ahead with its work in the areas of
visits to Member States, providing technical assistance
and establishing best practices. China urges CTED to
carry out comprehensive analysis of its work in
providing technical assistance and cooperating with
international organizations. Those activities help the
CTC to formulate effective and practical guidelines.
For the time being, the CTC should continue to focus
on the work programme for the first half of the year. It
should also endeavour to meet existing work targets.

China commends Mr. Javier Ruperez for his
contribution to the United Nations effort to counter
terrorism as the head of CTED for the past three years.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to him.

The 1540 Committee formulated its programme of
work this past October. Since then, the Committee's work
has focused on the implementation of the resolution,
outreach and international assistance and cooperation.
That undertaking has positive implications for the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and resolution 1673 (2006). China supports and attaches
great importance to the role of the 1540 Committee. As
always, we are prepared to participate in the work of the
Committee in a constructive manner. We hope that the
Committee will maintain its positive momentum,
strengthen its work in the areas of outreach and technical
assistance and make a contribution by forging consensus
on non-proliferation and promoting international efforts
in that regard.
In recent months, terrorist forces have increased
their violent activities across the world, thereby
seriously jeopardizing the peace and security of the
international community. Terrorists are the common
enemy of all humankind. No terrorist act is tolerable or
forgivable. The international community should adopt
integrated measures to address the threat of terrorism
by focusing simultaneously on preventing and
combating terrorism, endeavouring to eliminate the
root causes that breed terrorism and enhancing overall
awareness of the counter-terrorism capabilities of
Member States.

China calls for strengthening the role of the
United Nations and the Security Council in the
international fight against terrorism. We also advocate
a strengthening of the role of the United Nations and
the Security Council in international counter-terrorism
efforts and are in favour of the active implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. China supports the efforts of the three
Committees to continue their coordination and
cooperation while fully consolidating existing counter-
terrorism resources in order to make the United
Nations counter-terrorism mechanisms more effective.

