Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow me to
express my appreciation for the opportunity to address
the Security Council.

This year, Afghanistan will witness a number of
significant milestones - ones that will involve Afghans
taking on a greater responsibility for the future direction
of their country, as well as ones that will address the
vital needs of democratization, security and peace.

On 5 April, Afghan citizens will exercise their right
to elect the next Afghan President and the members
of provincial councils. That historic day will mark
Afghanistan's first democratic transition of power
from one presidential leader to another. Over the past
year, Afghanistan put into place a robust legislative
framework, national institutions and local machinery to
conduct credible, constitutional and inclusive elections.
We welcome the efforts of the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) and the Ministry of the Interior, who have
identified and addressed numerous security challenges
to help ensure that all Afghans are able to participate
in the elections. We are especially interested to see
the success of measures that facilitate the enhanced
participation of women. Canada is encouraged by the
number of women voters registered thus far, and further
calls on all Afghan citizens, Government officials, civil
society organizations and the international community
to increase their efforts to ensure the meaningful
participation of women in all aspects of the electoral
process leading to the elections of 5 April.

(spoke in English)

Since 2011, the Government of Afghanistan, with
the assistance of the international community, has
built a strong and capable Afghan National Security
Forces that now leads security operations throughout
the country. By 31 December 2014, those forces will
have full responsibility for the security of Afghanistan,
as the International Security Assistance Force mission
draws to an end. We can expect that the growing
capability of those forces will be tested in the coming
months by a determined insurgency. Nevertheless,
with each passing day, Afghans are increasing their
confidence in their security forces. Those outside of
the political process should come to recognize that
their future, their safety and security, and the future
of Afghanistan, lies within a peace and reconciliation
process. Canada is proud of the contribution we have
made 4 and continue to make - in strengthening the
ANSF. We call upon the Government of Afghanistan
to sign without delay the requisite Afghanistan-United
States bilateral security agreement and conclude the
NATO-Afghanistan status-of-forces agreement to allow
the international community to continue its military
assistance to Afghanistan.

While Canada's military mission has ended,
Canadian support to Afghanistan has not. Indeed,
Canada has committed $227 million in development
assistance for 2014 to 2017, to maintain the hard-fought
gains for women and girls through support for improved
health, education, humanitarian assistance and human
rights. In addition, Canada remains committed to the
safety and security of Afghanistan through continued
support to sustain the Afghan National Security Forces
with $330 million between 2015 and 2017.

Afghans themselves know that much remains to be
done to improve the protection of human rights in their
country. We note that the Government of Afghanistan
recently released its report on the implementation of the
elimination of violence against women law. Although
that report satisfies one of the obligations under the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, it also
illustrates the startling reality that violence against
women remains pervasive throughout Afghanistan.
Canada has made enhancing human rights protections
and empowering Afghan women and girls the focus
of its development assistance for 2014 to 2017 and the
priority in our relations with Afghanistan. We call upon
the Government of Afghanistan to fully implement the
elimination of violence against women law, and make
every effort to guarantee the participation of women in
all facets of Afghan life, be it in the security, political,
economic or cultural domains. Canada stresses that all
Afghan laws must ensure strong protections for women
and girls, as guaranteed by the Afghan Constitution and
in line with Afghanistan's international commitments
to protect human rights, particularly protecting Afghan
women and girls from sexual and domestic violence
and child early and forced marriage. Afghanistan's full
potential cannot, and will not, be achieved without the
full participation of all of its citizens.

Afghans also want an end to Government
corruption. We see the vibrant youth and civil society
movements in Afghanistan - over half of the population
is under 25 years old - and we can see their appetite
for change, for jobs, for an end to corruption and for a
chance to compete in the regional and global economy.
The Afghan Government must do more to combat
corruption by becoming more accountable to its people
and to international donors. Canada encourages the
Government of Afghanistan to meet the benchmarks
set out by the International Monetary Fund and to
pass new laws to address the corruption that is eroding
the public's trust at all levels of Government. If the
international community is to continue its special level
of engagement with Afghanistan, it will also need to be
confident that tangible results are being achieved in the
fight against Government corruption. Action on that
front will also help generate the investor interest needed
to grow and sustain the Afghan economy. Passing a
minerals law that is in line with international standards
would send a clear signal to the world's investors that
Afghanistan is genuinely open for business.

In conclusion, Canada remains committed to helping
Afghanistan become a more peaceful and prosperous
country in the heart of Asia, one that is able to benefit
from the vast economic opportunities available. In that
vein, we emphasize that networks of terrorists deployed
from neighbouring States must be held accountable,
as must their supporters. Reconciliation that fails to
enshrine the indispensable rights of women, advance a
constitutional democracy or tackle endemic corruption
is not reconciliation. The road to peace is fraught with
perils and pitfalls, but it is increasingly one on which
Afghans will lead the charge.

