Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France is
devastated by the result of today's voting. We deeply
deplore the fact that, thanks to another Russian veto, the
Security Council has been unable to agree on a simple,
balanced draft resolution condemning and seeking to
throw light on what happened at Khan Shaykhun. We
nonetheless strove to engage in discussion of the draft
in good faith. We have failed yet again to measure up
to the responsibility that we have assigned ourselves
and to the fundamental values that we are supposed to
support and ensure respect for. Almost four years after
the Ghouta massacre in August 2013, the Council has
taken a terrible step backwards.

The attack on Khan Shaykhun would appear to
be the latest example of the abject duplicity of a hard-
line regime. Once again, everything about it points
to the Damascus regime's clear responsibility for the
attack. Through it, the Syrian regime has crossed
another threshold of horror and of scorn for the most
basic standards and elementary principles of humanity,
which, as we have seen, it has continued to flout. France
has always said, not as an ideological statement but
because the evidence tells us so, that the Middle East
will never have peace and security as long as a regime
exists that is guilty of committing war crimes, indeed
crimes against humanity, in order to maintain its hold
on power. That regime slaughters its own population on
the pretext of fighting terrorism, while continuing to
fan the flames of Da'esh.

After the attack on 4 April, a military installation
of the Syrian regime that had been used for chemical
bombardments was destroyed by United States
air strikes. The American operation was a legitimate
response to a mass crime that could not go unpunished.
Bashar Al-Assad, as we have reiterated on many
occasions, bears full responsibility for this development.

Russia's veto on 28 February (see S/PV.7893) of a
draft resolution (S/2017/l72) aimed at punishing those
responsible for the chemical attacks committed several
years ago already represented a dangerous indication of
looming impunity. The massacre in Khan Shaykhoun
should have acted as a wake-up call to all of us about
our responsibilities. How can those who claim to be
committed to the non-proliferation regime and the fight
against impunity reject the evidence before them? How
is it possible to repeatedly and in such a systematic
manner evade the issue of the barbaric use of weapons
of mass destruction targeting innocent people? Nothing
can justify averting one's eyes from such atrocities, or
dissembling, or attempting to assign blame elsewhere
and trying to impose counter-narratives on the world.

France will not resign itself to the notion of the
Council's impotence that some seek to impose on it.
We will lend our full support to the work of United
Nations and OPCW mechanisms, including in their
efforts to shed light on the circumstances of the attack.
We must also fully support the OPCW team responsible
for the inquiry into the initial Syrian declaration. Our
goal will continue to be the dismantling of the Syrian
chemical-weapons programme.

France will not accept impunity for those responsible
for the atrocities committed in Syria. We will spare no
effort to ensure that sooner or later the perpetrators
answer for their crimes. France will also work to
strengthen the non-proliferation regime, which is vital
for our collective security and which the Council has to
date always sought to uphold.

The initiative undertaken by France, along with
Mexico, on limiting the use of the veto in the case
of mass atrocities is aimed at precisely situations of
this kind. It is now clearly more topical than ever and
reflective of our concerns.

This tragedy is yet another reminder of the fact
that only a genuine political transition will allow us to
guarantee peace and security for the Syrian people and
a return to stability in the Middle East. We cannot wait
for other crimes to be added to the long list of abuses
committed by the Syrian regime, which no one, not
even its closest supporters, can justify any longer.

We cannot simply give up. We owe it to the
Victims of this heinous chemical attack, and, more
broadly speaking, to all of the victims of the Syrian
tragedy. In that context, despite the fact that the veto
was wielded once again today, France solemnly calls
on all the members of the Security Council to come
together and set aside political divisions and national
interests in order to establish once again a complete ban
on chemical weapons and to help bring about, on an
urgent basis, a political transition in Syria, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

Let us live up to our responsibilities before the
judgment of history.

