Mr. Zarif: I thank the President of the Security
Council for the opportunity today to introduce the report
of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) (S/2012/603), and to brief the Council on
current developments and issues that the international
community is confronting in Kosovo.

In particular, I wish today to highlight, once
more, the risks of the sometimes quiet, yet hazardous,
tendency towards complacency. From the perspective of
those of us on the ground, opportunities to reinvigorate
a political process are fleeting, while the cost ofmissing
such opportunities can be very high. My assessment is
that more active and deliberate political international
engagement with the parties is urgently needed. The
elevation of the level of representation of the parties
at the table today attests to such an assessmentDuring
the current reporting period, sessions of the European
Union-led Belgrade-Pristina dialogue remained
suspended owing to the May general elections in Serbia
and the political process leading to the formation of a
new Government on 27 July.

I had the opportunity, some two weeks ago, to
meet with the new leadership in Belgrade, including
President Tomislav Nikolie and Prime Minister Ivica
Dacie. I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
His Excellency Mr. Ivan Mrkie on his appointment as
the new Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. During
my meetings with the Serbian leadership, I welcomed
their early and clear assurances of their commitment
to the full implementation of agreements previously
reached in the dialogue, and also to the early resumption
of dialogue.

A clear demonstration of a full faith commitment
to the dialogue, including through the expeditious
implementation of the agreements reached, is now
very important from both sides. As highlighted in
the Secretary-General's report, delays in carrying out
commitments or in settling subsequent discrepancies
in interpretation should not be an excuse to prolong
the pause in the process. I trust that, with the new
Government now in place in Belgrade, the European
Union-facilitated dialogue will soon resume. I further
hope that those involved in the process will have used
the period of the recent hiatus to focus on further
enhancements to the process, including dedicating
increased attention to the implementation stage.

The first official visit of the Secretary-General to
the region, in late July, just after the end of the period
covered by his report, contributed to raising the level of
the discussions on a number ofessential issues. I believe
it also contributed to setting the stage for what we all
have hoped to witness, namely, an energized approach
to tackling key issues in the very near future. Important
as it is to ensure the parties' renewed commitment to
dialogue, the international community should also
strive to renew its engagement during the next critical
period.

On the ground, considerable progress has been
made towards increased cohesion and efficiency
among the internationally mandated presences.
Increased exchanges among UNMIK, the European
Union Office in Kosovo, the Kosovo Force (KFOR),
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe have resulted in improved coherence of efforts
on many issues of common interest. Such coordination
also brings into clearer view those issues that can be
addressed through improved joint effort, as well as
those that have been held up by the lack of political
progress.

The European Union Office in Kosovo has continued
stepping up its operations, under the leadership of
European Union Special Representative Zbogar. During
the current reporting period, EULEX carried out a
substantial internal restructuring aimed at streamlining
its operation, while also increasing conceptual clarity
and efficiency. Alongside that conceptual redesign,
it remains essential, in our view, that great care be
taken to ensure capability and readiness for effective
interventions, especially in areas where the development
of rule-of-law institutions remains insufficient and
where they are at times subjected to political currents.

Although UNMIK'S operational activities are
limited, we have nonetheless remained focused on
increasing positive results from our engagement with
the Kosovo authorities, in areas that contribute directly
to improvements in the lives of the Kosovar people. I
was gratified by the findings of a survey held in June
that showed a healthy trend in the standing of the
United Nations among the Kosovo population. The
European Union-sponsored poll revealed that more than
three-quarters of the Kosovo population had trust in the
United Nations, an increase of some 15 per cent since
the previous survey, in 2010.

In addition to our relations at the political level
in Kosovo, the Mission's work has been undergoing
refinement, with the objective of enabling us to work
more efficiently with the local communities, the
institutions and our international partners in support of
a much-needed progress in human rights protection, the
return of internally displaced persons and refugees, and
determining the fate of missing persons.

Our endeavours also include coordinated steps to
improve constructive engagement at all levels in the
northern part of Kosovo. Concerning that area, far more
effort will be needed to change the familiar posturing
and rhetoric that emanates alternately from Pristina,
Belgrade and northern Kosovo. As I have stressed in
previous Council meetings, setting enabling conditions
for a legitimate and genuine representation of the
interests of the population in northern Kosovo should
be a matter of priority. Achieving that goal will require
demonstrated goodwill as well as political maturity
from all sides. We hope that progress towards that goal
will not continue to be hindered by the unconstructive
patterns and political bluster that have become far too
pervasive. That essential component of overall political
progress will also depend upon positive engagement
and support from the members of the Council.

It is my sincere hope that, during the forthcoming
period, neither the parties nor the key international
stakeholders will allow any opportunity to be missed
for imparting vitality to the efforts aimed at addressing
the root and core political problems in a deliberate and
forthright manner. We must be mindful not to conflate
short-term stability with genuine progress towards
fundamental solutions.

Accordingly, I wish to appeal once again to the
members of the Council to positively apply their
authority and influence in order to assist and encourage
the parties towards a more creative, bold and forward-
looking approach to negotiations, based on compromise
and mutual respect. I believe that only by pursuing
that path can we expect any real progress, along with
greater successes, eventually putting the unfortunate
past to rest. A less active approach now will, in my
view, amount to perpetuating the status quo, which is
in the interest of no one.

I wish to add, on the occasion of the conclusion
of their 12-month tenure in the coming days, a
special word of appreciation to the outgoing KFOR
Commander, Major General Drews of Germany, and
his Deputy, Brigadier General Luif of Austria, for their
exceptional professionalism and consistent engagement
in maintaining a safe and secure environment during
the past year. They have been instrumental in promoting
the goal of synergy of effort among the mandate-holders
on the ground.

Finally, I wish sincerely to thank the Council
members for their continuing support for the work of
UNMIK.

