Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow
me to start by thanking the United States for convening
this important debate. Let me also thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. J ean-Pierre Lacroix, and Ms. Sarah Blakemore, from
the non-governmental organization Keeping Children
Safe, for their thought-provoking interventions.

(spoke in English)

The success of peacekeeping operations depends
on the credibility, integrity and reputation of the
United Nations in the eyes of the local population. A
growing body of evidence shows that increasing the
meaningful participation of women at all levels in
peace operations can enhance effectiveness by bringing
valuable perspectives, helping build trust with local
communities and increasing situational awareness
by accessing a greater diversity of information about
conflict dynamics. Women bring irreplaceable assets to
United Nation peace operations and their contributions
support the safety and security ofpeacekeepers, as well
as the operational effectiveness of missions.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) 18
years ago, the United Nations has repeatedly set targets
for the increased deployment of women to uniformed
roles in peace operations. Unfortunately, we are not on
track to meet these targets. What will it take? We need
to demonstrate political commitment at the highest
level from a broad range of countries, including troop-
contributing countries and host Governments.

Canada has work to do at home as well. Far too many
women in Canada continue to face discrimination and
gender-based violence. It is apriority for my Government
to meaningfully address these challenges. In the context
of peacekeeping, we are doing so by actively working
to recruit more women to the Canadian Armed Forces,
increase the number of Canadian women deployed to
multinational operations and better mainstream gender
considerations into how our Government works.

(spoke in French)

Through effective collaboration and the bold
leadership of troop-contributing countries, we can
recruit, train and deploy many more women to United
Nations operations. But deployment itself is not
sufficient; mission leadership must also leverage the
contributions and performance of uniformed women
deployed in their missions. Making this a reality
will require honest reflection at Headquarters, in
missions and contributing countries on the barriers
and biases that persist. Deploying more women to
peacekeeping operations - and mainstreaming gender
considerations - will make a tangible improvement to
peacekeeping performance.

(spoke in English)

Canada is contributing to these efforts as a matter
of national priority. Since 2014, Canadian police have
been at the forefront of a United Nations initiative to
provide pre-selection training to female United Nations
police peacekeeping candidates and we have partnered
with the United Nations to deliver the Female Senior
Police Command Development Course, preparing more
than 130 female police commanders for leadership roles
in United Nations police components.

In November, Canada launched the Elsie Initiative
for Women in Peace Operations because we believe
that a thoughtful combination of technical assistance,
training, financial incentives and research can help
catalyse transformational change and accelerate
progress to meet United Nations targets. Canada's
Minister of Foreign Affairs looks forward to updating
Member States on the progress of the initiative at an
event on the margins of the high-level week of the
General Assembly later this month. Member States can
also be sure that we will remain an active proponent of
tangible progress on these issues should we be elected
to serve on the Security Council for the 2021-22 term.

Let me now address the issue of sexual exploitation
and abuse. I am glad that it has been included in this
debate on peacekeeping. It is clearly not only a conduct
and discipline issue, but also one of performance,
effectiveness and legitimacy. Instances of sexual
exploitation and abuse undermine the credibility of
United Nations operations by breaking down the trust
between the mission and the communities they serve.
We must work together to end sexual exploitation
and abuse. Canada is a strong advocate of the full
implementation of the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy. Our efforts to make this policy real must span
the entirety of the United Nations system, as well as the
national frameworks of troop- and police-contributing
countries. Victims must be able to access a single,
integrated, responsive and compassionate system that
treats them with dignity, investigates claims and offers
a path to justice and restitution.

While the Secretary-General has been unequivocal
in his message that sexual exploitation and abuse are
unacceptable, this message has not yet translated into
concrete efforts across all United Nations operations.
Only solid leadership can overcome this. The goal
is clear - a comprehensive response consistently
implemented across the United Nations system to
prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and abuse
and to assist victims. Similarly, more needs to be done
to clarify the role of the Victims' Rights Advocate and,
more broadly, how a victim-centred approach should be
articulated in policy and in practice.

The Secretary-General's strategy relies upon the
successful functioning of key mechanisms, including
the Office of the Special Coordinator, the Office of
the Victims' Rights Advocate and the Trust Fund in
Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
These Offices should be sufficiently resourced to tackle
a task of this scale, yet much more needs to be done to
ensure accountability and fundamentally reconfigure
our collective approach to make responses victim-
centred. At the end of the day, victims should feel
safe in coming forward. It is up to all of us to make it
happen; the system needs to be geared towards making
it happen.

(spoke in French)

At the Vancouver Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
conference last year, Canada hosted 80 Member States
and five international organizations to consider how we
can better undertake peace operations. It is imperative
that troop- and police-contributing countries work
together to ensure the reliable and predictable
availability of capabilities to meet the critical needs of
United Nations operations. It is equally important that
we work together to develop new ways to meet those
needs that make best use of scarce resources.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
improving peacekeeping performance is a complex
task. Increasing the meaningful participation of women
and tackling sexual exploitation and abuse are essential
components of this effort. As I said earlier, part of this
effort starts at home. We each need to work with our
own national institutions and we need to help and learn
from each other. Council members may rest assured
that Canada will be looking to the Council, as well as
to other Member States, civil society and experts, for
advice on what works. We all need to encourage, push
and support the United Nations to reach its own goals.
We all benefit from a safer world; we need to work
together to make this a reality.

