Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his briefing.
I would also like to express our happiness at seeing the
presence here today of the Chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee of the Council of Federation and
Special Representative of the President of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Mikhail Margelov. We are grateful for
his contribution to the discussion.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by Sweden in its capacity as President of
the European Union.

Austria welcomes the progress in deployment
achieved by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which now stands at
68 per cent, and hopes that the Mission will, in
principle, reach full deployment level by the end of the
year. We are also encouraged by the improvement in
cooperation in the framework of the Tripartite
Committee between the Government of the Sudan, the
African Union and the United Nations. In some areas,
improvements are nonetheless required, especially
concerning the issuance of visas, customs clearances
for equipment and freedom of movement of the
mission.

A negotiated political settlement of the crisis in
Darfur remains the only solution to the crisis. Austria
would like to reiterate its full support for the Joint
African Union-United Nations Mediation. We are
concerned at the lack of progress in the implementation
of the Doha agreement and call upon the signatories to
engage in substantive negotiations without
preconditions. An inclusive approach involving all
stakeholders, including civil society, is essential. From
our point of view, particular efforts should be made to
include women. Regional actors and the international
community need to make continued efforts to bring all
non-participating groups to the negotiation table.

Like others, we are also concerned by the
increased instability along the Sudan-Chad border and
by the deterioration of relations between the two
countries. We fully support all efforts by countries in
the region to ease tensions. We understand that there
are discussions under way concerning the
implementation of the border observation plan as
outlined in the Dakar Agreement. We would welcome a
monitoring of the border, and if there can be a role for
UNAMID and the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) in
this matter, it should be positively considered.
The matter of Darfur cannot be viewed separately
from the other open issues concerning the Sudan. The
Permanent Court of Arbitration announced its decision
regarding the boundaries of the disputed area of Abyei
on 22 July. Both parties accepted the decision of the
Court as final and binding. That is a major step in the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. Both parties need to avoid confrontation
and now have to work together to inform the population
about the decision and see to it that it is implemented.

The position of Austria on the issue of
cooperation with the International Criminal Court is
well known. At the same time, Austria welcomes the
African Union initiative to establish the High-Level
Panel on Darfur under the leadership of President
Mbeki and hopes that this initiative will also help to
address the matter of accountability. Austria believes
that the questions of judicial reform and transitional
justice mechanisms need to be addressed in any
settlement.

Small-scale but consistent returns of internally
displaced persons have been occurring in some places
in Darfur. Large-scale conflict has decreased. Security
conditions have to be created which are conducive to
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs). I make this point because the security situation
remains volatile and poses an ongoing threat to
civilians as well as to United Nations and humanitarian
staff.

Austria is concerned that banditry and sexual
violence continue to plague civilians throughout
Darfur. To protect the civilian population it will be
important to maintain the security and civilian
character of IDP camps and to prevent any recruitment
by armed groups of individuals, including children, in
or around the camps. All parties to the conflict must
show restraint and abide by their obligations to protect
the civilian population under human rights law and
international humanitarian law. We expect the
Government of the Sudan to continue to ensure the
safety and security of all United Nations personnel as
well as of humanitarian workers.

The decision by the Government of the Sudan to
expel and dissolve 16 humanitarian and human rights
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) has had a
detrimental effect on the work of UNAMID. Efforts by
the United Nations, the Government of the Sudan and
remaining NGOs have narrowed some of the gaps in
the humanitarian field. However, the number of aid
workers remains below pre-expulsion levels.
Particularly in remote locations, it is difficult for
humanitarian assistance to reach those in need. The
Sudanese Government has to assume its responsibility
to safeguard and provide food, shelter and health care
for the population of Darfur and other areas affected by
the expulsion of the humanitarian NGOs.

Last but not least, we would like to commend the
work done by UNAMID personnel and humanitarian
staff in Darfur under very difficult conditions. Austria
fully supports the extension of UNAMID's mandate for
one year, until 31 July 2010. We thank the United
Kingdom for its efforts on a draft resolution on this
matter.

