Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): It has
become a tradition for Ambassadors Mayoral, Loj and
Motoc to address the Security Council at the same
meeting in order to inform it of the activities and the
efforts they are making as the heads of their respective
committees. I should like to thank them and
congratulate them upon their excellent briefings. I
would agree with Ambassador Mayoral that resolution
1617 (2005) has provided some clarity, especially
regarding the idea "associated with Al-Qaida and the
Taliban", and the recognition of the role to be played
by the International Civil Aviation Organization and
Interpol in the implementation of sanctions,
particularly with regard to travel documents.

We welcome this resolution, which has renewed
the mandate of the Monitoring Team. This is
acknowledgement of its efforts and of the
professionalism of the members of the Team. We
congratulate Mr. Richard Barrett and the Monitoring
Team, as well as the members of the Secretariat, for the
assistance they have been providing the Committee.
We also welcome the fact that the Committee has
considered in depth the third report submitted by the
Monitoring Team and that it has approved certain of
the recommendations within its mandate. We
encourage the Committee and the Monitoring Team to
continue to use visits to verify the implementation of
sanctions, thus meeting the concerns of States in this
regard and strengthening dialogue with Member States
at the political level. The recent visit of the Chairman
of the Committee to certain African countries was
productive, and we encourage him to continue the
follow-up to such visits, especially regarding
strengthening the capacity of developing countries and
African countries.

We support the future activities of the Committee,
especially the need for an intensive dialogue with
Member States and for close cooperation among the
Committees involved in the campaign against
terrorism.

My delegation supports the seventeenth work
programme of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and also welcomes the fact that its Executive
Directorate (CTED) has now become operational. We
are convinced that this achievement will greatly benefit
Member States. The fact that the Directorate has
become operational has already been reflected in a
speeding-up of the processing of reports submitted by
Member States.

Regarding visits, I note with satisfaction that the
appeal I made a few months ago is beginning to be
heeded. Thus, CTED will soon visit three member
States of the Security Council, including Algeria. I
should like to see other members of the Council
volunteer to host visits of CTED, especially in light of
resolution 1624 (2005) on incitement to terrorism. The
CTC was mandated to ensure follow-up on the
implementation of that resolution.

We agree with the views of Ambassador Loj on
the priority areas of CTC activity, be it the involvement
of regional organizations in the fight against terrorism,
action-oriented and result-oriented dialogue with
potential donors, visits to countries for their agreement
or the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005).

Finally, I would like to state once again that my
country condemns all acts of terrorism, and we would
like to thank Ambassador Javier Ruperez and the
members of the Executive Directorate, as well as
members of the Secretariat, for their valuable
assistance in the work of the Committee.

Regarding the 1540 Committee, I would like to
thank you, Sir, as Chairman of that Committee, for the
excellent report and, through you, commend the
Committee and the group of experts for the
praiseworthy efforts they have been making. Since the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) in April 2004, the
international community has made important progress
in coping with the threat inherent in the acquisition of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors. This
progress is shown in the substantial number of national
reports submitted by Member States pursuant to
obligations mandated under paragraph 4 of resolution
1540 (2004), which is undeniably a collective response
aimed at protecting us against the proliferation of such
weapons.

In this connection, my delegation welcomes the
fact that 124 States have submitted their national
report, or even two reports, often in difficult conditions
because of time constraints imposed by the provisions
of the resolution and the diversity and complexity of
the topics with which it deals. We should bear those
limitations in mind when we consider the delay shown
by a certain number of States, especially in Africa, in
the drafting of their national reports.

In this regard, the 1540 Committee should set
aside a substantial portion of its work programme to
considering the possibility of lending assistance to
States that might request it. With this in view, we
believe that States should find their difficulties
significantly alleviated through the direct contact that
the Committee intends to carry out with them, as well
as in the holding of regional and similar meetings. In
that connection, we would like to commend the recent
holding of two seminars, one in Argentina and one in
Uganda.

