Mr. Danon (Israel): I would like to welcome the
new members of the Security Council that joined
this month: Ethiopia, Italy, Kazakhstan, Sweden and
Bolivia. I would also like to recognize Sweden on
assuming the presidency of the Council this month.
Israel looks forward to working with all members
during their time on the Security Council.

Last month, the Council voted to adopt resolution
2334 (2016). Immediately following the voting, the
Chamber erupted into applause, with almost every
nation represented voicing its approval over a resolution
that condemns Israel. The vote was also welcomed by
some around the world. Here are two examples: first,

"We welcome this important transformation and
development in international provisions supporting
Palestinian rights in international forums"
and, secondly,

"There is an international public opinion
against Israel and its policies and it has become
possible to isolate, boycott and pursue Israel in
international forums for the crimes and aggression
it commits".

The first quote was uttered by a Hamas spokesperson;
The second one was from the Islamic Jihad. Both of
these organizations have injured and killed countless
innocent Israelis. Both are recognized as murderous
terrorist organizations by the United States, the
European Union and many other countries, and both
are openly committed to the destruction of the State
of Israel.

Last week a Palestinian terrorist used his truck
to drive into a group of soldiers who were visiting
Jerusalem as part of an educational seminar. They had
gathered at a site where Jews, Christians and Muslims
come to take in the beautiful vistas of Jerusalem. The
terrorist drove his truck back and forth, killing four
Israelis and injuring dozens of others. We appreciate
the strong words used by the Council, the Secretary-
General and others in condemning this act of Palestinian
terror. Palestinian President Abbas, on the other hand,
has once again remained silent. Nothing.

Hamas and Islamic Jihad celebrated this despicable
act. They gave out candy in Gaza in honour of the
murder of innocent Israelis. These are the entities
that joined the Council in welcoming resolution 2334
(2016). That resolution declared that our presence in
Jerusalem is illegal. It encouraged the Palestinians to
continue to avoid negotiations and inspired the terrorist
in Jerusalem.

And this was the result: Shir Hajaj, Yael Yekutiel,
Erez Orbach and Shira Tzur were murdered by a
Palestinian who was led to believe that he could use
terror and violence to remove the Jewish people from
Jerusalem. He will not succeed.

Let us take a few minutes to better understand
this resolution, which was supported by Hamas. It is
particularly appalling that, among its many biased and
false clauses, the resolution, in paragraph 1, designates
Israel's presence in the parts of Jerusalem which
were liberated in 1967 as "a flagrant violation under
international law".

Let me remind the Council that this includes
Jerusalem's Old City and Jewish Quarter, and it also
includes the holy Western Wall that sits at the heart of
Jerusalem. This Wall is a remnant of our Temple, which
was first built on the mount above by King Solomon
almost 3,000 years ago. Yes, the same Temple Mount
which the Council refuses to call by its historic name.
King Solomon famously noted that "there is nothing
new under the sun". His words of wisdom still ring true
today.

In the year 587 B.C.E., the Babylonians destroyed
the first temple and exiled my people from Jerusalem.
But the Jewish people returned to Jerusalem and rebuilt
the Temple. In the year 70, the Ancient Roman Empire
succeeded in destroying the Second Temple and sent
us into our long exile. The physical destruction of
Jerusalem was not enough for the Romans; they even
renamed the land of Israel "Palestine" in an attempt to
erase any trace of our connection to our birthright. But
all of these attempts, and many more, failed to break
the bond between the people of Israel and Jerusalem.

Today, I represent not only the State of Israel, but
the 16 million Jews worldwide who pray and yearn for
Jerusalem. Those who came before us prevailed over
the attempts to remove us from Jerusalem, and we, too,
shall overcome empty statements and resolutions.

For Israel, peace is not a convenient ploy that we
raise in international forums; it is an essential part of
all of our prayers. This is why Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu has repeated his call time and again for
President Abbas to meet with him directly for genuine
negotiations. Prime Minister Netanyahu's offer still
stands today, and he is willing to meet in Jerusalem,
Ramallah or even here in New York to enter into a real
dialogue.

We know that neither speeches nor statements will
bring peace to our region. The only way forward is for
the Palestinians to understand that they must condemn
terror, yes, condemn terror, end incitement and return
to the negotiating table.

It saddens me, however, to report that last month's
resolution has set us back in the pursuit of peace.
The message emanating from this Chamber, from the
current Administration in Washington, DC, and now
from Paris is exactly the opposite. It has encouraged the
Palestinians to continue down the dangerous path that
they have chosen. The day after the Security Council
vote, Fatah, the movement of Mahmoud Abbas, posted
a cartoon on its official Facebook page. It showed a
dagger in the shape of a map of Israel coloured with
the Palestinian flag. Not Judea and Samaria; what some
call the West Bank. All of Israel. Under the dagger
was a pool of blood, and next to it said, "Thank you"
and listed each Council member who voted for that
shameful resolution.

The Council may have thought that the resolution
would send a message to Israel, but instead it sent a
message to the Palestinians. They now understand
that they should continue to spread the lie that the
Western Wall is not sacred to the Jewish people but,
rather, occupied territory. They now understand they
should continue to teach their children that Tel AViV
is really "Tel al-Rabia". And they now understand
that they should continue to raise the next generation
of Palestinians to believe that instead of a people who
have returned to their homeland, Zionism represents a
foreign occupying Power that must be overthrown.

This is why the Palestinian Foreign Minister's
immediate reaction to the resolution and Secretary
Kerry's speech was to declare "No to Israel as a Jewish
State". In this rare moment of honesty, the Palestinian
leader admitted that this conflict was not about so-
called settlements but about the refusal to accept the
Jewish State of Israel, in any borders.

By saying "no" to Israel as the nation State of the
Jewish people, the Palestinians are saying that their end
game is not to create a State alongside Israel but rather to
replace it completely. That is why they continue to turn
to international bodies instead of negotiating directly
with Israel. They believe that they can accomplish all
they seek without making the concessions needed to
really put an end to this conflict. Just two days ago, a
conference was convened in Paris to supposedly further

the cause of peace. This gathering took place despite
Prime Minister Netanyahu's calls to hold a meeting
with President Abbas instead of a useless conference.
More than 70 nations met in the City of Light without
our presence to discuss how we should make peace.
What arrogance!

It is because Israel wants to see real diplomatic
progress that the actions of the United Nations are
so dangerous. For years we have sounded the alarm
alerting the Council of the various bodies and agencies
which, under the pretence of assisting the Palestinian
people, really serve as mechanisms to delegitimize
Israel. They present a biased, one-sided narrative of
the conflict and encourage the Palestinian leaders to
continue to hold their people hostage and avoid the
steps needed to promote real peace.

In the wake ofthe adoption ofresolution 2334 (2016)
last month, we have decided that enough is enough.
Israel has initiated a reassessment of its relationship
with a number of United Nations organizations. Our
first step is to suspend more than $6 million from our
annual contributions to the United Nations for 2017.
That amount represents the portion of the United
Nations budget allocated to anti-Israel bodies that
represent the United Nations double standard when it
comes to Israel. Those organizations inject anti-Israel
sentiments and prejudice into the United Nations
system, harm its credibility and Violate the principles
on which the United Nations itself was founded.

All we need do is look at just one example. The
Division for Palestinian Rights is a prime example of
a United Nations body focused solely on promoting
the Palestinian narrative while delegitimizing Israel.
That division spends more than $1.3 million on travel
alone. The sum of $1.3 million could have been used to
promote dialogue and understanding but was instead
spent on touring the world in an organization that
has 16 employees. Those millions of dollars should
be going to make the world a safer and more secure
place for our children but are instead being spent on
spreading hatred and even blatant anti-Semitism. The
steps that we are taking should be seen as an act of
protest. It is our sincere hope that the message that we
are sending will be heard and that this organ will take
the necessary steps to fundamentally change the way in
which it operates.

Despite the events of the past few weeks, we
remain hopeful. We are hopeful because with every
new composition of the Security Council, there is a
chance that the members will stake a new and honest
course by actually encouraging peace in our region
rather than continuing down the path of assigning
one-sided blame only on Israel. We are hopeful because
a new Secretary-General has taken office and with him
comes the possibility of a wind of change. That can be
an opportunity for the United Nations to institute real
reforms, return to its founding principles and "unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security",
pursuant to the second preambular paragraph of the
Charter of the United Nations. We are also hopeful
because a new American President will take office in
three days. With that new Administration comes the
hope that the United States will return to its policy of
rejecting unfair and biased Security Council resolutions
and of promoting direct and genuine dialogue between
Israel and the Palestinians.

Finally, we are hopeful because we are armed
with thousands of years of history behind us and the
innovative, vibrant and moral modern State of Israel
before us, and because, as Rabbi Yehoshua Weitzman so
poetically described the strength of the Jewish people,
"the eternal people does not fear a long journey".

