Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by welcoming the presence among
us of the Secretary-General, whose statement we very
much appreciate. We have also listened very carefully
to the statements made by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel.
We thank them both for their interventions.

Costa Rica would like to express its appreciation
for the convening of this meeting in the light of the
gravity of the current situation in the Middle East,
especially in Gaza and southern Israel. We believe that
the urgency of the reality on the ground required the
immediate holding of a public meeting of the Council
and calls for a firm response by this organ. We hope
that the Council will take relevant action that will be
respected by the parties.

Costa Rica agrees with the judgement of the
Secretary-General that Israel's military activities in the
Gaza Strip have been disproportionate. Those activities
have resulted in the death of more than 350 persons,
including a significant number of civilians. As we have

said before, legitimate self-defence does not sanction
reprisals such as those carried out by Israel in its
attacks of recent days and its months-long blockade
against the Palestinian civilian population, which has
resulted in shortages, hunger and economic collapse.

We understand Israel's security concerns. In that
regard, Costa Rica has repeatedly condemned, as it
does today, the terrorist attacks against southern Israel.
However, apart from that tragic situation, we urge
avoiding the temptation to engage in an argument
about who began this new descent into madness. Such
a pointless undertaking leads only to the point of
departure, while the number of dead and wounded
continues to mount. Israel and Palestine should not be
a proving ground for intellectual preferences or
political games. For more than half a century, the lands
of Israel and Palestine have called for a reaffirmation
of the principles upon which the United Nations was
founded, as well as the implementation of policies that
neither ignore nor contravene those principles. Justice
and Israel's security should not be incompatible goals.

As always, the question today is how to halt the
current escalation of violence that is undermining
every hope to see two States living side by side in
peace, while furthering the well-being of their peoples.
No one is blind to what a solution to the Middle East
conflict requires. No one denies that there will be no
solution and no peace so long as the occupation
continues and international law is not respected,
including international conventions and the resolutions
of the Council. It seems to us important to reiterate
that, given what is currently happening in the Middle
East, the Council cannot remain indifferent and still be
relevant.

It is also necessary to reiterate that there is a need
to respect the Rome Statute and the relevant Additional
Protocol to the Geneva Conventions, so as to ensure
the protection of civilians and civilian goods. The
parties to the conflict must always make a distinction
between civilians and combatants and between civilian
goods and military goals. Along the same lines, we
believe that attacks on both Israeli and Palestinian
territory are equally to be condemned.

As we have said before, we are concerned about
the recourse to collective punishment as a response, for
it violates international law under the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
Today, Costa Rica calls for a ceasefire that will
lead to a permanent cessation of hostilities. We believe
that the Council must, as a priority, ensure fulfilment
of the parties' obligations under the Road Map, the
relevant Council resolutions and international law. Our
delegation is committed to working on the basis of the
proposal submitted to us. We would like to see it
improved so that it can receive broad support, and we
will strive to achieve an unequivocal statement by the
Council.

