Mr. Osvald (Sweden): Sweden fully associates itself
with the statement that will be made later in the debate by
the representative of the. Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union.

Sweden is committed to the peace process, both
politically and economically. We support the right of the
Palestinians to self-detennination, including their right to a
State of their own. This right can be fully realized only
through negotiations and only through a political process
can lasting security in the Middle East be achieved. The
foundations for peace are laid down in Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978).
The direction and timetable of the Israeli and
Palestinian peace process was agreed to in the Declaration
of Principles of 1993 and the Interim Agreement of 1995.
The Hebron Protocol of 17 January 1997, concerning
Israeli redeployment in and from Hebron and aspects on
the further implementation of the Interim Agreement,
constitutes an important step towards strengthening
confidence between the parties.

The parties should continue to base their efforts on
what has been achieved so far and refrain from measures
that can threaten the peace process. In particular this
applies to measures that could prejudge the outcome of
the final status negotiations, including steps that would
change the status of the occupied territories. Accordingly,
the Government of Israel should reverse its settlement

policy.

Sweden has long been deeply concerned about
Israeli Government decisions and plans concerning
settlements on occupied territory. The most recent
decision concerns Jabal Abu Ghneim/Hat Homa located
on the occupied West Bank in the Jerusalem area. My
Government considers that the construction of such
settlements is a grave obstacle to peace, incompatible with
the Declaration of Principles and in contravention of
international law, notably the Fourth Geneva Convention.

The framework laid down in the Declaration of
Principles between the Government of Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) should be the
blueprint for an irreversible process. The peace efforts of
the Government of Israel and the Palestinians must be
brought to fruition. All parties have a formidable
responsibility to see to it that this endeavour becomes
reality.

Peace and stability in the region are an urgent
necessity not only to the parties and the region but to the
whole international community. We "urge the Israeli
Government to reconsider its decision on the settlements
in Jabal Abu Ghneim/Herr Homa and to reverse its
settlement policy. This will serve the peace process, the
Israeli and the Palestinian peoples, and international
security.

