Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): It is s pleasure to see
you, Sir, once again presiding over the Security Council.
The security challenges in the Mediterranean have
many dimensions, as they do not negatively affect only
countries in the region but also have severe implications
for global peace and security. It is therefore timely and
necessary to think collectively about how best to tackle
these threats. I thank you again, Mr. Minister, for
bringing such an important issue to the attention of the
Security Council. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his important briefing.

Today's discussion can be seen as continuation
of our deliberations yesterday (see S/PV.8104) on
the situation in Libya. We believe that the country
remains an important element for the stability of
neighbouring States, North Africa and the Sahel. It is
therefore even more regrettable that the current crisis
in Libya shows no signs of abating. People live under a
constant threat of death or injury from fighting among
various armed groups. Hundreds have been killed or
tortured. And thousands have been displaced. The
humanitarian and economic situation continues to
deteriorate rapidly. More and more Libyans require
international assistance. The Libyan crisis has opened
up a wide range of opportunities to exploit the security
and institutional vacuum. It has enabled local terrorist
groups and criminal networks to gain ideological
influence and military strength not only in Libya, but
in the wider region.

It should be mentioned that the terrorist threat is
not something new to the countries of the South-East
Mediterranean and the neighbouring Sahel. Major
contingents of foreign terrorist fighters who joined the
ranks of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Jabhat
Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and their affiliates in Iraq and
Syria originated from those particular regions. Now,
in view of the recent significant setbacks and loss of
territory by respective terrorist organizations in the
Middle East, countries in North Africa have to face the
inflow of both those who are returning and those who
are relocating. Their presence will, without a doubt,
fuel only sectarianism and increase the complexity and
duration of conflicts.
The other side of the problem is the possible abuse
of asylum systems by terrorists while huge waves of
migrants arrive from conflict zones, seeking shelter.
There is a growing concern about the possible creation
of sleeper cells in different parts of North Africa and
Europe, which has to be duly addressed.

In order to combat potential terrorism outbreaks and
its spread to new regions, the international community
may need to elaborate additional measures to those set
established in resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2322 (2016),
which should address terrorists' modus operandi, inter
alia, in a number of ways.

First, we should ensure broader criminalization
of foreign terrorist fighters and develop bilateral and
international exchange of evidence of their crimes, so
that terrorists can be apprehended at the earliest stage
possible and face justice.

Secondly, we should ensure swift and unimpeded
sharing of information between States, especially
of terrorist biometric data, and universalize
the use of advanced passenger information and
INTERPOL databases.

Thirdly, we should establish effective cross-border
cooperation between immigration, law-enforcement
and judicial authorities.

Fourthly, we should conduct risk assessments and
identify the most vulnerable border stretches in order to
strengthen respective controls.

And, fifthly, we should further cut off the sources
of financing for terrorism, especially combating
extortion activities and kidnapping for ransom, as well
as disrupting terrorists' cooperation with transnational
organized crime groups involved in smuggling and the
trafficking in human beings and weapons.

We also believe that, without political or economic
opportunities, particularly for youth, there is a risk that
the North Africa and sub-Saharan regions will remain
impoverished and ungoverned zones where terrorists
and criminals will find a safe haven and a suitable
environment for illegal trafficking in persons and arms,
as well as other unlawful activities.

Syria remains another burning hotbed of tension in
the Mediterranean, poisoning the surrounding region
and the wider security environment. The uncountable
waves of refugees that fled Syria, seeking salvation
from the brutal tyranny and inhumane conditions,
arrived in Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, Turkey and many
European Union States, thereby creating additional
risks for the socioeconomic and security situation in
those countries.

Six years of the conflict have passed and what
do we see? If current trends persist in Syria, there is
a chance that one side will claim a military victory
and the overall situation will be akin to that of 2011.
However, this time it will be compounded by a
traumatized society affected by years of war and a
deepening sectarian divide, with neither national
reconciliation nor the root causes of the crisis having
been addressed. Under such circumstances, any victory
over the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in
Syria will provide only temporary relief, with a door
remaining open for a new ISIS-like crisis to emerge.
Therefore, we continue to believe that there should be a
longer-term blueprint for Syria, one that is firmly based
on a commitment to a negotiated political settlement
and a clear understanding of what will be done next.
In the absence of such a blueprint, the situation in the
country will continue to pose a long-term risk for the
entire Mediterranean region.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate that, if we
want to achieve sustainable peace and stability in the
Mediterranean, more investments have to be made in
the socioeconomic development of the countries in
need. Without functioning Government structures, the
provision of most essential social services, working law
enforcement and judicial organs, and the active State
support for local businesses and trade initiatives, the
vulnerable communities in conflict-affected countries
will remain an easy target for terrorists and criminals.
Therefore, initiatives to fight terrorism, bring about
economic development and ensure respect for human
rights - including the active promotion and protection
of the rights of women and children - must go hand in
hand and complement each other.

