Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First, let me welcome
Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, congratulate him on his
appointment and express our deep appreciation for his
balanced report to the Security Council today.

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open meeting on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. In the face of the
far-reaching developments taking place in the region, it
is important for the international community to be
actively engaged. This Council in particular has a
special responsibility for peace in the Middle East.
A lot has been said during the day-long debate. I
would like to make five essential points.

First, the construction of the separation wall by
Israel in the occupied Palestinian territories, aside from
enormously aggravating human suffering in the
Palestinian territories, poses a mortal danger to the
peace process, seriously undermines the
implementation of the road map and presents a major
obstacle to the creation of a viable and contiguous
Palestinian State. Last July, the International Court of
Justice rendered its advisory opinion, concluding that
the wall is illegal.

The General Assembly, in resolution ES-10/ 15 of
20 July 2004, demanded that Israel comply with its
legal obligations as mentioned in the advisory opinion,
which, inter alia, included immediate cessation of the
wall's construction, the dismantling of the parts already
built and payment of reparations to affected persons.

It is a matter of deep concern that, one year after
the Court's advisory opinion and the General Assembly
resolution, the construction of that illegal wall
continues unabated and has, indeed, accelerated. The
Israeli cabinet recently approved the remaining details
of the separation wall's route around Jerusalem, which,
as Special Coordinator de Soto reported this morning,
would cut off some 55,000 Palestinians residents of
East Jerusalem from the rest of the city. They will be
separated from their workplaces, schools, hospitals and
families.

Aside from exacerbating the plight of the
Palestinians, that action raises much larger issues,
including the final status issues. The international
community has an obligation to ensure that Israel does
not further ignore the Court's opinion and the General
Assembly resolution, that it fulfils its legal obligations
and fully respects international humanitarian law, and
that it does not pre-empt the final status issues,
especially on the status of Jerusalem.

Secondly, the situation on the ground continues to
be of serious concern, with an increase in violence and
the reported gradual erosion of the ceasefire. While
referring to mortar and Qassem rocket attacks by the
militants, the Special Coordinator also noted in today's
briefing the Israeli side's resumption of the practice of
targeted killings. The principal victims of that tragic
conflict remain innocent civilians, most of them
Palestinians. We appreciate President Abbas's
commitment to security reforms and the practical steps
taken by the Palestinian Authority to strengthen law
and order. Those endeavours deserve the full support of
the international community.

The latest statistics also show a significant
increase in Israeli construction activity in the West
Bank and Gaza. The Quartet, in its statement of 23
June, expressed concern over Israeli settlement activity
and rightly affirmed the need to avoid any action that
contravenes the road map or prejudices final status
negotiations. As consistently demanded by the
international community, all illegal settlement activity
must be frozen and reversed.

It is vital that all sides avoid any escalation,
observe the utmost restraint and work to establish a
stable environment for hope and security. But hope
cannot be generated in a vacuum. Peace and
development go hand in hand. The Palestinian
Authority must have the necessary international
assistance to revive the economy and undertake the
development activities essential for beginning a new
page in Palestinian life. We welcome recent
commitments of support to the Palestinians, including
at the Group of Eight summit.

Thirdly, the Israeli plan to disengage from Gaza
and parts of the northern West Bank is a welcome step.
It should be implemented with the utmost care and in
full coordination with the Palestinian Authority. The
withdrawal must be full and complete. Most important,
it must be the first step towards the end of the
occupation of all Palestinian territories.

Fourthly, Israelis and Palestinian must deepen
their dialogue and gradually move to address final
status issues. The Security Council should actively
promote that process.

Fifthly, the implementation of the road map offers
the most viable way forward towards sustainable
peace. Ensuring a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian dispute in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)
and the road map is our collective obligation. The
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security is one that was reflected in
the Arab peace initiative and that has been embraced
by the entire international community. We must all
work for the earliest possible realization of that vision.

Success in realizing that vision can have
profound and positive implications for peace and
stability in the entire Middle East and beyond. At this
fateful moment, the international community, including
the Security Council, must summon the political
courage and will to ensure the realization of that shared
Vision.
