Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to sincerely congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month and to offer your predecessor our gratitude
for his wise conduct of the work of the Council last
month.

Jordan aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Arab
Group and by the representative of Cuba on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

Today, Jordan would like to be the voice of logic
and moderation before this august Council, as it always
has been. After 60 years of conflict, it is neither
possible nor acceptable to continue trading accusations,
and it is neither possible nor acceptable for any party
to claim a monopoly on the truth or to cast aspersions
on the pivotal historic role that the Security Council
has played regarding the Arab-Israeli conflict. Millions
of people in the Middle East still look to the Council
with hope. They still believe in its ability to exercise
its basic function, the maintenance of international
peace and security, on the basis of objectivity,
neutrality and justice. Once our people stop thinking in
such terms, our ability to keep events under control
will be seriously compromised.

Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah Bin A1 Hussein, only accepts positive
dealings between and within the parties with a view to
attaining peace in the region in a manner that will
preserve the historical rights of the Palestinians to
establish a viable, contiguous, independent State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in conformity with
resolutions of international legitimacy adopted by the
Council and at the same time, preserving the security
of Israel. That positive option is not an impossible
dream, but a strategic vision that can be implemented.
2
The Annapolis Conference touched on that issue when
it formulated a time frame for realizing that objective
by the end of 2008. Only five months remain for that.
The real challenge that today faces us all is how to
make use of the remaining months of this year to attain
that objective.

Jordan believes that reaching and implementing a
peace agreement between the Palestinians and Israelis
will dramatically change current trends in the Middle
East and will give an important opportunity to change
the strategic situation in the region for years to come.
Failure to reach an agreement will only strengthen the
positions of the forces opposed to peace in the region.
The realization of a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question, the core of the
conflict in the Middle East, is the key to solving other
conflicts and will guarantee security and stability in the
region. Consequently, the Israeli occupation must come
to an end. There must be a just solution that realizes
the aspirations of the Palestinian people to preserve
their national identity through the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, while also ensuring
security for the people of Israel.

Achieving the desired peace requires that all
concerned parties go seriously to the negotiating table
on a clear basis. That should be accompanied by
sincere efforts by the international Powers and forces
to encourage both parties, Palestinians and Israelis, to
fulfil their commitments and to reach comprehensive
solutions to all problems to be addressed in a final
settlement. In that context, Jordan, under the leadership
of His Majesty King Abdullah II, pursues efforts in all
areas to mobilize international support to lend impetus
to the negotiations between the Palestinians and the
Israelis and to reach a peace agreement that will make
possible the establishment of a Palestinian State before
the end of this year, in accordance with what was
agreed on at the Annapolis Conference and with the
resolutions of international legitimacy, the Road Map
and the Arab Peace Initiative, which constitutes the
basis for dealing with every aspect of the Arab-Israeli
conflict.

Success in the peace process requires that bridges
of confidence and understanding be rebuilt and that
there be real progress on the ground. Unilateral
policies and the imposition of a de facto situation have
failed in the past, and there is no reason to believe that
such policies will enjoy any success in the future.
Israeli plans to build new settlements in the occupied
08-4336]
Palestinian territories, especially in East Jerusalem, in
addition to the expansion of existing settlements, are
totally unacceptable and have been rejected. Those
attempts to build a de facto situation constitute flagrant
violations of international law and of Israel's
obligations under the Road Map. They will also
jeopardize the peace process and the future of the
Palestinian State. The international community should
intensify its efforts to urge Israel to put an immediate
end to all settlement activities, including their natural
growth. All people in the Middle East should look to
the Security Council to assume its responsibility in
putting an end to those plans.

The situation in Gaza is at its worst ever. We
remain worried about the deteriorating humanitarian
and living situation of our Palestinian brothers there.
Jordan will pursue all possible efforts and contacts
with all international and regional parties to urge them
to work towards putting an end to the suffering of the
Palestinian people in Gaza and to provide the
assistance that will help to improve their living
conditions and put an end to the deterioration of the
situation. The political negotiations required at this
stage should result in immediate steps by Israel to
alleviate the daily suffering of the Palestinian people,
including by lifting the blockade and the closures,
which have a devastating political, economic, social
and psychological impact on the Palestinian people.

Jordan reiterates its full and constant support to
the legitimate Palestinian leadership, represented by
the Palestinian Authority and its President,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas. We stress the need for the
international community to provide the support and
assistance that Mr. Abbas and the Palestinians need in
their efforts to establish a democratic political regime,
strengthen the work of the Palestinian national
institutions and build responsible, transparent
institutions, including security institutions. The
international community must contribute by supporting
Mr. Abbas in reviving the Palestinian economy,
improving the living conditions and the environment
for investments and developing a free and prosperous
economy. Palestinians are currently in a difficult
situation and need support to establish an independent
Palestinian State on their national soil.

In conclusion, putting an end to violence and
achieving peace is not the responsibility of one party
and not the other. In that respect, we totally reject the
targeting and killing of innocent civilians on both
08-43361
sides, whether Palestinian or Israeli. Such acts are
obstacles to the success of the peace process. They also
foment violence, which leads to more hatred, killing,
destruction and extremism. In that respect, we reiterate
Jordan's support for the efforts of the regional and
international parties to help the Palestinians and
Israelis resume the negotiation process. We also
recognize the importance of the role of the Quartet and
its representative, Mr. Tony Blair, in crystallizing and
implementing the message of peace that the peoples of
the region expect from this Council.

