Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union. However, I would like to deliver the following
remarks in my national capacity as the representative
of Cyprus.

First of all, I wish to thank the Japanese presidency
of the Security Council for convening today's important
meeting and for circulating a very useful concept note
(S/2016/586, annex).

Africa continues to be the priority with respect
to peacebuilding activities. Nonetheless, it is very
difficult indeed to talk about peacebuilding in Africa
as a unitary object, due to the diverse challenges with
which the continent is faced. While some States are
peaceful, secure and growing, others are in the process
of institution- and capacity-building following their
emergence from long conflicts, whereas many others
remain plagued by various problems such as violent
extremism, conflict, poverty and inequality.

There is no simple or single answer to these
challenges. Based on its own experience, Cyprus
firmly believes that nationally-owned processes
provide the best responses to existing and potential
crises, as national ownership can reflect the interests
and needs of local populations. Inclusiveness is also
key to advancing national peacebuilding processes
and objectives in order to ensure that the needs of all
segments of society are taken into account, and we
stress that civil society can play an important role in
advancing efforts to sustain peace.

In this regard, it is crucial for the international
community to support multidimensional national and
regional strategies, addressing political, security and
developmental aspects. Priority should be given to the
regional dimension of building sustainable peace, as
well as providing a platform to promote the perspectives
of regional actors, most notably the African Union.
Cyprus welcomes the call made in both recent United
Nations review processes on peacebuilding and
peacekeeping for greater United Nations cooperation
with the African Union, and we firmly believe that such
enhanced cooperation could significantly contribute to
the prevention of the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict.

As peacebuilding encompasses a wide range of
political, development and human rights programmes
and mechanisms, it is of critical importance for the
international community to assist Africa in its efforts
to implement the Sustainable Development Goals and
targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/ 1) and promote poverty eradication, social
development, national reconciliation and unity through
inclusive dialogue and mediation, accountability, good
governance, democracy, accountable institutions,
gender equality and respect for and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.

Last but not least, we underscore the importance of
African women's enhanced participation in all efforts
aimed at maintaining and promoting peace and security
and the need to increase their role in decision-making
with regard to conflict prevention and resolution and
peacebuilding. It is equally significant to consider ways
to increase meaningful and inclusive participation of
African young people in peacebuilding efforts.

I thank you once again, Mr. President, for this
important and timely initiative that today's meeting
represents, which Cyprus fully supports, both in its
national capacity and through its membership in the
European Union. Supporting peacebuilding in Africa
is a large part of our collective efforts to sustain peace
and security and promote development and prosperity
for the benefit of all of us.

