Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): It is indeed a great
pleasure for my delegation to associate itself with the
expressions of appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his informative report (S/1995/881) of 23 October 1995,
the thirteenth in a series of progress reports on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL).

We wish also to express our gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Anthony
Nyakyi, and to the leaders of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Economic
Community of West African States Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), for the continuing endeavours they have
made towards the restoration of peace, security and
stability in Liberia.

In the same vein, we commend the Liberian National
Transitional Government (LNTG) and the personnel of
UNOMIL for their efforts to end the six years of
suffering and devastation inflicted on the Liberian people.

The Indonesian delegation, like other delegations, is
very much encouraged to note from the report the
progress made by the Liberian parties that demonstrates
their determination, now stronger than ever before, to take

 

tangible steps towards the restoration of peace and stability
in their country. Such positive developments - manifested
in the formation of a Cabinet, appointments to the Supreme
Court, the reconstitution of the Ad Hoc Elections
Commission and the setting up of a committee to prepare
a status-of-forces agreement between the LNTG and
ECOWAS - are most welcome to my delegation.

We are also gratified to note that the LNTG has
expressed its desire to ensure the effective implementation
of the Abuja Agreement, including disarmament and
demobilization of combatants. The recent agreement
reached by the Liberian parties themselves on a timetable
for implementing the peace process is indeed a welcome
development. We view as encouraging the LNTG's
commitment to continuing to cooperate closely with the
Liberian faction leaders, the personnel of ECOWAS and
UNOMIL, and with the international community.
Against this positive backdrop, the Council must seize
the opportunity that now exists to bring to an end the civil
war, which has ravaged Liberia for far too long. We
therefore feel that, taking into account the new atmosphere
prevailing in the country, the momentum gained since the
signing of the Abuja Agreement deserves our strong
support and should continue to be encouraged and sustained
by the international community. To this end, it is not only
essential for UNOMIL to maintain its presence in the
country, it is also imperative, if UNOMIL is to be assisted
in securing its stated objectives, for it to be provided with
a clear mandate that reflects these changing conditions.

We therefore fully support the adjusted mandate of
UNOMIL as contained in paragraph 2 of the draft
resolution now before us.

In this connection, the Indonesian delegation considers
it of utmost importance, if UNOMIL is to be effective in
discharging its task, for there to be close cooperation and
enhanced coordination with the LNTG, ECOMOG and all
the Liberian parties. Enhanced coordination and closer
cooperation would enable UNOMIL to overcome and
resolve the many challenges still being encountered, such
as violations of the cease-fire, harassment of civilians and
looting of their property.

We are also concerned that the process of the
disengagement of forces and disarmament, which are the
elements most critical to the peace process, have
encountered some delays. The lack of coordination in
repatriating refugees and resettling internally displaced
persons, and in reintegrating combatants into civilian life,
also requires rectification.

We are convinced that effective and close
cooperation and coordination between the United Nations
and regional organizations can be attained, as is shown by
the success stories in Cambodia, El Salvador and
Mozambique.

In conclusion, my delegation, in light of these
developments, will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us today. We believe it reflects a well-balanced
approach for expediting a speedy resolution to this tragic
conflict - that has crippled the region for far too long -
while taking into consideration the current reality of the
situation. The new spirit of cooperation on the part of the
Liberian parties presents a unique opportunity to make
real progress in resolving these difficult issues. We
therefore believe that the adoption of this resolution is
critical for carrying the peace process forward.

While the effective implementation of this draft
resolution lies in the hands of the Liberian parties
themselves, assistance from the international community
is also essential. It is in this context that my delegation
welcomes the commitments made by many Member
States during the Conference on Assistance to Liberia
recently convened by the Secretary-General here in New
York, and hopes that their pledged assistance will be
disbursed in a timely manner so that an end can be put to
this tragic chapter in Liberia's history.

