Mr. Davide (Philippines): At the outset, the
Philippines congratulates you, Mr. President, on Viet
Nam's successful leadership of the Council, an
undoubted testament to its fidelity to the legacy of last
year's successful presidency, and thanks you for
convening this important meeting to discuss the
situation in Timor-Leste.

My country welcomes back Deputy Prime
Minister Jose Luis Guterres and thanks him for his
important statement this morning. We also thank the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Mr. Atul
Khare, for presenting the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/504) on the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). Once again, the Special
Representative has given us a front-row view, even an
eyewitness account, of how the United Nations is
conducting successful peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations in Timor-Leste. The Philippines also notes
that Mr. Khare's tour of duty with UNMIT ends in
December and acknowledges the exemplary work he
has done in the past three years as head of UNMIT and
in his previous capacities as Chief of Staff and Deputy
Special Representative in earlier peacekeeping
operations in Timor-Leste. The Philippines wishes him
all the best in his future endeavours.

The Philippines also associates itself with the
statement delivered by Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). We
would, nonetheless, like to stress some points.

The Philippines' special relationship and solidarity
with Timor-Leste date back to the latter's formative
years. The Philippines started its involvement in 1999
with a 600-strong humanitarian support mission as part
of the International Force in East Timor, and has
deployed a significant number of personnel in every
United Nations mission in Timor-Leste from that time
until the present. The majority of its individual police
officers are in UNMIT. The Philippines continues to be
committed to Timor-Leste's nation-building efforts
through, inter alia, bilateral arrangements for assistance
and cooperation in capacity-building, working with
various relevant groups and institutions in Timor-Leste,
and remains a member of the Core Group on Timor-
Leste.

As such, the Philippines is heartened to note that
developments in all aspects of Timor-Leste's nationhood
have been very positive and encouraging since the last
Security Council meeting on the subject in February.
Highlights in this area include the successful
celebration of the tenth anniversary of the popular
referendum in an atmosphere of continuing safety and
stability, for which the people of Timor-Leste and its
State institutions, with the support of UNMIT and the
United Nations country team, should be commended.
Another such example is the resumption on 14 May of
primary policing responsibilities by the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL). The international
community, through the United Nations and bilateral
donors, should provide long-term assistance to support
the PNTL and the Timorese Government in
reconstituting and developing the police force.

There has also been progress in efforts to enhance
democratic governance by establishing anti-corruption
and civil service commissions and by ratifying the
United Nations Convention against Corruption.
Significant progress has also been made in meeting
targets for the national priorities set forth in the
international compact for Timor-Leste (see S/2008/501, para. 36). Development partners should endeavour to
reinforce the Government's commitment to the
priorities in order to ensure that the high degree of
compliance in meeting targets for the first and second
quarters of this year will be sustained.

The Philippines acknowledges the comprehensive
role that UNMIT and the United Nations country team
have played and will continue to play in promoting
peace and development in Timor-Leste. It is imperative
that the international community continue to express its
strong support for their work. A case in point is the
resumption of primary policing responsibilities.
UNMIT's presence is still necessary to ensure that the
gradual takeover of policing responsibilities by the
PNTL continues to go smoothly. The Philippines fully
concurs with the observation in paragraph 58 of the
Secretary-General's report that UNMIT's present
strength and composition should be maintained.

The path to nationhood is never smooth. Looking
back, we have seen Timor-Leste toiling through
tragedies and triumphs, sufferings and joy. The
Philippines congratulates the people and Government
of Timor-Leste for their courage, determination and
faith. Their spirit of hope is outstanding. Thus far, we
can say with certainty that with the character and
idealism of the Timorese people, the time, effort and
resources that the international community has
invested in Timor-Leste have been worth it.

The experience in Timor-Leste is still definitely
one of the best examples of a successful international
enterprise engineered through the combined cooperative
efforts of the United Nations, regional players and
partners. The Timorese leadership has remained focused
on being proactive in promoting democracy and the
rule of law and on enhancing stability, security,
development and progress in a way that is sustainable
and consistent with the needs of the Timorese people.
It is incumbent on us to be relentless and enduring in
our support to them to help maintain this positive
attitude. As the saying goes, "When the only tool you
own is a hammer, every problem begins to resemble a
nail."

