Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let me
first warmly thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov, who is leading our counter-terrorism efforts,
for his very illuminating briefing on the sixth report of
the Secretary-General on the threat posed by Da'esh
(S/2018/80).

As the report underscores, Da'esh has suffered
major military defeats in the Levant over the past
six months, owing in particular to the efforts of the
international coalition. Although the group has lost its
territorial anchorage, the fight against Da'esh in Syria
and in Iraq is not over. We must therefore continue our
efforts, including on the military front, to prevent the
emergence of safe havens, especially in Libya, West
Africa. Afghanistan and South-East Asia. But above
and beyond our necessary military efforts, I would
like to underscore four areas for action that France
considers to be priorities, which broadly meet those
outlined by Mr. Voronkov.

First, changes in the flows of foreign terrorist
fighters should prompt us to constantly adapt our
legislation and plans. Beyond the need to continue
to prevent radicalization and block departures, we
must anticipate the risks posed by potential returnees
and by fighters who decide to travel to a third State.
That requires that we improve our detection tools
and strengthen information-sharing, especially with
INTERPOL. We must also design appropriate legal
responses. It is an exceedingly complex undertaking,
given the diversity of the people involved, and, in the
case ofFrance, the large number ofwomen and children.

With regard to the last point, France attaches
great importance to specific care for children. The
adoption of resolution 2396 (2017) in December is
an important milestone in that regard, as it requests
that Member States redouble their efforts and adopt
additional measures to address the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters.

Secondly, combating the financing of terrorism
must remain an absolute priority. As we have
sadly witnessed, little money is required to kill
indiscriminately in the streets of Paris, New York,
Bamako, Kabul or Baghdad. But it takes significant
resources to lead a terrorist organization, establish its
networks, disseminate its hate narratives and maintain
its fighters, while also purchasing their weapons and
sometimes even their allegiance.

Significant work has been carried out over the
past 20 years to dry up terrorists' resources, in the
United Nations and other entities, such as the Financial
Action Task Force. But terrorist groups have proved
their resiliency and resourcefulness in raising and
transferring their respective financial resources and,
as we are aware, have used a wide range of options,
including common and online crime, organized fraud,
kidnapping, extortion and trafficking in arms and
narcotics, to list just a few.

Although we have secured results by freezing
terrorists' assets, controlling official and unofficial
financial flows and maintaining the integrity of the
financial system, all the techniques for transferring
money are vulnerable. Our work in that regard
must not falter, and that has led the President of the
French Republic, Emmanuel Macron, to convene an
international conference on the financing of terrorism,
to be held on 26 April in Paris, to facilitate the needed
sharing of expertise and to call for renewed political
commitment in the area.

Concerning our third priority, we must continue
to counter the spread of this barbaric ideology, in
particular on the Internet. While confronting terrorists
who use digitization to their advantage, we must also
adapt our means of reacting, in full respect for human
rights and basic freedoms. Combating Da'esh on the
Internet is a new frontier in our struggle. The Internet
must not become the last refuge for Da'esh following
the fall of its strongholds on the ground.

At President Macron's initiative, France is at
the forefront of the struggle, seeking to lead a frank
discussion with the major Internet companies on ways
to counter Da'esh's deadly propaganda. At the United
Nations, in September 2017, we co-hosted a high-level
event on the sidelines of the General Assembly, together
with Italy and the United Kingdom, as well as with
companies from the private sector. In the framework
of the Group of Seven, the Interior Ministers adopted a
strongly wordedjoint communique in Ischia in October
2017, which recalls the need to fight with resolve the
use of the Internet for terrorist ends. In the framework
of the European Union, France is actively supporting
the work initiated by the European Commission in the
framework of the European Union Internet Forum,
which is leading a dialogue with the major digital
technology companies.

As evidenced by the establishment of the Global
Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism in the summer of
2017, the private sector has grasped the stakes involved,
but we must do more and better. Beyond the needed
commitment of Government stakeholders and Internet
companies, the effectiveness of our action also depends
on the mobilization of civil society in terms of counter-
narratives so as to expose the contradictions ofterrorist
groups. Civil society efforts must be encouraged and
supported. France is committed to continuing its work
to combat the use of the Internet for terrorist ends,
which is a major pillar in combating Da'esh.

Lastly, and our fourth priority, there cannot be an
effective and sustainable fight against Da'esh without
a fight against impunity for the crimes that it has
committed. Too many civilians, including women and
children, have been victims of crimes that, in addition
to constituting acts of terrorism, may well constitute
war crimes or crimes against humanity. Justice must
be part of the response to that scourge. That is why
France supported the establishment of the Independent
International Mechanism of Inquiry on crimes
committed in Syria, which also applies to crimes
committed by Da'esh, and the Security Council's
establishment of the international Investigative Team
for crimes committed by Da'esh in Iraq. France
promotes investigative efforts and prosecutions
conducted in accordance with the rule of law and
human rights, and recalls, in that regard, its steadfast
opposition to the death penalty wherever and no matter
the circumstances.

In conclusion, I will emphasize the unique role
that the United Nations must continue to play in
the multifront struggle that we are waging against
terrorism, in particular against Da'esh. With the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban
and associated individuals and entities, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United Nations now
has all the tools it requires to analyse threats, assess
the implementation of Security Council resolutions,
identify the priority needs of States and provide them
with appropriate technical assistance. France reiterates
its full support for United Nations entities in their work
and will fully engage in the sixth United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy review next June to ensure
that our collective response remain commensurate to
the threat.

