Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): Mr. President, at
the outset, on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) group, I would like to congratulate
your delegation, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and to express our thanks to Togo, an
important OIC member country, for its excellent
stewardship of the Security Council in February.

As the OIC Secretary General, Mr. Ihsanoglu,
stated recently at the London conference, the
organization believes that after more than two decades
of conflict and chaos, Somalia today is at a critical
juncture. We believe that concerted and decisive actions
by the international community, in collaboration with
the Somali parties, are now urgently needed more than
ever to enable the country to make a new beginning. The
outreach efforts of the Transitional Federal Government
in the political field are a positive development.

Meanwhile, the expulsion of Al-Shabaab from
Mogadishu by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the Kenyan military operation in southern
Somalia, the Ethiopian military offensive in central
Somalia, and the sustained fight against piracy have
created added momentum towards achieving the goals
of the transition.

As we highlight these important achievements,
however, we note with dismay the distracting crisis in
the Parliament, which could potentially derail the
transition. Therefore, we welcome the political
agreement reached by the Somalis at their National
Consultative Constitutional Conference in Garowe. We
are particularly encouraged by the commitment to
include a minimum of 30 per cent of women in the
Independent Electoral Commission, the Constituent
Assembly and the new Federal Parliament. Supporting
the empowerment of women and their full participation
in political processes in the OIC member States is an
important priority for us.

In view of the OIC's comparative advantage, due
to its clear cultural and religious affinity and as a result
of consultations with a wide spectrum of Somali society
and some partners, the OIC has come to the conclusion
that there is a need to launch a peace and reconciliation
initiative with the relevant parties in order to provide
an opportunity to some moderates who are willing to
join the peace process and mainstream politics.

A genuine political process of reconciliation is
essential to complement the military action in Somalia.
Military measures alone will not deliver durable and
sustainable peace. We have noted with satisfaction that
the exploratory contacts of the OIC with some of the
Somali opposition elements have given hope and
reinforced the conviction in the necessity to press ahead.

On its part, the international community must
ensure that the required support and assistance are
provided to the Government in a coherent manner in
order to deliver services and security and to extend its
authority in the recovered areas. The OIC wishes hereby
to reassure the Security Council and all stakeholders of
its unflinching support for the achievement of the major
priorities of security, constitution-making, reconciliation
and good governance in order to successfully conclude
the political transition.

On the humanitarian side, the lives of millions of
people, especially the weak and vulnerable groups,
continue to be at risk. While the United Nations has
officially declared the end of famine in Somalia, efforts
must be sustained to further stabilize the food situation
in the months ahead, which is critical if another
shortage is to be averted.

Despite the ongoing efforts of the international
community, including the generous response of the
OIC member States and its civil society, coordinated
and mobilized by the OIC, millions more remain in
need of humanitarian support. Nature is not the only
cause to be blamed for the Somali humanitarian crisis;
political dysfunction, military and security escalations
are also root causes of the crisis. Furthermore,
continued conflicts and lack of access to the neediest
people remain major operational challenges.

The expulsion of 16 humanitarian international
non-governmental organizations from Somalia recently
has severely impacted basic relief measures and created
a big gap that needs to be filled. The OIC urges the
international humanitarian community to work together
on how to overcome these lacunae by leveraging the
opportunity for the better access enjoyed by the OIC in
Somalia on account of its cultural considerations.

Conscious of its long-term commitment to the
Somali people, the OIC, through its Humanitarian
Coordination Office in Somalia, is set to proceed to the
next phase of its mandate. Shortly, it will move from
emergency relief to development by focusing on the
relocation of the internally displaced persons to their
villages and homes as a means of promoting
sustainable development. In that regard, a number of
water projects across the county are to be implemented.

In the field of capacity-building in the education
and health sectors, the OIC is in the process of
developing and finalizing a joint project with the
United Nations Development Programme. The OIC is

committed to continuing to support the Somali people
and stands ready to enhance its operational cooperation
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and other humanitarian stakeholders. It is also
committed to entering into meaningful engagement and
collaboration, and to working out a shared strategy for
the recovery phase in Somalia.

The OIC and its member States are determined to
be pace-setters, as displayed in their laudable
performance in addressing the recent famine. During
the most recent Council of Foreign Ministers in Astana,
OIC Foreign Ministers further endorsed the
establishment of a trust fund for Somalia to contribute
to the long-term development and peacebuilding efforts
in that country. Throughout their humanitarian actions
last year, OIC Member States pledged and are still
raising a total of $500 million to mitigate the
catastrophic humanitarian crisis in Somalia.

In conclusion, the OIC stands ready to expand its
cooperation and partnership with others for the benefit
of the Somali people. We are pleased to enhance our
constructive collaboration with the League of Arab
States and the United Nations within the framework of
the overall peacebuilding and reconstruction efforts in
Somalia.

