Mr. Thoresson (Sweden): Sweden aligns itselfwith
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union. I would like to make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.

I would first like to thank the Lithuanian presidency
of the Security Council for taking the initiative of
convening this important debate and of launching
a draft resolution to follow it up. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his excellent report
(S/2015/289) and his briefing today. And I would like
to acknowledge the important work of Member States
in implementing and developing the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, as well as that of the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, UNICEF and other
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations in the field. In addition, I would like to
recognize the crime-prevention efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which make up a
critical complement to our work.

The theme of today's debate could not be more
relevant and timely. As we have heard from many
other speakers, the illicit transfer and destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition are key drivers of
conflict, and thus continue to undermine international
peace and security. The human toll is disastrous.
The importance of mainstreaming the issue of small
arms and light weapons and their ammunition on the
Council's agenda could not be more urgent. The same
goes for the arms-control-related findings of the high-
level review of United Nations sanctions, of which
Sweden is a sponsor. I would like to make four points.

First, we would like to see a sharper focus on
ammunition in discussions on small-arms issues.
Without ammunition, small arms and light weapons are
inoperable. While monitoring transfers of ammunition
may be difficult, it is essential if we want to prevent
the misuse of existing stocks of small arms. Reporting
must be encouraged. Mapping should be strengthened.
Tracking and traceability need to be improved.
Furthermore, we would like to see ammunition
included in the United Nations Programme of Action
on Small Arms, and reporting on ammunition should
be fully included in the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms.

Secondly, efforts to prevent the misuse and illicit
transfer of small arms and light weapons, along
with the implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT), are crucial to rebuilding peaceful societies.
We should make every effort to strengthen United
Nations peace-support operations and their mandates
with regard to small arms and stockpile security in
conflict and post-conflict areas. Poor stockpile security
constitutes a serious threat to peace and security, owing
to the risk of diversion. And tragic accidents involving
stockpiles of ammunition serve as reminders of the
immediate threat that they pose to physical security.
In that regard, international cooperation and assistance
are key. Increased coordination and local ownership
are crucial to getting results. We have seen that in
successful projects, such as in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Republic of Moldova and Kenya, where Sweden
and other donors and partner countries have worked in
close collaboration. Sweden will continue to promote
the development of agreed standards and best practices.
We will also continue to promote the use of technology
to improve the management and security of small arms
and ammunition, as well as to strengthen physical
and stockpile security, in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Thirdly, the use of weapons has different effects on
women and men, boys and girls. Research shows that
easily available small arms and light weapons increase
the levels of armed violence, which in turn increases the
levels of violence against women. However, the reality
is far more complex than the commonly held perception
that women are always on the receiving end of violence.
Young men are still the most common perpetrators, but
they are also more likely to become victims of armed
violence themselves. In that regard, it is vital to address
the male social roles that in many cases shape armed
violence. That will continue to be a priority for Sweden.

Without women's full participation in combating
the misuse and illicit transfer of small arms, in line
with the agenda on the issue of women and peace
and security, effective and lasting results cannot be
achieved. Women's participation has proved central
to sustainable peace and development. However, the
reality on the ground shows that there is considerable
scope for improvement. Of the 585 peace agreements
negotiated in the last two decades, only 92 include
references to women. During the same period, fewer
than 4 per cent of the signatories of peace agreements,
and less than 10 per cent of negotiators, were women.
However, that does not mean that women have not
been involved. They have been. Sweden will continue
to support women's organizations, with a focus on
conflict and post-conflict settings, in cooperation with
civil society and through the United Nations.

For my final point, I would like to turn to a major
positive development. In regulating the international
trade in conventional arms and in helping to combat
the illicit trade in small arms, the Arms Trade Treaty
represents a giant step forward. The ATT's success is
the result of the international community's political
will and commitment. It shows that political support
can bridge traditional divides and lead to real progress,
and that tangible results can also be achieved when
national security interests are involved. Sweden has
long been an active participant in the Arms Trade Treaty
process, because we believe in it. The ATT remains
a political priority, and we will continue to play an
active role in supporting its effective universalization
and implementation. For Sweden, the ATT is also
important for the reason that it focuses on the potential
humanitarian consequences of the arms trade, and thus
on human security, which is at the core of Sweden's
disarmament and non-proliferation policies. Moreover,
for the first time in a binding international instrument,
gender-based violence is included as a factor to be
considered.

I would like to conclude by referring to the words
of the Secretary-General on weapons and ammunition.
They are hardware, and, as such, they are physical
commodities on which we can take measurable action.
Weapons management is concrete in character, and
therefore warrants our unflagging attention. We can
take action, and we must take action.

