Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
thanks you, Mr. President, for convening this wrap-
up session. June has indeed been a busy month for the
Council with various country situations and thematic
issues on its programme of work. We would like to focus
our comments today on the briefing on peacekeeping
operations (S/PV.7464), the briefing on peacebuilding
(S/PV.7472) and the Security Council press statements
issued during the month.

The briefing on peacekeeping operations once
again presented the Council with an opportunity to hear
directly from and interact with force commanders. The
three themes of the briefing, which were operating in
an asymmetric environment, the protection of civilians
and how caveats affect performance, highlight some of
the key contemporary challenges faced by peacekeeping
operations. We are pleased to note that, despite those
challenges, peacekeeping missions continue to play a
vital role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. We pay tribute to the men and women serving
in those missions and we offer our deepest condolences
to the loved ones of the peacekeepers who have lost
their lives in the line of duty.

The briefing on peacebuilding underscored the
value of maintaining a close engagement between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Nigeria is of the view that, for peacebuilding to
be effective, sustained attention must be paid
to institution-building; security-sector reform;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and
the strengthening of the rule of law. Also important are
the promotion of national dialogue and reconciliation.
We must note the interdependence of those thematic
issues. They underline the imperative for sustained
commitment in addressing the multifaceted challenges
of assisting countries transitioning from conflict to
peace.

The Nigerian delegation pays tribute to Ambassador
Antonio de AguiarPatriota of Brazilforhis achievements
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We
also offer our strong support to the current PBC Chair,
Ambassador Olof Skoog of Sweden, and welcome his
commitment to making the biggest possible difference
in the countries that the Commission is working with.
We are confident that, under his able leadership, the
PBC will continue to play a vital role in promoting
sustainable peace and development in those countries.
The timely issuance of press statements is an
important aspect of the Council's work. They allow the
Council to respond publicly to significant developments
on matters on its agenda. In June, the Council adopted
a significant number of press statements, mainly
on terrorist attacks, but also on other matters of
importance to peace and security, especially at the
regional level. Nigeria commends Council members for
their flexibility, which has allowed us to reach early
consensus on those statements. It is important that the
voice of the Council be heard in a timely manner when
the situation so demands. That sends an important
message of unity and common purpose among Council
members.

Finally, Nigeria congratulates you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for the able manner in which you
have presided over the affairs of the Council in the
month of June. We also seize this opportunity to assure
the delegation of New Zealand of our full support as
they prepare to assume the presidency of the Council
in July.

