Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): May I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption for the fourth
time of the presidency of the Council; it is a pleasure to
see you in the Chair. I thank the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic for his very
splendid performance last month.

My Government's views will be reflected in the
statement to be made later in this debate by you yourself,
Sir, speaking on behalf of the members of the European
Union. I would like simply to make a few additional and
complementary remarks.

The British Government regrets that the problems
caused by Israel's settlements policy have arisen again
less than three months since the last time the Council
discussed the subject. On that occasion, we reiterated our
position that settlements in the occupied territories,
including East Jerusalem, are illegal, contravene the
Fourth Geneva Convention and are an obstacle to peace.
That remains our view.

Our concerns about the latest decision to expropriate
131 acres of land in East Jerusalem have been raised with
the Israeli authorities by European Union representatives
in Tel Aviv. We consider that the decision is contrary to
Security Council resolutions and in particular to resolution
267 (1969), which was adopted unanimously on
3 July 1969 and confirmed that

" . all legislative and administrative measures
taken by Israel which purport to alter the status of
Jerusalem, including expropriation of land and
properties thereon, are invalid " (resolution 267 (1969), para. 4)

 

and called upon Israel to refrain from taking any further
such measures in the future.

But we also consider that the decision is contrary to
the spirit of the Declaration of Principles agreed by Israel
and the PLO in 1993, which reserves the issues of
settlements and Jerusalem for the final status negotiations.
This decision in a sense prejudges the outcome of those
negotiations.

If it pursues this course of action, the Government of
Israel would, we believe, undermine the peace process and
play into the hands of those who oppose it. We therefore
strongly urge Israel to reconsider its decision. We also
encourage both parties to press on with the negotiations on
an interim agreement in a flexible and constructive manner,
leaving to one side, for the time being, highly sensitive
final-status issues.

The further we get into the implementation of the
Declaration of Principles, the more crucial it is to carry that
process to a successful conclusion and the greater the need
to avoid any action which could prejudice or undermine it.
It is in that spirit that we are speaking today, and in that
spirit that we will continue to address this item on our
agenda.

