Ms. Bensouda: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to present my Office's thirtieth report on
the Darfur situation, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

In June, when I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.8554), I emphasized that the recent events in the
Sudan presented a unique opportunity to ensure that
the suspects against whom warrants of arrest had been
issued by the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the
Darfur situation finally faced justice in a court of law.
I urged the authorities in the Sudan and the Council
to seize that opportunity. I also expressed my hope
that the Sudan would begin a new era of cooperation
with my Office and, more generally, the Court. Today,
emboldened by the events over the past six months, I
repeat those messages, with greater confidence that the
Sudan will honour its commitments to deliver justice
for the victims in the Darfur situation.

Over the past six months, the Sudan's extraordinary
transition has continued. On 17 August, the
Constitutional Declaration, which sets out a political
framework for the following 39 months, was signed
by the Transitional Military Council and the Forces
for Freedom and Change. On 21 August, the new
Sovereign Council, composed of six civilians and five
military personnel, was sworn in. Shortly thereafter, a
new Cabinet was inaugurated, led by Prime Minister
Abdalla Hamdok.

Those political changes have already yielded a
number of positive developments in relation to the
Darfur situation. Foremost among these is the Juba
Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures and the
Preparation for Negotiation, signed on 11 September by
the Sovereign Council and a coalition of armed groups
across the Sudan, including in Darfur. The Declaration
sets out a comprehensive road map for peace across
the Sudan, with the ultimate aim of a national peace
agreement. Given the correlation between peace,
stability and the prevention of atrocity crimes, it is
essential that all sides commit to this initiative and that
the ongoing crimes in Darfur stop.

As the Council is aware, there are ICC arrest
warrants for the five suspects in the Darfur situation,
and each of these remains in force, notwithstanding
the ongoing developments in the Sudan. In response to
my last report to the Council, the representative of the
Sudan confirmed that investigations by the Sudanese
public prosecutor were ongoing in relation to Mr. Omer
Al-Bashir, Mr. Abdel Raheem Hussein and Mr. Ahmad
Harun. All are believed to be in detention in Khartoum.
The exact whereabouts of the remaining two Darfur
suspects, Mr. Ali Kushayb and Mr. Abdallah Banda,
are unknown.

Mr. Al-Bashir has been tried in the Sudan for
financial crimes. Last week, on 14 December, he
was reportedly sentenced to two years in detention.
A statement issued by the Sudan's public prosecutor
shortly after the verdict indicated that a number of other
cases are pending against Mr. Al-Bashir, including in
relation to the 1989 coup that brought him to power and
crimes against humanity in Darfur.

In my last report to the Council, I emphasized
that, pursuant to the fundamental principle of
complementarity enshrined in the Rome Statute, the
primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
crimes rests with national criminal jurisdictions.
In response, the representative of the Sudan noted
the reference to complementarity, describing it as
"positive".

I was encouraged by the fact that he also emphasized
that "fighting impunity is a noble cause ofjustice" and
that this "falls primarily within the responsibility of the
relevant national investigative and judicial institutions".
While that position is entirely consistent with the Rome
Statute, the principle of complementarity ensures
that, while States have the primary responsibility for
bringing perpetrators to justice, the ICC's jurisdiction
is engaged if States are inactive or otherwise unwilling
or unable to genuinely exercise that duty.

With that in mind, in the present circumstances,
notwithstanding recent media reports in relation to
Mr. Al-Bashir, the Office is not aware of any concrete
information suggesting that the suspects in the Darfur
situation are currently subject to domestic investigation
or prosecution for the same criminal conduct alleged
in the relevant ICC arrest warrants. Unless and until
the Sudan can demonstrate to the ICC judges that it is
willing and able to genuinely investigate and prosecute
the Darfur suspects for the crimes alleged in their
respective arrest warrants, those cases will remain
admissible before the ICC. The Sudan must ensure
that the five ICC suspects in the Darfur situation are
brought to justice without undue delay, in a courtroom
either in the Sudan or in The Hague. In that way, the
Council's referral of the Darfur situation to my Office
can finally yield tangible results in court for the victims
the Council sought to protect, and progress can be made
towards resolving the Council's referral of the Darfur
situation to the ICC.

In June I made it clear that my Office is ready
to engage with the Sudan. Since then I have been
encouraged by public statements made by high-level
Sudanese officials, which have indicated a clear
commitment to accountability in the Sudan. Notably,
Prime Minister Hamdok declared before the General
Assembly on 27 September (see A/74/PV.10) that the
Sudan is determined to uphold its commitment to the
principles of international law, international human
rights, as well as to the efforts aimed at eradicating
all forms of discrimination, exploitation, injustice and
inequality. In early November, the Prime Minister
reportedly visited Darfur, including camps for
internally displaced persons where Darfuris reportedly
appealed for justice. On 17 October, in response to the
special report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on the strategic assessment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) (8/2019/816), the representative of the
Sudan told the Council (see S/PV.8643) that the Sudan
is a new country that seeks to join the international
community as a peace-loving member that seeks
international cooperation, is committed to international
law and respects the basic rights of its citizens.

A commitment to international law must include
the Sudan's duties under the Charter of the United
Nations, pursuant to which the Sudan is bound by the
Council's decisions, including its decision to refer the
Darfur situation to the ICC. Respect for international
human rights and the basic rights of Sudanese citizens
must include a willingness to ensure accountability
for the gross human rights violations against Sudanese
Darfuri citizens, as alleged in the ICC arrest warrants.
The Sudan now has the opportunity to demonstrate
that commitment to international law and respect
for international human rights by complying with
its obligations arising from resolution 1593 (2005)
and working with my Office. I have consistently
emphasized that this cooperation is crucial to the
Office's independent and impartial investigations in the
Darfur situation. In that regard, it is my sincere hope
that in the near future, my Office will be granted access
to the Sudan to facilitate our work and discuss the way
forward. The Sudan has a legal duty to cooperate with
my Office, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005) and the
jurisprudence of the Appeals Chamber of the ICC.
Cooperation with the ICC would clearly demonstrate to
the Council and the international community writ large
that the Sudan is committed to achievingjustice for the
victims in the Darfur situation and that it has followed
through on its declared commitments and assurances
with visible and practical steps.

Despite the positive developments in the Sudan,
including in relation to the peace process, crimes in
Darfur regrettably continue. They must stop. The
Darfur situation remains a priority for my Office, and
I am pleased to report that substantial progress was
made in the investigations during the reporting period.
In addition, my team continues to monitor events
in Darfur, and when circumstances require, I will
investigate and, where appropriate, prosecute those
most responsible for crimes in Darfur that fall within
the Court's jurisdiction.

Clashes between Government forces and the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) have
reportedly continued in the Jebel Marra area, resulting
in approximately 60 civilian casualties. Unfortunately,
that fighting has also led to the displacement of more
than 2,300 people in Darfur, mostly women and
children, and has exacerbated the already unstable
living conditions in camps for nearly 2 million
internally displaced persons in the region. I am deeply
troubled by the fact that sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as grave violations against children,
have persisted in Darfur throughout this ongoing armed
conflict. Since June, UNAMID has reported sexual and
gender-based violence against 17 victims, including
seven minors, and grave violations against 84 children,
including 35 girls. Although UNAMID has identified
the perpetrators of those atrocities as mostly SLA/AW
fighters, they have also noted violations by the Rapid
Support Forces (RSF), among other groups.

Additionally, in July UNAMID reported that
SLA/AW elements were responsible for the temporary
abduction of several local and international staff
members from international non-governmental
organizations around G010 and Jebel Marra, and the
looting of critical humanitarian equipment. That
disturbing incident closely followed the RSF's alleged
seizure of UNAMID facilities that I mentioned to the
Council earlier this year (see S/PV.8554). I am pleased
to note that UNAMID now reports that the Sudanese
authorities have provided assurances that those
facilities will be handed over to the Darfur state for the
purposes of health, education and other services. It is
with those essential human rights monitoring functions
in mind that I commend the Council on its adoption
of resolution 2495 (2019), extending the mandate of
UNAMID until 31 October 2020.

In my statement before the Council in June, I
also expressed deep concern regarding the alleged
attacks by Government forces on peaceful protesters in
Khartoum on 3 June. As those present will recall, those
Government forces were allegedly made up of the RSF,
whose members include former Janjaweed militias
linked to systematic human rights abuses in the Darfur
region between 2003 and 2008. The new Administration
has since created a commission of inquiry to investigate
human rights violations that occurred in the course of
those attacks. I sincerely hope that this investigation
will be conducted in an independent, impartial and fair
manner by the competent domestic authorities.

In relation to the recent judicial activities, on
30 October a confidential status conference was held
by the Trial Chamber in Mr. Abdallah Banda's case.
Its purpose was to discuss the status of the case and
the way forward to ensure Mr. Banda's appearance at
trial. As I mentioned, Mr. Banda's arrest warrant has
not been executed, and he remains a fugitive from the
Court. Following that status conference, the Chamber
made a number of requests, including for submissions
from the Prosecution and the defence on their
respective positions on trials in absentia in the specific
circumstances of Mr. Banda's case. Those confidential
submissions were filed on 13 December, and the parties
now await further direction from the Chamber.

It would be remiss of me not to express my sincere
gratitude for the principled support and cooperation
that my Office continues to receive from a number of
States. I particularly welcome the public statements
that members of the Council have made to encourage
the Sudan to cooperate with my Office. It is time to
embark on a new chapter in the relationship between the
Sudan and my Office rooted in a commitment to finally
bring those most responsible for the atrocity crimes
perpetrated against the people of Darfur to justice.
My Office is ready and willing to do so, and we hope
that our hand extended in cooperation in the pursuit
of justice is met favourably by the new authorities in
the Sudan.

My Office also continues to benefit from essential
support provided by various organizations and
individuals committed to the cause ofjustice in Darfur.
I particularly want to express my sincere and heartfelt
appreciation to Darfur's victims' groups, in which many
courageous women and men work tirelessly to ensure
that justice in the Darfur situation remains a critical
issue in the Sudan's transition. I am humbled and
inspired by their strength, courage and determination.

I will finish where I began, with a request for
the reinvigorated support and engagement of the
Sudan and the Council in the Darfur situation. The
Sudan continues on its extraordinary journey. Its
publicly stated commitments to international law and
international human rights and justice have created a
renewed expectation for accountability in the Darfur
situation. The Sudan is now on a path towards greater
peace and stability. If that can be achieved, justice for
the victims will be essential to a comprehensive and
enduring peace in Darfur. In its transition process, the
Sudan has benefited from the support of the Council
and the United Nations system, the African Union
and multiple States and regional organizations. Now
a principled caucus must rally to strongly support and
encourage the Sudan in its pursuit ofjustice in Darfur.

In response to the special report on UNAMID,
the representative of the Sudan told the Council on
17 October that the Sudan of today is totally unlike the
Sudan the Security Council has come to know over the
past three decades. Those are promising words that must
be translated into action. I now invite the Sudan, with
the support of the Council, and all stakeholders in the
Darfur situation to work with my Office and in doing so
demonstrate that the Sudan of today is unambiguously
committed to achieving long-awaited justice for the
victims in Darfur. As has been most eloquently said in
some timeless words, "The are of the moral universe is
long, but it bends towards justice."

We must seize the opportunity now to take concrete
steps to end impunity for the alleged crimes in Darfur.
Before the Council and the representatives of the
Sudan here today, I reiterate my Office's willingness
to engage in dialogue and cooperation with the Sudan
so that justice can finally be served for the victims of
atrocity crimes in Darfur, either in a Sudanese court or
before the ICC.

