Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Otunnu, at this open debate of the Security
Council on children in armed conflict, as well as his
important statement.

The question of protecting children in armed conflict
has been a matter of concern for various countries and
bodies, such as the United Nations General Assembly. At
present, there still exist armed conflicts in many places that
not only endanger international peace and security but also
bring tremendous damage to the peoples of the countries
and regions concerned. As one of the most vulnerable
social groups, children are particularly hurt by armed
conflicts.

In the armed conflicts around the world, tens of
millions people have lost their homes and become
displaced. They have neither a stable life nor an opportunity
to receive an education. On top of that, they are constantly
subjected to violent attacks that cause tremendous damage
to their mental and physical health. What is more, millions
of children have been forcibly recruited as combatants, thus
becoming directly involved in armed conflicts.

Children represent the future of our world. The
international community should give special attention to
the question of protecting children in armed conflict. The
fundamental way to protect children in armed conflict is
to effectively prevent, halt and eliminate armed conflicts.
Under present circumstances, where it is not possible to
fully accomplish this, we should urge the parties
concerned to end their conflicts as soon as possible
through peaceful means, whenever and wherever those
armed conflicts occur. We should request that they strictly
observe international law - including international
humanitarian law - and prevent and prohibit the various
forms of violent harm done to children during conflicts.
We should urge them to strive to provide children with
the necessary protection and help them resume their
normal lives and studies as soon as possible.

China has always attached great importance to the
question of protecting children and has actively
participated in the deliberations on this question in bodies
such as the General Assembly. We also support the work
of Ambassador Otunnu. We are in favour of the Security
Council's issuing a presidential statement on the question
of children affected by armed conflict, so as to
demonstrate the importance that the Council attaches to
this matter. At the same time, we believe that since the
protection of children involves a wide range of issues, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
are the appropriate forums to carry out more
comprehensive, fuller and more in-depth deliberations on
this question.

