The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

I would first like to align myself with the statement
made by my French colleague in the Normandy format.
We have worked very closely together and I subscribe
to everything he said.

I just listened to Mr. Nebenzia's statement and
I must admit that I have always been fascinated by
Russian diplomacy. I believe the Russian State Institute
of International Relations has textbooks that prescribe
the patterns of behaviour to be followed in Russian
foreign policy. Mr. Lewicki, the representative of
Poland, mentioned earlier that there are other examples
of the passport policy that are applied on a regular basis.

The German Foreign Service teaches us how to deal
with a country with which we have strained relations or
a President with whom we may not be on the best of
terms. If there is a new, inexperienced President, we
would perhaps send that President rhetorical flowers
and write a congratulatory letter before inviting him or
her to visit us.

In Russia, one could do the same thing. There is
a new President. Perhaps it was not possible to work
with the old one, but now a new one has been elected.
Rhetorical flowers could be sent - paragraph 1 of
the Minsk agreements and a full ceasefire could be
implemented, or Russia could liberate the 24 marines
that are in prison or, with respect to the bridge of
Stanytsia Luhanska, the Ukrainians could be granted the
80 centimetres and finally people can cross the bridge.

However, that is not in the textbooks of the Russian
State Institute of International Relations. Rather, its
textbooks teach that if there is a new, inexperienced
leader, efforts should be made to intimidate him on the
first day following his election in order to provoke him
and try to catch him off guard. That is what Russia has
been doing. That is textbook diplomacy and those of us
old enough to remember will recall how when John F.
Kennedy became President, Khrushchev provoked him.

Another lesson in Russian textbooks is that
one should not miss an opportunity for cynicism.
Accordingly, President Putin signed the decree on
passports yesterday, on 24 April, the International
Day of Multilateralism and Diplomacy for Peace, the
day on which at the General Assembly we all spoke
about multilateralism and the need to adhere to an
international rules-based order. By its actions, Russia
demonstrated its disdain for the international rules-
based order.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

