Ms. Kadare (Albania): We thank Viet Nam for choosing such an important and timely topic for today's open debate, as we start the year that will mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the existence of United Nations. Upholding the Charter of the United Nations and strengthening the multilateral system are crucial in effectively addressing the global crises the world faces today. Those challenges have significantly evolved, while new threats have emerged. No country can address alone the current complex challenges, such as climate change, mass migration, rising inequalities, new technologies, international terrorism and organized crime, all of which have a direct impact on the international security architecture. Under such circumstances, the United Nations needs to adapt its tools and rapidly adjust to new realities. I would like to mention three interrelated elements, which we believe are crucial in upholding the United Nations Charter. First, we should make conflict prevention a reality. As the Secretary-General has emphasized since the beginning of his mandate, prevention must be at the centre of all efforts. We must collectively mobilize in order to prevent the deterioration of situations by addressing root causes long before conflict escalates into violence. In so doing, we must recognize the power of women's participation, which makes peace agreements stronger and societies more resilient. Prevention development. also. depends' on __ sustainable The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development offers a framework for addressing the economic and social drivers of conflict and building stable inclusive societies. Albania strongly supports the Secretary-General's reform agenda, which aims to put conflict prevention, sustaining peace and sustainable development at the centre of the work of the United Nations. Secondly, we need a more responsive and effective Security Council, the body in charge of preventing crises and maintaining international peace and security. When the Security Council has managed to overcome its divisions and take united action, it has successfully achieved the Charter's purposes. Regrettably, the Council has also quite often been unable to act in a timely manner, failing to find common ground in order to resolve conflicts and ease human suffering. It should be underlined that membership in the Security Council is a responsibility, not a privilege, and implies the exercise of that responsibility on behalf of all Members of the United Nations, in the light of the purposes and principles of the Charter. That is why the use of the veto to protect narrow national interests, in situations of mass atrocities, is unacceptable. Thirdly, the maintenance of international peace and security cannot be understood without respecting and protecting human rights and international humanitarian law. Here I would like to emphasize that Albania believes that human rights are the Security Council's business - not only because the United Nations Charter calls on all Members to respect them but also because violations of human rights inevitably lead to instability, thereby threatening peace and security. Former Secretary-General Kofi Annan said that we will not enjoy development without security or security without development, but we will not enjoy either development or security without universal respect for human rights. I would like to conclude by stressing the commitment of my country to defend and strengthen the rules- based global order, international law and multilateral institutions. As a candidate for a non-permanent seat in the Security Council for the term 2022-2023, Albania pledges to engage actively in all efforts to strengthen the role of the Security Council, with a focus on its efficiency, credibility and accountability. As the Secretary-General said today, international cooperation is at a crossroads. Indeed, the global challenges that we face today will test the Charter and multilateralism, as well as our capacity to secure a better world for all of humankind, as we strive to deliver for "We, the peoples". Let us remember that upholding the Charter's values, which remain as relevant as ever, is both our shared responsibility and in our common interest.
