Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mark Lowcock for his briefing on
the humanitarian situation in Syria.

We share concerns about the situation in the Idlib
de-escalation zone - a territory that is under the de
facto control of fighters from the Al-Nusra Front
alliance with the Hayat Tahrir al-Sham owing to the
fact that the moderate armed opposition was forced out.
Violations of the ceasefire regime continue to increase.
Since the Russian-Turkish memorandum was signed
on 17 September 2018, over 1,000 violations of the
ceasefire agreement have been reported, leading to the
deaths of 65 people and the injury of more than 200
wounded. From the very beginning, we have said that
the freezing of a situation in the area where terrorists
are present would not last long. Such an approach
cannot be viewed as a long-term and sustainable option
for protecting the local population.

Unfortunately, developments concerning the
situation confirm that our views were right. In that
regard, following the talks between the Russian and
Turkish leaders in Moscow on 23 January, work was
stepped up to develop effective, feasible and agreed
measures with regard to the Idlib de-escalation zone.
In addition, at the Russian-Turkish summit, discussions
were conducted on cooperation in north-east Syria,
including by harnessing the potential of the existing
bilateral legal basis of Turkish-Syrian counter-
terrorist efforts.
Our position remains unchanged. The best way
to stabilize the situation in north-west and north-east
Syria is to transfer those territories to the control of
the legitimate authority of the Syrian Arab Republic.
This will not only benefit Syria but will also ease
the concerns of neighbouring countries in terms of
protecting their national security. Stabilization is a
necessary precondition for making serious progress
on the humanitarian front. It will allow the Syrians
themselves to return to a normal life and will help
to prevent a situation from arising whereby ordinary
people start to feel kinship with terrorists. Joint efforts
must therefore to be made to improve the difficult social
and economic situation in the country, to rebuild what
has been destroyed by terrorists and to guarantee the
inalienable right of refugees and internally displaced
persons to return to their homes.

We deem it unethical - to say the least - to take
a selective approach to providing assistance to the
Syrian population. The politicization of humanitarian
assistance is unacceptable. One cannot just blame
the Syrian Government while choosing to ignore, for
example, what happened in Raqqa or what is currently
happening in Rukban.

Russia, despite the numerous concerns about
how humanitarian assistance is being handled in
Syria, always welcomes initiatives that will help the
population, as was the case with the extension of the
cross-border assistance mechanism and the organization
of humanitarian convoys in Rukban, as well as with the
second Rukban humanitarian convoy.

Despite the fact that the humanitarian situation
in Syria remains difficult, we cannot deny that there
have been some positive trends, as confirmed by
recent statistics from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. In areas that have been
stabilized and liberated from terrorists, normal life
is returning. Syrian refugees understand this and are
deciding to voluntarily return home, in the context
of a an increasingly sustainable process. With the
assistance of the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation
of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, tens of
crossing points have become functional, including one
aerial one, at Duvali, and a maritime one at Baniyas,
through which many thousands of people have returned
to Syria.
Russia will continue to provide humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people on a non-politicized
basis. Since the beginning of the settlement process,
the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing
Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic has carried out
2,052 humanitarian actions, providing 3,238.5 tons
of humanitarian goods. Assistance is being stepped
up to rebuild infrastructure and to create conditions
conducive to the return of refugees. As of 27 January,
31,117 homes, 726 schools and 134 medical facilities
had been built, and 986 kilometres of roads had
been repaired.

We trust that those who are truly concerned about
the fate of ordinary Syrians will soon be able to set aside
their biased agendas and policies ofunilateral sanctions
and commit to rebuilding what has been destroyed and
to restoring normality for the population.

In addition to the humanitarian and de-escalation
efforts undertaken, and jointly with our Turkish and
Iranian partners and in coordination with the United
Nations, we are continuing our painstaking work
on the political track and efforts to help launch the
constitutional committee in Geneva.

The visit by the Special Envoy, Geir Pedersen,
to Moscow on 21 January and his negotiations with
Foreign Minister Lavrov and Defence Minister
Shoygu confirmed the commitment to pursuing the
political process in Syria, with the assistance of the
United Nations.

We are convinced that the next meeting of the Astana
guarantors, in mid-February, will give further impetus
to the process of the settlement of the Syrian question.
We urge all those who really want to see peace return
to Syria to involve themselves constructively in our
efforts. The only path is that of honest cooperation, and
any attempt to impose opinions on the Special Envoy
or dissuade Arab countries from normalizing relations
with Damascus would be counterproductive indeed.

