Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the Senegalese presidency ofthe Security Council
for having organized this extremely useful debate.

Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I would now like to
make some remarks in my national capacity.

(spoke in English)

An ancient Chinese proverb says that water can
sink boats as well as float them, and water can indeed
be simultaneously productive and destructive. We live
in a divided world in which less than half of the global
population has achieved water security. It was pointed
out at last year's Davos World Economic Forum that
water-related issues such as drought and pollution
would be the biggest threats to the planet for the next
decade. Water is a very political matter. The action
plan released in September by the Global High-Level
Panel on Water and Peace clearly underlines the fact
that technical solutions to many of the world's water
problems already exist, but that we need strong and
coordinated political leadership to make progress.
Water is also a finite and irreplaceable resource,
renewable only if well managed. Today, more than
1.7 billion people live in river basins whose depletion
through use exceeds their natural recharge. If that trend
continues, by 2025 two thirds of the world's population
will be living in water-stressed countries.

For many small island developing States, dealing
with water threats is a matter of survival, owing to rising
sea levels. Many least-developed countries are affected
by increasing droughts and extreme weather events.
They require better access to funds for adaptation
projects, but they also need us to revisit the paradigm
of water governance, because water issues are linked to
climate change, poverty, food, health and energy and
should be seen as cross-sectoral and multidisciplinary.

Romania fully supports working to ensure
sustainable water resources around the globe.
In that regard, we sponsored the draft resolution
introduced in the Second Committee by Tajikistan
entitled "International Decade for Action, 'Water for
Sustainable Development', 2018-2028" (A/C.2/71/L.12),
and we welcome the high-level conference in support of
the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal
14 that Sweden and Fiji will organize in New York
next June.

The lack of institutional capacity for managing
shared water resources could lead to misperceptions
and fears. In some parts of the world there is a long
history of mistrust around joint access to water
resources. Some of the best known such examples
revolve around the Nile and Jordan Rivers, while the
question of water-sharing is one of the final status
issues in the peace negotiations between Israel and
Palestine, as defined by the Oslo Accords. We therefore
encourage the promotion of international agreements
on water cooperation.

While the Geneva Conventions regard water
resources and installations as key areas of civilian
infrastructure, and therefore supposedly protected from
attack, reality has unfortunately proved otherwise.
Perhaps no conflict has reflected the effects of the
horrors of war on civilians more than the situation in
Syria, where water has become a weapon. Limiting
civilian populations' access to water supplies is a
grave breach of international humanitarian law and
human rights.

Water insecurity in some parts of the world
represents a threat to the entire world because, as other
speakers have pointed out, water ignores boundaries.
Good communication, strengthened relations between
upstream and downstream States and strong institutions
are therefore essential to successful negotiations on
water. Many opportunities can also emerge from
negotiations on energy, agriculture and infrastructure.
Education matters, too, because it will shape the next
generation of leaders on the issue of water. Bilateral
cooperation and international mediation, facilitation,
good offices and dialogue are effective methods of
preventing, managing and resolving water disputes.
The United Nations should therefore continue to
deploy sustained diplomatic efforts to secure regional
cooperation on water.

Where the experience of my own region is
concerned, the European Union Strategy for the Danube
Region, initiated by Romania and Austria, has helped
to advance cooperation among the Danube's riparian
countries in areas such as transport, energy security,
environmental protection, education, tourism and rural
development. Last but not least, since 2010, Romanian
experts, in partnership with the United Nations and
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, have been providing professional training
for water-supply specialists from Eastern Europe, the
Black Sea region and Central Asia.

