Mr. Craxi (Italy) (spoke in French): I am
particularly honoured to have the opportunity to
address the Security Council on this important
occasion.

Permit me at the outset to congratulate Minister
Moratinos Cuyaube on his briefing and, in particular,
on the effectiveness of his actions as Chairman-in-
Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and on the results
achieved thus far by the organization under his
leadership.

At the most recent OSCE Ministerial Council,
which took place in Brussels in December 2006 and at
which I had the honour to represent my country, we
recalled Italy's commitment to the OSCE and
expressed the hope for greater confidence among all
the States participating in the organization.

I wish to express my appreciation for the fact that
the actions of the Spanish chairmanship - as well as
those of the Belgian chairmanship that preceded it -
have been consistently inspired by that objective. We
have endorsed the priorities that Minister Moratinos
Cuyaube has set for the organization this year, and I
take this opportunity to confirm to the Spanish
chairmanship our support for a successful conclusion
to his mandate.

Italy is convinced that the OSCE remains an
effective instrument for seeking, on the basis of
consensus, solutions to problems that continue to affect
Europe. Indeed, regional disputes persist in Nagorny
Karabakh, Georgia and Moldova. Nevertheless, we
hope that under the leadership of Minister Moratinos
Cuyaube, all the States participating in the OSCE will
take care to respect the principles underlying the
Helsinki Final Act: restraint, responsibility and
rejection of the use of force. Under all circumstances,
dialogue and the search for agreed solutions must
remain priorities. Recent events have demonstrated that
these issues cannot be easily resolved and that,
ultimately, the political will of the parties concerned
remains an essential element.

Italy is convinced that the OSCE can also
continue to play an important role for the future of
Kosovo, its communities and the stability of the region.
In that connection, we support the actions of the
chairmanship-in-office. We also support the other
priorities of the Spanish chairmanship's programme:
combating terrorism, the major challenge of our time,
which can be overcome only in close cooperation
among States and with respect for democratic
principles; protecting the environment, with particular
attention given to soil degradation and contamination
and the sustainable management of water resources;
and, in the human area, promoting diversity and
participation in pluralistic societies and combating
intolerance, discrimination, corruption and human
trafficking. Those are factors that have become
indisputable in the OSCE's indivisible and
comprehensive approach to security. Thus, we agree
with the choice of those priorities, and we believe that
all the credit goes to the Spanish chairmanship, which
has the duty to show that the organization can meet the
challenges of our time and that it has worked
effectively to achieve a better balance among those
three areas. As was stated earlier, the OSCE is an
alliance of civilizations in action.

The road leading to the Madrid ministerial
conference has already been embarked upon. However,
major issues remain unresolved. Here, I should like to
mention the conventional arms control regime in
Europe, regional conflict settlement, the future
chairmanships of the organization, its legal status and
the adoption of scales of assessment for the budget.
Nonetheless, the Spanish chairmanship will be able to
guide us so that the Madrid meeting is characterized by
a renewed awareness on the part of all participating
States of the importance of political dialogue within
the OSCE framework in a changing environment of
security and peace.

