Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me first to welcome the new Permanent Representatives
of Sierra Leone and Nigeria to the Council. They both
presented their credentials yesterday and we wish them
the greatest success in their important and difficult posts.

I believe that we can assert today that, after nine
years of struggle, the population of Sierra Leone can look
to the future with hope. Along this long and difficult path
towards peace, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), its Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and
the United Nations have made significant contributions in
defending and in allowing the values of democracy,
freedom and respect for human rights to be effectively
restored.

As we stated at our formal meeting in August, the
Lome Peace Agreement marked a decisive moment in
Sierra Leone's recent history. We trust that the
peacekeeping operation that we shall establish today will
effectively contribute to the Agreement's implementation.
In our opinion, the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) has a clear mandate on four distinct
levels: on the military level, through assistance to the
Government of Sierra Leone in the implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme
for former combatants and in monitoring the ceasefire; on
the political level, by promoting confidence-building
measures among the parties and providing electoral
assistance, when required; on the humanitarian level, by
facilitating the delivery of assistance; and on the human
rights level, by supporting respect for and the promotion
of these rights.

I wish to refer in particular to paragraph 14 of the
draft resolution before us, which authorizes UNAMSIL to
act under Chapter VII of the Charter towards two well-
defined objectives: to ensure the security and freedom of
movement of its personnel and to afford protection to

 

civilians under imminent threat of physical violence. The
safety and security of personnel in the field of operations
must be an essential condition of all peacekeeping missions.
In the course of this year alone, many staff members of the
United Nations have fallen victim. The women and men
working in the service of the Organization should not be
unduly vulnerable. As the Deputy Secretary-General said to
the General Assembly on 14 October,

"improved security is not a luxury. It should be
viewed... as an essential operating cost" (A/54/PV34).

There can be no doubt that the personnel of
UNAMSIL will be carrying out their duties in a hazardous
environment. That is why we deem it appropriate that the
draft resolution reinforce UNAMSIL's rules of engagement
with the additional authority of Chapter VII. Similarly, the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel provides the legal mechanisms required for the
trial and punishment of those committing crimes against
United Nations personnel. In this regard, we would venture
once again to appeal to those States that have not yet done
so to ratify that Convention.

We believe that the protection of civilians under
Chapter VII is a pertinent development in the context of the
mandate of a peacekeeping operation. This draft resolution
is significant in that it introduces a new, fundamental
political, legal and moral dimension. This bears on the
credibility of the Security Council and shows that the
Council has learned from its own experience and that it will
not remain indifferent to indiscriminate attacks against the
civilian population. At the same time, we are realistic. The
objective to be fulfilled must be consonant with the means
provided. For that reason, we agree with the limits that
operative paragraph 14 of the draft resolution sets on
UNAMSIL'S actions. It establishes an objective limit, the
competence the Council wishes to give UNAMSIL, a
geographic limit - UNAMSIL'S area of deployment -
and a functional limit - it does not overlap the specific
security responsibilities entrusted to ECOMOG pursuant to
the mandate adopted by ECOWAS on 25 August 1999.

We believe we must seriously consider what
Ambassador Olara Otunnu said at the beginning of this
debate. The atrocities committed against children and
innocent civilians must be compensated for as much as
possible. In this regard, the very recent visit of Mrs.
Albright to Sierra Leone left us with unforgettable images.
Thus, paragraph 18 of the draft resolution is appropriate in
that it refers to the rehabilitation of child soldiers and the
needs of all children affected by the conflict. UNAMSIL
will undoubtedly give this provision the necessary scope,
within its mandate, to address the legitimate concerns that
Ambassador Otunnu underscored before the Council.

UNAMSIL is the first in a series of large-scale
peacekeeping operations that the Security Council will be
creating in coming weeks. There is undoubtedly a need
for a relaunching of peacekeeping operations. At the same
time, if they are to fulfil their mandates properly, the
United Nations must provide the necessary resources.

The United Nations has an irreplaceable role to play
in peacekeeping and peace-building in Sierra Leone. We
believe that this draft resolution establishes the
appropriate legal and political framework so that this task
can be successfully fulfilled.

