The President: Pursuant to the decision taken at
the 5055th meeting, I invite the representative of
Afghanistan to take a seat at the Council table, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Farhddi (Afghanistan) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
presidential election that took place on 9 October
2004 in Afghanistan, stresses its historic
importance as a milestone in the political process,
and congratulates the millions of Afghan voters,
many of them women and refugees, who showed
their commitment to democracy by participating
in the first popular election of their head of State.
The Council welcomes further the broad political
representation, as manifested by the 18
presidential candidates. The Council commends
the Afghan National Police and the Afghan
National Army for their role, with the assistance
of the international security forces, in bolstering
security during the election period.

"The Security Council appreciates the effort
of the Joint Electoral Management Body (JEMB)
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their excellent
achievement in the preparations of the
presidential election. The Security Council
appreciates the JEMB's efforts to address any
candidate's concerns and to further enhance the
transparency of the electoral process, and looks
forward to a final statement.

"The Security Council urges the
Government of Afghanistan, with the help of the
international community, to continue to confront
the challenges that remain in Afghanistan,
including security, timely preparation of the
parliamentary elections in April 2005, the
reconstruction of institutions, the fight against
narcotics, and the disarmament, demobilization,
and reintegration of Afghan militias.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Afghan authorities to plan and carry out without
delay inclusive parliamentary elections and calls
upon the international community to support
them in completing the electoral process set out
in the Bonn Agreement.

"The Security Council pledges its continued
support for the Government and people of a
sovereign Afghanistan as they rebuild their
country, strengthen the foundations of
constitutional democracy and assume their
rightful place in the community of nations, and
calls upon the international community, with the
United Nations in a central role, to support them
in these efforts."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/35.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

