Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka (Uganda): I thank you,
Sir. My delegation is delighted to see you providing
over this session and would like to commend the
delegation of Jamaica for hosting this important
discussion. We welcome once again this opportunity to
discuss in the Security Council the most devastating
war faced by mankind during peacetime: AIDS. We
commend the Security Council for its continued
interest and its determination to be a partner in the
fight against AIDS.
Today's session is being held after a landmark
conference, the Thirteenth International AIDS
Conference, which ended last week in Durban, South
Africa. Maybe it is too early to evaluate the impact of
that conference. Nevertheless, we can even at this early
stage list a number of significant outcomes, including
President Mandela's ringing and heart-warming speech,
which called for action now.

First of all, at Durban there was a general
consensus that AIDS anywhere is AIDS everywhere,
that AIDS is crushing the African continent - not only
politically, but also economically. Politically because
able leaders are dying prematurely. It was also
recognized, more than ever before, that AIDS is a
development issue and that it is a poverty issue. It is
economically an issue because the most productive part
of the population is the one being wiped out.

There was also consensus that the AIDS bill is
enormous, as we were reminded this morning by the
Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Mr. Peter Piot.
Hence the need for a worldwide response. We welcome
therefore the commitments by the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation, the commitments by the World
Bank, as well as earlier commitments by the United
States, which were outlined in this Chamber during the
month of January by Vice-President Al Gore.

Uganda has received honourable mention for its
achievements in the battle against AIDS.

I wish briefly, at this stage, to share some of our
experiences with you, Sir, and members here present. I
emphasize that these are Ugandan experiences and
therefore do not apply to or reflect what other countries
may think.

First of all, there was open and committed
political will at the top. Consequently, Uganda became
a model for frankness and bold approaches. Realizing
that the formidable challenges posed by AIDS could
not be solved by one sector, Uganda adopted a
multisectoral approach to show that AIDS is more than
a health issue. The strategy involved all government
ministries, non-governmental organizations, regional
bodies and private enterprises. Public information and
the AIDS-awareness campaign have played a key role
in informing the population, to the extent that very few
Ugandans today would attribute an AIDS death to
witchcraft. That is why I say that I am speaking of
Uganda's experience and not of other experiences in
Africa. There has been massive free distribution of
condoms, targeting the sex industry as well. To support
government efforts, non-governmental organizations
developed a wide range of AIDS-prevention
programmes and activities.

The net result of this high-profile government
involvement and commitment against AIDS has been
that we have begun to see a reversal over the past
decade. The prevalence rate was reduced from 30 per
cent at mid-decade to about 10 per cent by the end of
the decade.

Again, as a result of our experience and as I have
said before, AIDS is a development and poverty issue.
Ugandans know as a result of bitter experience that
AIDS is not caused by poverty, because we have seen
many members of the prosperous part of the
population - the entrepreneurs, leaders in the business
and industry and the political leadership - dying in
like numbers. This is why, in fact, we say that AIDS
has a devastating economic impact on societies,
because it is the entrepreneurial class, the productive
part of populations, that is dying.

AIDS is also a poverty issue, because poverty is
responsible for ignorance. People who are better off are
better able to utilize the drugs available. They have
access to expensive drugs which poor people cannot
have. Poverty, in fact, is a major constraint to the
prevention of AIDS.

At this stage, I would like to develop a new area
in sharing our experiences. My colleague, the
Ambassador of Malawi, has said that the spread of
AIDS has other characteristics. He rightfully pointed to
cultures. I think we need, in our preventive strategies,
not only to address culture, but also to address the
socio-political environment that, in many countries, has
turned the spread of AIDS into a wildfire. The
following are some of the dominant conveyor belts and
links in the AIDS chain in most of sub-Saharan Africa:
the breakdown of traditional values and behaviour due
to the impact of modernization; the demographic
changes and the impact of urbanization - rural push
and urban pull - which have led to the exodus to the
cities and slums, the unemployment of many loitering
young men and women and the high consumption of
alcohol and other good things of life; migratory labour,
which leads to wife abandonment and male
bachelorhood; the impact of civil conflicts and wars,
which this meeting is addressing - conflicts have
produced huge numbers of orphans, refugees and
internally displaced persons, which, I am glad to say, is
also the subject of the present meeting; the
mushrooming of urban communities in rural areas; and
the widespread and uncontrolled sale and consumption
of alcohol, even to and by very young people.

Former South African President Mandela, at the
closure of the Thirteenth International AIDS
Conference, called for urgent action. I think this urgent
action must address behaviour change in our
communities. This is a contribution which we,
internally, can make. He called for emergency
measures - AIDS demands emergency responses.

Before I conclude, let me join others in paying
tribute to Ambassador Holbrooke, who, in January this
year, pioneered and initiated the introduction of the
discussion of this subject as a Security Council issue in
this Chamber. My delegation had no hesitation in
backing Ambassador Holbrooke when he broached the
idea. Now, the resolution before us, which my
delegation supports - provided, however, that poor
countries will be assisted in building the capacity to
test and to undertake preventive measures, as well as to
treat. Without that assistance, the call upon many of the
developing countries to ensure that all their armies are
tested may fall on very infertile ground. I would like to
say that Uganda was engaged in awareness education
campaigns within the military long before the United
Nations and the Security Council thought of the
subject.

