Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like at the outset to express my delegation's
appreciation to the United Kingdom for convening this
important debate and for the concept paper
(S/2008/291, annex) prepared in advance of this
discussion.

My delegation aligns itself with and supports the
statement to be made by the representative of Jamaica
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The concept paper forms the basis for a
discussion of three major areas that, we all agree, need
to be addressed more robustly within the United
Nations system. While we agree with the objective
assessment that there is a need for further United
Nations efforts to address those areas, we must always
bear in mind the discussions that took place prior to the
2005 World Summit, at which it was concluded that
there were a number of gaps that must be filled by the
United Nations, including the three topics covered by
the concept paper.

The world leaders gathered at the Summit
therefore agreed to establish the Peacebuilding
Commission to carry out the tasks set out in the
resolutions providing for its establishment (resolution 1645 (2005) and General Assembly resolution 60/180),
in particular bringing together all relevant actors to
propose integrated strategies for post-conflict
peacebuilding based on the principle of national
ownership; to provide recommendations and
information to improve the coordination of all relevant
actors within and outside the United Nations, including
helping to ensure the funding necessary for those
3
activities; and ensuring the necessary linkages between
peacebuilding and peacekeeping activities.

Therefore, we consider today's Security Council
meeting an opportunity to build momentum for
peacebuilding activities through the Peacebuilding
Commission, not through a contest between the
Security Council and the General Assembly for control
over the Commission, which could undermine the
Commission's credibility. Accordingly, we request that
the presidential statement to be issued by the Council
on this topic include a clear and explicit mandate from
the Council to the Peacebuilding Commission to study
the best ways to overcome these three obstacles and
any others that could prevent the Commission from
carrying out its mission - a task that, as the Chairman
of the Commission has just reaffirmed, that organ is
prepared to accomplish as effectively as possible.

The proposal that the role of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General be enhanced
so that they can carry out the work of the United
Nations more effectively requires that we distinguish
between two scenarios. First, if the country concerned
is not included on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Security Council has the right to
enhance the role of the Special Representative within a
framework that guarantees respect for State
sovereignty and the principle of national ownership.
On the other hand, if the State concerned is included on
the Commission's agenda, the Commission must, on a
case-by-case basis, determine the roles to be played by
the Special Representative and by each member of the
steering committees in various countries, including the
United Nations and other relevant influential actors, in
particular donor countries and the international
financial institutions.

With regard to the rapid deployment of qualified
civilian experts specializing in police matters and the
reform of the security and judicial sectors, it must first
be agreed that each peacebuilding situation requires
skills different from those required in other cases. This
depends on the background of the conflict and the
cultural, ethnic and religious background of the
population, among other factors. Thus, it is impossible
to determine what type of expertise is required unless
the Peacebuilding Commission first identifies priorities
and necessary areas for action, in consultation with the
authorities of the State concerned. Moreover, it is
possible that the building of such a framework could
waste huge amounts of financial resources through the
appointment of experts whom the United Nations does
not need for long periods of time, but only on an ad
hoc basis and under vastly different and substantive
conditions. That would only place an additional and
useless burden on the Organization's regular budget,
which we are trying to keep under control.

On the other hand, while we agree with the
concept paper on the need to provide rapid and flexible
funding for activities aimed at achieving stability in a
post-conflict situation, we believe that, given the
inability of existing funding mechanisms to do so with
the required effectiveness, the best way to accomplish
this is to focus on quickly overcoming the defects
hampering the work of the existing funding
mechanisms and to reform them - particularly the
Peacebuilding Fund - rather than thinking about
creating new ones.

The experience of the Peacebuilding Fund since
its establishment has underscored the urgent need to
review its working methods and terms of reference.
The General Assembly must do this through its review
of the terms of reference, which is scheduled to take
place two years after the August 2006 adoption of the
terms, in accordance with the Assembly's mandate to
provide general policy guidance on use of the Fund. In
particular, we believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission should participate in decision-making
regarding the funding of projects that are peacebuilding
priorities in the States under consideration. Thus, the
process will not be limited to informing the
Commission after the Secretary-General has made
funding decisions. We also believe it is necessary to
consider raising the ceiling of the Fund's budget - for
example, doubling it to $750 million. That would make
it possible to expand the base of projects to be funded
upon the Commission's decision and to increase the
number of recipient States. In that connection, we
propose the holding of an annual meeting of the
General Assembly dedicated to fund-raising, along the
lines of the annual meeting held by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to enhance the
financial capacities of the Central Emergency
Response Fund.

Once again, I wish to thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to focus on three major
obstacles facing the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We look forward to working with the
Council, with the General Assembly and with our
fellow members of the Commission to overcome those
obstacles in order to benefit States emerging from
conflict and to enhance and promote the Commission's
authority to carry out its work in the way that we all
hope it will.

