Mr. Shukurov (Azerbaijan): Mr. President, in my
capacity as the Chairman of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC) Group at the United Nations,
I would like to inform you that the OIC Group adopted
the following statement on 7 November, in response to
the recent developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, which I would like to read:

"The OIC Group at the United Nations met at the
ambassadorial level in New York on 7 November
2006 to discuss the continued deterioration of the
situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory as a result of the military
aggression being carried out by Israel, the
occupying Power in the Gaza Strip.

"The OIC Group at the United Nations expressed
its grave concern at the continued deterioration of
the situation on the ground in the Palestinian
territory occupied by Israel since 1967 during the
recent period, particularly as a result of the
excessive and indiscriminate use of force by
Israel, the occupying Power, which has caused
extensive loss of civilian Palestinian life and
injuries, including among children and women.

"The OIC Group at the United Nations
condemned in particular the military assaults
being carried out by Israel, the occupying Power
in the Gaza Strip, which has caused loss of life
and extensive destruction of Palestinian property
and vital infrastructure.

"The OIC Group at the United Nations
emphasizes the need to preserve the institutions
of the Palestinian National Authority and
Palestinian infrastructure and properties.

"The OIC Group at the United Nations expressed
grave concern about the dire humanitarian
situation of the Palestinian people and called for
the provision of emergency assistance to them.

"The OIC Group at the United Nations decided to
call for the convening of the Security Council's
meeting on this issue and urged the Security
Council to shoulder its responsibility, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and
the preservation of international peace and
security, by taking the following measures.

"First: demanding that Israel, the occupying
Power, immediately cease its aggression against
the Palestinian civilian population in the occupied
06-61024
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
and immediately withdraw its forces from within
the Gaza Strip to positions held prior to 28 June
2006.

"Second: calling for an immediate ceasefire
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides.

"Third: calling also for the establishment and
dispatch of a United Nations observer force to
supervise the ceasefire.

"Fourth: calling upon Israel, the occupying
Power, to scrupulously abide by its obligations
and responsibilities under the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949.

"The OIC Group at the United Nations called
upon the international community, including the
Quartet, to take immediate steps, including
confidence-building measures between the
parties, with the objective of resuming peace
negotiations and restarting the peace process in
accordance with General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions.

"The OIC Group at the United Nations decided to
endorse the draft resolution tabled by the Arab
Group at the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee under agenda item 32, entitled 'Israeli

aggression in the Gaza Strip .

