Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Chairs of the
Council's three counter-terrorism-related Committees
for their respective briefings this morning.

Last year, during the 10-year anniversary of the
events of 11 September 2001, a special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee was held. At that
meeting, we reviewed the progress made to date in the
fight against terrorism and reaffirmed our commitment
to zero tolerance for terrorism. In addition, the Global
Counterterrorism Forum and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, new structures aimed at
redoubling our efforts to counter terrorism, were
established. It was a significant year in which we
stepped forward into the next phase of the international
fight against terrorism. This year as well we expect a
great deal of active and constructive discussions in the
Security Council.

Japan is actively participating in the Global
Counterterrorism Forum and highly values its activities,
including the opening of an international centre to
counter violent extremism and the holding of several
meetings of each working group to strengthen
international cooperation in the area of counter-
terrorism.

In the effort to advance international counter-
terrorism efforts, we hope that the three committees
and the various bodies of the United Nations will take
further steps toward ensuring greater dialogue,
cooperation and collaboration with relevant bodies
such as the Forum and private-sector organizations,
and that such efforts will produce synergistic effects,
thereby improving the ability of all parties to deal with
terrorism by integrating and sharing best practices.

Even in the next phase of the international fight
against terrorism, the central role of the broad and
continuous activities of the relevant bodies, especially
the three committees, must not change. At the same
time, it is necessary to ensure the legitimacy and
credibility of United Nations counter-terrorism
measures.

In that regard, Japan values highly the activities
of the Ombudsperson in the context of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), which maintain and enhance the
legitimacy and credibility of the sanctions regime. We
will continue to cooperate actively with the work of the
Ombudsperson and the Committee.

Japan stands squarely behind the three
Committees. At the same time, we deem it equally
essential to make their activities more transparent and
widely known. To that end, Japan hosted in Tokyo a
series of seminars on the promotion of accession to the
international counter-terrorism Conventions and
Protocols. With regard to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), twice last year my Government hosted seminars
here in New York on sanctions, non-proliferation and
disarmament, including the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), in order to facilitate the
engagement of Member States and to promote the
sharing of experience and knowledge. Together with
Poland and Turkey, we will convene another meeting on
21 May here in New York.

In addition to global efforts, regional cooperation
is key to materializing tangible outcomes in these areas.
Japan has provided development assistance as well as
support for capacity-building to countries in Asia. For
example, for nearly two decades now Japan has
spearheaded regional efforts by organizing Asian
export-control seminars. That series of meetings,
including one hosted in February of this year, has
contributed to creating a wider regional network of
experts from the Governments of East Asian countries.
We understand that Germany also hosted a conference
in Wiesbaden in April aimed at strengthening public-
private collaboration in their region. Japan welcomes
such initiatives, since we believe that, regardless of the
membership of the Security Council, it is important to
continue and strengthen such efforts at the regional
level.

The United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator,
whose appointment was recommended by the
Secretary-General, could ensure the consistency and
integrity of all efforts by United Nations entities in the
field of counter-terrorism. Japan recognizes the
necessity of establishing that position and hopes to see
active discussions on the initiative and its mandate in
the Security Council. In that regard, it is necessary that
in the establishment of a counter-terrorism coordinator,
duplication be avoided.

We strongly hope that the three Committees will
continue to fulfil their roles in close coordination with
one another. At the same time, it will be important to
deal with several of the issues facing the Committees.
We need to enhance their cooperation with the relevant
bodies as well as the Committees' legitimacy and
credibility. We must also expand movements and make
greater efforts at the regional level, as well as
appropriately enhance the consistency and integrity of
all activities concerning counter-terrorism in the
United Nations.

The Government of Japan will continue to take
all possible measures to cooperate positively in the
efforts of the three Committees.

