Mr. Valle (Brazil): I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of France for his additional
remarks, today, on the Security Council mission to
Central Africa. I take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador De La Sabliere and his team for the
excellent preparation for and performance of the
mission. I would also like to make the following
points.

First, my delegation reiterates its support for the
nature of such missions. They offer an invaluable
opportunity for better and deeper knowledge on
specific issues and situations and directly convey the
Council's commitment to the advancement of peace in
war-torn regions.

Secondly, Brazil is encouraged by the mission's
progress, which its members witnessed particularly in
Burundi, but also in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We welcome the efforts being made in order to
conduct elections in 2005 according to the agreed
calendar, although we are conscious that the holding of
elections is not an end in itself. At the same time, we
also take note of the logistical concerns highlighted by
local authorities, which may delay the electoral process
in Burundi and in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. If necessary, new dates must be agreed upon by
all concerned parties, but a delay in the elections must
be considered only as a last resort, in order to
guarantee free and fair elections.

The mission also recognized that all progress
achieved on the political and security agendas could be
jeopardized if legitimate concerns about social and
economic development are not properly addressed. In
that regard, in considering the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Operation in Burundi, the
Council should devote further attention to the
Operation's role in promoting and coordinating
international efforts aimed at fostering development in
Burundi.

Thirdly, I acknowledge the efforts made by the
mission to cope with the unexpected challenge posed
by the decision of the Rwandese authorities to launch,
at the time of the mission's visit to the region, a series
of threats that could easily undermine the Congolese
peace process. In this regard, my delegation commends
Ambassador De La Sabliere for his vigorous
leadership, which was responsible for a timely and
balanced response to the situation. The mission had the
opportunity to witness the concerns deriving from the
presence of foreign armed troops, including members
of the former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe, in the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Council is aware of
remaining problems in the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and should continue
to back the efforts being made by Congolese
authorities, with the support of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, aimed at accelerating the disarmament and
demobilization of foreign armed troops. The
presidential statement adopted yesterday by the
Security Council on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda (S/PRST/2004/45)
is a further step reflecting our interest in the
establishment of peace and stability in the region.

Fourthly, my delegation supports the
recommendations in the report (S/2004/934). Because
of their pertinence and urgency, I would underline a
number of them: first, the request for the international
community to assist in the advancement of the
transition process in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including in the preparation of
elections; secondly, the need for the Transitional
Government in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to develop its programme of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation in order to address the problems related to
the presence of foreign armed groups in its territory;
thirdly, the request for the Governments of Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
implement expeditiously the Joint Verification
Mechanism already agreed on by both parties; and, last
but not least, the recommendation that the Council
undertake a deeper reflection on the issue of the Forces
nationales de liberation with a View to considering
what additional measures could be taken against those
in that movement who compromise the peace process.

