Ms. O'Brien: I am pleased to have this
opportunity to present the report before the Council on
behalf of the Secretary-General (8/2011/360).

The Secretary-General has consistently advocated
for the international community to take action to
counter piracy and to respond in the most proactive
way possible. He has pressed the United Nations and
other international organizations to do more to
contribute to a solution to this complex problem that
poses so many challenges. The Council will recall that
the Secretary-General dispatched me on a mission to
Kenya as far back as March 2009 to discuss the issue
with Kenyan authorities and to engage with the United
Nations offices active on the ground. Most recently, in
April, he dispatched me again to represent him at the
conference organized and hosted by the Government of
the United Arab Emirates. The theme of the conference
was "Global challenge, regional responses: forging a
common approach to maritime piracy". For my Office,
the piracy dossier remains an active and important one,
2
which reflects the Security Council's close attention to
this pressing issue.

The human cost of piracy off the coast of Somalia
is incalculable, with killings and widespread hostage-
taking of sailors. The increasing number of incidents of
piracy, the escalation of violence and the expanding
geographical scope of the attacks are all extremely
worrying. The commercial cost of this scourge is also
very high. As I said when presenting the previous
report (S/2010/394) on behalf of the Secretary-General
in August last year (see S/PV.6374), the problem of
piracy clearly demonstrates the increasing
interdependence of States and people in a globalized
world. The number and diversity of States and
organizations with a stake in finding a solution
provides strong evidence of this fact, with human
welfare and commercial and security interests
remaining under serious threat.

Against this background, the Secretary-General's
report on the modalities for the establishment of
specialized Somali courts to try suspected pirates both
in Somalia and in the region, including an
extraterritorial Somali specialized anti-piracy court, is
a timely contribution that I believe will assist the
Security Council's deliberations. It has had input from
my Office, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the Department of
Political Affairs, the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS), the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Safety and Security
(DSS), the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and INTERPOL. In responding to the
Security Council's request in resolution 1976 (2011),
we have taken into account the work of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. I and other
senior members of the Office of Legal Affairs have
also consulted a number of concerned regional States.

The report (S/2011/30, annex) of the Secretary-
General's Special Adviser on Legal Issues Related to
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, Mr. Jack Lang, has
been highly praised for comprehensively addressing
the operational, security, jurisdictional and economic
aspects of piracy off the coast of Somalia, and for
setting out an emergency plan focused on Somalia. His
report brings together, for the first time, all of the
facets of the problem, and makes concrete suggestions
for action.
11-38134

By making specific recommendations for the
establishment of three Somali specialized anti-piracy
courts, he has sharpened the debate and laid the ground
for the detailed assessment of the modalities for such
courts, as requested by the Security Council. Two
aspects of Mr. Lang's report, in particular, have
provided the impetus for productive inquiries by my
Office, namely, the availability of legal experts among
the Somali diaspora to add impetus to the development
of Somali specialized courts and the need to disrupt the
activities of the financiers and planners of piracy. The
results of our consultations on the basis of these
aspects highlighted by Mr. Lang are set out in annexes
III and IV, respectively, to the Secretary-General's
report.

Mr. Lang noted in his report that the
strengthening of the rule of law in Somalia remained
the guiding principle underlying the proposal for the
establishment of Somali specialized anti-piracy courts.
The legal and practical considerations for the
establishment of such courts include such matters as
the constitutional and legal basis in Somalia; the need
for adequate criminal and procedural legislation for the
prosecution of pirates; a sufficient number of trained
judges and other legal professionals; security
considerations; sufficient prison accommodations that
comply with international standards; financing; and the
timeline for the establishment of such courts. These are
the modalities that are the subject of the Secretary-
General's report.

The report contains a factual assessment of these
modalities, based on the information that is set out in
the five annexes to the report and the consultations
with concerned regional States that my Office and I
have conducted. I would like to emphasize from the
outset that, if the Council should wish to mandate the
Secretary-General to look in greater depth at any of the
particular modalities considered in the report, my
Office and I stand ready to do so. Furthermore, if the
Council wishes to request the Secretary-General
actively to address any of the modalities with a View to
moving towards the establishment of Somali
specialized courts, we will do so as a matter of priority.

We were greatly assisted in the preparation of the
Secretary-General's report by the fact that UNDP,
UNODC and UNPOS are active on the ground in
Somalia in assisting Somali authorities to address some
of these matters. UNDP and UNODC are working to
develop the capacity of the courts in Somaliland and
11-38134

Puntland to conduct piracy prosecutions in conformity
with international standards. The report draws on that
experience in assessing, in section II, the modalities for
the establishment of specialized anti-piracy courts in
Somalia and, in section III, the modalities for the
establishment of an extraterritorial Somali anti-piracy
court located in another State in the region.

Before outlining the content of those two sections
of the report, I would like to mention an initial point as
to the scope of the report. Paragraph 26 of Security
Council resolution 1976 (2011) asks the Secretary-
General to report on the modalities for the
establishment of specialized Somali courts to try
suspected pirates. The resolution does not specify
whether the recommendation concerns the
establishment of new Somali courts, the establishment
of new specialized chambers within existing Somali
courts or the development of the capacity of the
existing assize sections within Somali courts, which
have jurisdiction to hear piracy cases.

As that was not specified in the Security Council
resolution, nor in Mr. Lang's report that led to it, the
Secretary-General's report deals with all three of these
possibilities. The Secretary-General's report also
makes it clear that it would be for the Somali
authorities to determine whether the establishment of
new courts, or new specialized chambers within
existing courts, would be compatible with the relevant
provisions of the 1960 Constitution of the Somali
Republic and the 2004 Transitional Federal Charter for
the Somali Republic.

To address Mr. Lang's recommendation regarding
specialized courts in Somaliland and Puntland, UNDP
and UNODC are engaged in programmes of assistance
in the courts in those regions to build the capacity of
the assize sections to try piracy cases. This important
work is ongoing, and it is estimated that it will take
around three years to bring piracy trials up to
international standards. This will be a key
development, because the courts in Somaliland and
Puntland are conducting large numbers of prosecutions.
Two hundred and ninety cases have been concluded or
are ongoing in Puntland, with 94 cases in Somaliland.

The programmes of assistance are aimed at
increasing the numbers of prosecutions in each region
by about 20 cases per year, with each case involving
about 10 accused. Achieving international standards
will be a critical step, because it will open the way for
3
naval States to be able to enter into arrangements with
Somali authorities for the transfer of piracy suspects
apprehended at sea to Somaliland and Puntland for
prosecution.

The timeline of three years could possibly be
shortened through the use of international experts to
assist and mentor local professionals. Initial research
by my Office confirms that there are legal
professionals among the Somali diaspora who could be
contacted to determine whether they would be willing
and able to play that role.

A further key step in opening the way for naval
States to transfer suspects apprehended at sea to
Somalia would be the building of new prisons in
Somaliland and Puntland to provide a total of
1,000 prison spaces that complied with international
standards. That will take about two years to achieve.

The total cost of these UNDP and UNODC
programmes of assistance over the next three years,
both in relation to he courts and the prisons, is
calculated at approximately $24 million. Salary and
security costs would be likely to increase if
international experts were deployed to assist the
development of trial capacity. The challenges facing
these programmes of assistance in Somaliland and
Puntland include critically out of date criminal and
procedural codes and a shortage of trained judges and
other legal professionals.

As I emphasized in my introduction, an
extraterritorial Somali court could be a new court
established for the purpose located extraterritorially, a
new specialized chamber established within an existing
court located extraterritorially or an existing section of
a Somali court located extraterritorially. In any of these
events, the determination as to whether such court or
chamber would be compatible with the relevant Somali
constitutional provisions, or whether an amendment of
the Transitional Federal Charter would be required for
that purpose, would be for Somali authorities to make.
They would also need to consider the need for a
specific legislative basis for the court or chamber.

The views of the Transitional Federal
Government and Somali regional authorities are
important in the consideration of the proposal for the
establishment of an extraterritorial Somali court or
special chamber, as are the views of the States in the
region that could potentially host such a court or
special chamber. I and other senior members of my

Office therefore conducted three sets of consultations,
including in the region. We also sought views in
writing. Those consulted were the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and the regional authorities in
Somaliland, Puntland and Galmadug, and Tanzania,
Kenya, the Seychelles, Mauritius and Djibouti.

The Transitional Federal Government of Somalia
and Somali regional authorities were not favourable to
the location of a Somali court outside of Somalia. In
the most recent consultations, officials of the
Transitional Federal Government and of Puntland and
Galmadug expressed their preference for the location
of any such court within Somalia, and confirmed their
willingness to work towards agreement on a location
for it.

Among the States of the region consulted as
potential host States for an extraterritorial Somali
court, the Government of Tanzania expressed its
readiness to host the court within the current premises
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) in Arusha. In such an event, the Government
considered it imperative that prison construction in
Somalia be completed on time to avoid those convicted
being held in Tanzania for lengthy periods. The ICTR
has confirmed that, as its work approaches completion,
one courtroom, office space and cells for 30 piracy
suspects could be made available. The office space and
numbers of cells available will increase during 2012
and 2013. However, the ICTR also highlighted that its
premises are within the Arusha International
Conference Complex, which it shares with other
international bodies. It also raised serious security
concerns about hosting an extraterritorial Somali
anti-piracy court within those premises.

The United Nations Department of Safety and
Security shares that concern and advises that a full
security risk assessment would be needed. They
consider that hosting the anti-piracy court would
significantly increase the security risks to the ICTR,
and potentially to the United Nations more widely. The
fact that the premises are shared limits the ability to
upgrade security. DSS therefore recommends that
stand-alone premises would need to be found.

The Government of the Seychelles considered
that the proposal for an extraterritorial Somali
anti-piracy court needed considerable further
discussion and consultation before any substantive
reply could be prepared for the Security Council.
The Government of Mauritius supported the idea
of on extraterritorial Somali anti-piracy court, but was
faced with a number of practical difficulties and
capacity constraints that prevented it from hosting a
court at this stage.

If the proposal for an extraterritorial Somali court
were to proceed, a key modality would be the
negotiation of an agreement between the Transitional
Federal Government and the host State to regulate their
respective rights and obligations. Drawing on the
Lockerbie precedent, in which the United Kingdom and
the Netherlands agreed in 1998 that a Scottish court
could conduct a trial in the territory of the Netherlands,
such agreement would be likely to require provisions
to regulate the exercise of Somali jurisdiction within a
specified location in the territory of the host State; the
receipt and transfer of suspects through the territory of
the host State; the security of premises and persons;
privileges and immunities; cooperation between the
two States; and the responsibility for costs.

It is difficult at this stage to estimate a timeline
for the establishment of an extraterritorial court.
Factors affecting the timeline would include, for
example, the views of the concerned States and the
need for the negotiation of an agreement between the
Somali authorities and the host State for the
establishment of the court. Some of the relevant factors
are currently being addressed, such as the training of
judges and other legal professionals, as well as the
improvement of prison conditions in Somalia. We have
also confirmed that legal experts from among the
Somali diaspora would be contactable and may be
available to mentor and assist Somali legal
professionals.

Similarly, it is difficult to estimate the costs of
the establishment and functioning of an extraterritorial
court at this stage. The closest comparisons that we
have may be the costs of the Special Panels in Timor-
Leste, which were approximately $4 to $5 million
dollars per year, and the Bosnia War Crimes Chamber,
which costs about €13 million per year.

If, at the other end of the spectrum, there were to
be participation in an extraterritorial court by United
Nations-selected judges, prosecutors and staff, the
closest comparison would be the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, which is a
national Cambodian court with a United Nations
component embedded within it. Its budget for the
current biennium is $92.3 million.

I would like to underline the position that I set
out at the beginning of my statement. If the Council
wishes to mandate the Secretary-General to look in
greater depth at any of the particular modalities
considered in the report, or to request the Secretary-
General actively to address any of the modalities with a
view to moving towards the establishment of Somali
specialized courts, including an extraterritorial Somali
court, we will do so urgently.

This brings to an end my introductory remarks. I
am looking forward to the debate and am happy to
answer any questions.

