Mr. De la Fuente Ramirez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Kuwait for taking the initiative
to convene this debate on the working methods of the
Security Council, which is unquestionably a priority
issue, as we have seen in the statements made during
this meeting.

The States Members of the United Nations have
conferred on this organ the responsibility to act in order
to ensure swift and effective action in the maintenance
of peace and international security. On a number of
occasions, however, the Council has not been up to the
task. It has allowed crimes against humanity, war crimes
and genocide to occur as a result of its failure to take
timely action. Unfortunately, the veto has been used
more as a right than what it really is 4 a responsibility.
That is why we once again invite States that have not
yet done so to join the initiatives on restrictions on the
use of the veto, including the French-Mexican initiative,
the purpose of which is to voluntarily restrict the use
of the veto in the event of mass atrocities, and which
has already been endorsed by more than 100 States.
Blocking the action of the international community in
the face of such crises has serious consequences, and
those who do so must take on the political and moral
responsibility that it entails and be held accountable to
the international community.

The Security Council must be more transparent and
improve its accountability mechanisms. The United for
Consensus movement has been emphatic in arguing
that Council reform must be comprehensive and that
one of its fundamental aspects consists precisely in
its working methods. The Council has an obligation
to inform the General Assembly about measures it
has decided to adopt in order to maintain or restore
international peace and security. Mexico deplores the
fact that those reports often lack complete, rigorous
and objective information. As the most representative
organ of the Organization, the General Assembly must
and can act with greater independence in matters that
are still the exclusive domain of the Council, bearing
in mind the powers related to international peace and
security enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Resolution 377 (V), better known as "Uniting for
peace", is a clear example of that possibility.

We must also recognize that until now it has been
mainly the elected members of the Security Council
who have tried to promote ongoing improvements in
its working methods. During its most recent term on
the Security Council, Mexico frequently had recourse
to inclusive formats, such as Arria Formula meetings
and informal interactive dialogues, in order to be
able to listen to all States involved and civil society,
especially in cases that directly concerned them. We
commend Indonesia and the other delegations that
have held Toledo-format meetings at the end of their
presidencies, which we believe represent a good
opportunity to have more fluid exchanges with States
that are not Security Council members. We also believe
that issues of transparency should be reviewed within
the framework of the various Sanctions Committees,
and that there must be accountability to Member States
with regard to the deliberations and decisions of those
subsidiary organs.

Finally, I would like to touch on the ongoing
invocations by some States of Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations with regard to using military means
to address threats to international peace and security,
especially from non-State actors. We are concerned
that this practice, coupled with the ambiguous language
of some recent Security Council resolutions, increases
the risk of broadening in practice the exceptions to the
general prohibition on the use of force in paragraph 4
of Article 2 of the Charter. We are concerned about
the insufficient transparency with which those issues,
which are of interest to the international community,
are addressed, especially given the seriousness of
their implications.

Mexico will continue to seek to open up spaces for
analysing and discussing these issues, because of the
importance they represent for Member States and the
international community.

