Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We come to this Chamber with deep regret and deep concern. Despite the continued calls for a cessation of hostilities in the face of growing human suffering in the north-west of Syria, we are here once again. We thank the presidency for acceding to our request to convene this meeting today. We understand that the current situation calls for it. The situation of extreme tension that is developing before us foreshadows an uncertain panorama for the civilian population. The Dominican Republic therefore demands an immediate cessation of hostilities, maximum restraint on the part of all belligerent parties and protection for the civilian population. Humanitarian workers in the field must be given the opportunity to fulfil their task of addressing the needs of civilians ina safe, complete and timely manner, before it is too late. Without their presence on the ground, the catastrophic situation of these people could quickly become the saddest human tragedy of recent times. We offer them our most meaningful and determined support for their commendable work. As the representative of Indonesia said yesterday, "[t]hey are our real heroes" (S/PV.8734, p.15). For that reason, and for them, we are here. There is only one Council, not two; there is only one Charter, not two. And there is only one humanity, and it is in crisis right now. Let our sense of humanity - of shared responsibility for peace - be the only thing that drives our actions. Our position in this Chamber today, for all of us without exception, must be to seek a diplomatic solution to the current military offensive and to protect the civilian population. Our inaction will be unjustifiable. No tactical or military objective will prevail in the face of the suffering of almost a million displaced persons, half of whom are children. We can do more. We call on the Russian Federation and Turkey to redouble their efforts and recommit to the Sochi ceasefire agreement and to its full implementation. Have no doubt that the Dominican Republic will support every effort to that end. Accordingly, we stress the need for the United Nations, playing its unique and irreplaceable role, to support those efforts as well. We echo the Secretary-General's urgent appeal and his assessment that the most pressing need at this time is the cessation of hostilities before the situation gets out of control. Finally, we are saddened to see the families of all the fallen, Syrians and Turks - sons, husbands, brothers, parents and friends - who, together with the civil authorities, are paying too high a price for a conflict whose only solution, we know, is political. It is in their name, and in the name of all Syrians of goodwill, that we ask once again for an end to be put to this tragedy.
