Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to thank
Australia for taking the initiative to hold this open
debate on international cooperation on combating
terrorism and violent extremism. I am equally happy to
speak on behalf ofa country that has suffered a lot from
that scourge and has suffered it alone. What we would
like to share with the Council is our own experience,
and I hope that lessons will be drawn by everyone.

It is recognized that in the face of new threats, only
renewed international cooperation will make it possible
to effectively prevent and combat the violent extremism
narrative that sows ideas of violence, division, hatred
and disrespect for human life. Under the circumstances,
we think it is first of all the responsibility of individual
States and then of the international community as a whole
to set up appropriate mechanisms for preventing and
deterring any evil soul 4 be it lodged in an individual
or in organized groups - from inciting terrorist acts
with the help of funding from hidden sources and

publications that focus on violent extremism and
lawbreaking. Dialogue with partners at the bilateral,
regional and international levels is an integral part of
Algeria's approach to countering violent extremism and
the ideology of extremism that underpins the terrorists'
narrative.

We have stated in the recent past that the issue
of foreign terrorist fighters is a serious matter to be
specifically addressed among other aspects ofterrorism.
Addressing that issue means bearing in mind all other
aspects ofthe phenomenon by setting up comprehensive
strategies that encompass the local, regional and
multilateral levels. It is clear that the fight against
the phenomenon cannot be limited to the repressive
dimension. Extreme action must be deployed, based
on prevention, dialogue and an understanding of the
attraction exerted by the violent extremism, conducive
to terrorism, that underpins the terrorists' narrative.

I would like to share some of our Algerian experience
in combating terrorism and violent extremism.

Since the inception of our counter-terrorism action
and endeavours, Algeria has advocated a comprehensive
approach to preventing and combating terrorism. To
that end, it has adopted at the national level a wide range
of legal instruments that criminalize terrorist acts and
the justification for committing such acts. Through an
amendment to the Constitution, it has banned all parties
and activities contrary to the constitutional order and to
the indivisible values of the Algerian people in order to
strengthen the nation's peace and stability. No one has
the right to use religion, race, ethnicity or language in
the political arena. If one wants to conquer hearts, it
must be done through ballots, not bullets.

In addition to legal, judicial and operational
measures, the effort to combat transnational terrorism
has made it necessary to take preventive action,
including many initiatives in the areas of education,
religion and communication, to which Algeria has
attached great importance in its strategy. Those ideas
form the basis of a frame of reference consisting of
the policy called "Peace and National Reconciliation",
advocated by the President of the Republic and endorsed
by popular referendum, which reflects the political
dimension of the counter-terrorism efforts. In the fight
against terrorism it is important to gain the full support
of public opinion and the people as a whole.

Algeria has a legislative framework for preventing
and prohibiting incitement to commit terrorist acts.
The penal code has provisions concerning all forms of
justification, encouragement and financing of terrorist
acts, as well as the reproduction or dissemination of
printed documents or recordings that incite terrorist
acts. It fully respects civil liberties and is always under
the supervision ofjudges.

Furthermore, as part of the progressive development
of legislation aimed at preventing incitement to commit
terrorist acts, the Algerian penal code has provisions
against anyone who through preaching or by any other
action conducts an activity contrary to the mission of
the mosque or is likely to undermine social cohesion
or to seek to justify and advocate terrorist acts,
whenever they are committed, be it in our country or
elsewhere. The creation of groups, organizations or
associations for subversive ends or for the perpetration
of terrorist acts is combatted in Algeria by legal means.
The recruitment abroad of any Algerian to a terrorist
organization is punishable by law.

The Algerian authorities have connected all sectors
involved in the fight against terrorism and extremism,
including education, culture, religious affairs and
worship and communication, in their efforts to prevent
and combat incitement to commit terrorist acts. Those
sectors have been made increasingly aware of the need
for a coherent response based on appropriate strategies
and with clearly identified goals in order to prevent and
combat the extremism, fanaticism and intolerance that
foment radicalization and terrorist violence.

The appearance of new threats and the proliferation
of terrorist groups with links to transnational organized
crime have led the international community to develop
additional means of combating perverted types of
indoctrination and the dissemination of subversive
publications, including through Internet websites, by
groups and individuals who seek to justify terrorism
and terrorist acts and who provide an ideological and
religious basis to legitimize terrorist activities. That
means that the educational, religious and cultural
dimensions of the counter-terrorism effort are now
fully understood and are in concert with the general
endeavour.

It is in that spirit that Algeria remains convinced
of the need for the international community to assume
genuine responsibility within a framework of effective
cooperation. We are committed to cooperate by
bringing our own experiences to the bear in the fight
against this modern scourge.

