Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today's meeting, the seventh the Security
Council has held on the issue of its working methods,
serves as yet another confirmation of the unswerving
attention we give to proposals of States Members ofthe
United Nations on improving the procedural aspects of
the Council's work, subject, of course, to the unchanged
understanding that working methods and decisions
to modify them fall exclusively within the remit of
the Council, and relevant dialogue must be balanced,
professional and without any politicization of the topics
discussed. The objectives of changes and improvements
in the work of the Security Council must, by definition,
enhance the effectiveness and the rapid response
capacity in Council's operations, for a more optimal,
comprehensive implementation of the tasks before it,
namely, to maintain international peace and security,
for which the Council naturally bears the primary
responsibility within the United Nations system.

Very often we hear criticisms of the Council
that it encroaches upon the competencies of other
United Nations bodies. We share such concerns. Our
colleagues on the Council know full well that we show
restraint vis-a-vis the consideration of initiatives to
discuss thematic topics, in particular generic ones in
the socioeconomic, humanitarian, health and human
rights fields, inter alia. We deem that the Council
should focus on country subjects and issues where it
can and indeed must take concrete decisions.

We also understand the reasons for concerns
regarding whether the Council resorts too often to
Chapter VII, including the imposition of sanctions,
especially, to put it gently, with respect to the possibly
ambiguous humanitarian consequences. In that respect,
I would like to underscore that Russia has consistently
championed a more active use by the Security Council
of the instruments of preventive diplomacy, investing
in the development of measures and mechanisms for
the peaceful settlement of conflicts and crises. We
must more fully and more broadly use the provisions
of Chapter VI and Chapter VIII of the Charter. All of
that, I repeat, unfortunately falls outside the parameters
of "methods of work of the Security Council" and of
course bears no relation to the working methods of the
Security Council or the basic Charter provision for the
right of veto.

We share the view that only painstaking work on
improving the methods of work of the Security Council
can make it even more effective and in keeping with the
realities of the day. To that end, under the chairmanship
of Argentina, we have a successful and fruitfully
operating Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. We note that the
Working Group meets on a regular basis and with the
rational and constructive cooperation of all interested
Members of the Organization.

We have participated actively in the work of the
Group. In October, members of the Group agreed to
a note that was prepared upon our initiative, namely,
a note of the President of the Security Council on the
issue of the order of taking the floor in Council, the
first such type in nearly 70 years of operation of this
United Nations body. We are also working on another
draft note, which is designed to tidy up the practice of
holding Arria Formula meetings. Finally, this month, we
submitted a draft note on the issue of the preparation of
the annual report of the Security Council to the General
Assembly.

With regard to that document, we often hear
criticism related, first and foremost, to its informational
nature and the lack of an analytical component. We
believe that the Council must respond to the demands
of the States Members of the Organization in a relevant
way and review the method by which the report is drawn
up. We would propose, inter alia, not overburdening the
document with statistics and data, which are in any case
accessible on the website of the Security Council, and
which are an unnecessary use of budgetary resources.
Instead, we would propose changing the format for the
introduction of the report, including an assessment of
the work of the Security Council by each delegation
serving as a member thereof, which would add a purely
analytical component to the document and allow every
delegation to express its views regarding the outcome
of the work of the Council for the year.

In conclusion, I can say that the Security Council
continues to react in a flexible way to the intensification
of international relations that has led to the expansion
of the Council's agenda. Its working methods are
constantly evolving and are being improved as realities
dictate.

It was with great interest that we listened to the
briefing by the Ombudsman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), Ms. Kimberly Prost. Her
current authority in enshrined in resolution 2161 (2014);
her role provides the optimal level of transparency and
fairness in the procedures of the Committee's work.
In that regard, there are serious questions with regard
to proposals aimed at expanding the mandate of the
Ombudsman. We believe that their implementation
will lead only to a dilution of the sanctions regime and
undermine the principles fundamental to the work of
the Committee. The initiative to expand the mandate
of the Ombudsperson to other sanctions bodies of the
Security Council will require careful work and must be
considered in the light of the experience gained by the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, which, we must be
honest, is somewhat ambiguous.

We take note of the large volume of work carried out
by the Ombudsperson in considering delisting requests,
but we are forced to note that the practical activity of
this institution is not always up to the tasks before it.
Quite often we are faced with narrow approaches that
disregard the views of interested States and that also
contain a subjective assessment of the level of terrorist
threat.

In our View, it would be more important,
given today's realities, to, rather than create new
structures, enhance the existing sanctions mechanism.
Achieving that objective will, of course, hinge on the
implementation by States of the relevant commitments
in that context. We deem unwarranted any references
to national judicial bodies ignoring the restrictions
imposed by the Security Council. Such an approach
brings into question the prerogatives of the Council and
the coordinating role of this international Organization
in combating terrorism.

Regarding the parameters for the cooperation of
the Security Council with the International Criminal
Court (ICC), we are in no way certain that this needs
to be discussed in principle within the context of the
methods ofwork ofthe Security Council. This topic, we
believe, touches on a great many aspects of the nature
of the Court itself and its basic founding documents.
The issues of cooperation between the United Nations
and the ICC are also guided by a separate agreement
between the two.

But on the substance ofthis issue, we would note the
following. In carrying out its mandate of maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
consistently deals with issues of impunity. Here it has
solid experience, including the creation of special ad
hoc tribunals and its participation in the setting up of
other judicial bodies with an international element. The
creation in 2002 ofthe ICC led to a new partner to work
with the United Nations as an organization independent
from the United Nations. The Court and the United
Nations must cooperate within the framework of their
mandate and, of course, with mutual respect for their
prerogatives.
As we can see in the annual reports of the Court
to the General Assembly as well as its Prosecutor's
briefings to the Council, the key problem for the
ICC's operations remains the low level of cooperation
between States and the Court, inter alia, in enforcing
the relevant arrest warrants. Here States parties to the
Rome Statute ask on a regular basis about the follow-
up activities of the Council regarding the cases that are
referred by it to the ICC.

No one, we are sure, would claim that the Council
does not cooperate with the ICC. Confirmation of this
is the fact that twice a year we hear and discuss detailed
reports by the Prosecutor of the Court on cases referred
to the ICC. Ms. Bensouda also Visits the Council in
the context of its consideration of other items, as she
did today, for example. The Council today therefore
has robust channels for interaction with the Court and
opportunities for the consideration of emerging issues.
We stand ready to continue to participate in such work.

But let us not forget that the ICC, unlike ad hoc
tribunals, was not created by a Security Council
decision, so the Council cannot automatically take upon
itselfthe functions of the enforcement of ICC decisions.
For these same reasons, we do not deem it justified to
further institutionalize relations between the Council
and the ICC, even less to create new special structures
or artificially expand existing mandates or structures.

In our View, the reasons for States' lack of
willingness to cooperate with the ICC to a large extent
lie within the Rome Statute itself, as well as with the
Court's accumulated practice, including on bringing to
justice senior public officials of States. For example,
the Court's interpretation of the immunity of these
individuals has been somewhat ambiguous.

By way of conclusion - and I know this is a lengthy
statement - I should like to note that the Court faces
a complex set of tasks in delivering justice in complex
conditions that require a very delicate process and a
careful, tried and balanced approach regarding the
legal activities undertaken. We wish the Court every
possible success in this respect.

