Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Sir, for your initiative this morning. I warmly endorse
the remarks of colleagues about the relevance of doing
what we are doing this morning in an open meeting, and
we must do more of them.

I should like to thank Under-Secretary-General Miyet
for his briefing of us this morning. He made some
important points about how we take forward our work on
Sierra Leone and these are points which we must follow up
and produce action on in our discussions to come. The
United Kingdom will contribute substantially to those
discussions.

I particularly wanted to join colleagues in paying
tribute to the skill and dedication that Ambassador Dahlgren
has brought to his work as Chairman of the Sierra Leone
sanctions Committee and to his initiative in undertaking his
visit and reporting to us. His first-hand experience is
particularly valuable in this instance. My delegation
strongly supports the points that he has made, not only
about the implementation of sanctions, but also, in his
capacity as Permanent Representative of Sweden, about
the situation in Sierra Leone itself.

The United Kingdom has a very strong continuing
interest in that situation and in remedying it. We, over the
past few months in particular, have called a number of
special meetings, meetings of contact groups and other
gatherings of interested members of the international
community, together with the United Nations. We have
put an increasing amount of our own resources into the
situation, and we are going to continue with follow-up
work on this situation to represent, as best we can, the
strong interest of the international community in making
things in Sierra Leone better. But we are particularly
concerned about the way things are developing in that
country, and especially the continuing rebel activity.

The people of Sierra Leone do have to be protected
from what is really a campaign of murder, terror and
horrific abuse of human rights. In these circumstances, the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) is doing excellent work, but there is a
particular and an urgent need for the international
community to give greater support to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), in particular to enable
further troops to be sent there to join those troops already
in the field. And we hope that more donor countries will
come forward to join in this activity.

It is an example, as we have already begun to
discuss in our debate on peace-building and post-conflict
work, of how easy it is to think that a situation in a
country is being improved, but we have not done quite
enough to sustain that improvement. It is time, I think, to
draw conclusions from the difficulties that Sierra Leone
is now confronting - we have to ensure that what we
believe is a post-conflict situation does not dissolve back
into a real and nasty new outbreak of that conflict. So, I
appeal to colleagues and to the membership of the
Organization generally to take account of the briefings
that we have had this morning to look again to see
whether they can contribute to the work that needs to be
done in Sierra Leone.

