Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Once again, the
Security Council is meeting on the situation in the
Middle East, as the conflict between Israelis and
Palestinians shifts to a deeper and more dangerous
level.

Singapore is deeply distressed that the escalation
of violence has continued unabated, resulting in the
senseless loss of so many innocent civilian lives for far
too long. By some estimates, more than 1,200 people
have been killed since the conflict began in September
2000, some three quarters of them Palestinian.

Targeting civilians and acts of terrorism are
deplorable and must be unequivocally condemned. We
are also deeply concerned about the bombardments
near United Nations installations, which have caused
damage to United Nations facilities and threaten the
safety and security of United Nations personnel. The
situation is certainly of grave concern to the entire
international community and demands the urgent and
sustained attention of the Security Council.

We are therefore encouraged that as a first step,
the Council has reacted so promptly and responsibly to
the request of the Group of Arab States and the
members of the League of Arab States in convening the
open meeting last Thursday, 21 February, to listen to
the briefing by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan.
We have consistently supported the efforts of the
Secretary-General as a neutral and even-handed
facilitator.

We are also encouraged that in the past two
months, Council members have had the benefit of
listening to two excellent briefings - one by the
Secretary-General's Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, and the
other by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Sir Kieran Prendergast. These briefings, as the

S/PV.4478

 

Council knows, are a new practice adopted by the
Council, and we believe that they have been useful.
They have broadened Council members' understanding
of the problem and of the various diplomatic initiatives
undertaken.

We are pleased that all United Nations Members
had the opportunity to listen to a similar briefing by the
Secretary-General last week, which clearly established
that the interlinked problems of occupation, security
and economic distress must be handled together. Like
the Palestinian representative, we believe that these
briefings could help frame subsequent and perhaps
more important deliberations on the possible action
that the Council could undertake, which should be
unanimously approved by Council members.

Public debates alone cannot solve the problem in
the Middle East. There is also no lack of diplomatic
initiatives and prescriptions on how to bring the parties
back from the abyss that the Secretary-General has
spoken about. The so-called "Quartet" comprising the
representatives of the United States, Russia, the
European Union and the United Nations have laid
down clear demands on both sides in their joint
statement of 25 October 2001 - a statement supported
by all members of the Security Council.

The report of the Sharm El-Sheikh Fact-finding
Committee, or the Mitchell report, has been accepted
by the two parties and endorsed by the international
community as a compass to bring the parties back to
the negotiating table. Unfortunately, 10 months after
the issuance of the Mitchell report, the preconditions
and timetable that had been laid down to implement the
report have in effect made it an obstacle to peace.

What is needed right now are ways to turn the
Mitchell report on its head and use it for the purpose
for which it was intended. To do this, we must
recognize that at the end of the day, it is the parties
involved who must bear their respective
responsibilities and obligations and take the necessary
strategic decisions to return to the negotiating process.
The map and the compass have been provided to the
parties. It is ultimately up to them to put two and two
together to find the peace which has thus far proved
elusive. However, given the climate of deep distrust
and mutual recrimination and the cycle of violence and
counteraction, we strongly believe that outside help is
urgently needed. I believe that Ambassador Greenstock
made the same point when he spoke earlier.

The question is, what kind of external mechanism
could make a real difference? The Security Council,
with its Charter responsibility to maintain international
peace and security, is certainly one such body, and it
cannot neglect its responsibility. The "Quartet" is also
a useful mechanism. In addition, there are many
countries both within and beyond the region which
have equally pivotal roles to play. Indeed, the strong
interest expressed thus far in the informal proposal put
forward by Saudi Arabia, and the positive references to
that proposal that we have heard this afternoon,
illustrate the positive role that other parties can play.

Therefore, perhaps what is needed is coordination
and collaboration between these various players. We
should find and make use of the comparative advantage
of each of these mechanisms. Each mechanism should
complement the efforts of others, not undermine them.
We, the international community, hold the key to
turning things around in the Middle East. Therefore,
we believe that the Security Council could best
contribute to the efforts of collective action by
coordinating our positions, finding common ground
and, as far as possible, speaking with one voice. As the
Secretary-General said here last week, the Security
Council should work in a concerted manner with the
parties themselves as well as with the others involved.
This is how the Council can be the most effective.

We note that the focus is on the immediate
priority of breaking the cycle of violence. At the same
time, we agree fully with the Secretary-General's
observation that the political horizon of the hopes for
peace must also be provided. Indeed, the causes of the
current situation are fully intertwined. Occupation
breeds Violence; violence begets Violence and causes
economic deprivation; and dire socio-economic
conditions in their turn feed extremism. Thus it is only
logical to state that sustainable peace can be achieved
only through a comprehensive approach comprising the
political, economic and security tracks. Measures taken
simultaneously on all these areas can be mutually
reinforcing and buttress any agreements reached.

Ultimately, it is indisputable that there is no
military solution to the crisis in the Middle East, and
we are glad that several speakers have stressed that
point this afternoon. Violence cannot take the place of
dialogue and negotiations. A just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East can be
achieved only through a negotiated settlement on the
basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and

S/PV.4478

 

338 (1973) and the Madrid principle of land for peace.
On this, there is complete unanimity.

Furthermore, even in these dark days we must
remember the gains made in the other peace processes
in the Middle East, including the Camp David Accords,
the Madrid Conference and the Oslo peace accords.
The longer it takes for the parties to find their way
back to the path of peace, the harder it will be to fully
realize these gains.

