Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you for convening
this debate, Madam President, for your presence here
today and for Argentina's very strong leadership on
the protection of civilians. I would also thank the
Secretary-General for his consistent leadership on
protection matters and High Commissioner Pillay,
Under-Secretary-General Amos and Mr. Spoerri for
their unwavering efforts.

Today's debate is an apt way to mark World
Humanitarian Day and pay tribute to those working
tirelessly to address humanitarian challenges - people
to whom we owe so much. We also pause to reflect on the
life and legacy of Sergio Vieira de Mello, a humanitarian
of courage and conviction, and his 21 United Nations
colleagues who were killed in Baghdad.

International humanitarian law obliges all
parties to a conflict to protect civilian populations
against the effects of hostilities and sets out a range
of fundamental protection guarantees. It also extends
specific protections to relief and medical personnel.
Yet, humanitarian actors are still too often - and at
times systematically - subject to indiscriminate and
deliberate attacks.

In June, the Council expressed its outrage over the
attack on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu.
We learned last week that Medecins sans Frontieres has
ended its engagement in Somalia following attacks on
its personnel. In Syria, 20 Syrian Arab Red Crescent
staff have been killed during the conflict. Over the
past decade, 47 aid workers have been killed in Darfur.
We know that some of those killings were the result of
deliberate attacks, which is an intolerable situation.

The reality is that humanitarian actors operate in
extraordinarily difficult circumstances. Their work
is hard enough, but constraints on humanitarian
access continue to further undermine the ability of
humanitarian actors to reach people in need. Delayed,
impeded or denied access causes unnecessary deaths,
avoidable disease and needless suffering.

Under international humanitarian law, each party
to a conflict has the responsibility to meet the basic
needs of civilians under its control. For those provisions
to have any meaningful effect, it is imperative that
consent to relief operations not be arbitrarily denied.
We support the call made by Under-Secretary-General
Amos this morning for further attention to that concern.

Nowhere are the challenges to humanitarian efforts
more evident than in Syria. The Syrian Government
has systematically used bureaucratic and operational
obstacles to deny, delay and impede access for the
delivery of urgently needed humanitarian assistance,
including, alarmingly, medical supplies. Denying
civilians access to medical personnel and facilities is
a particularly grave failure of the Syrian Government's
protection obligations to its own citizens.

Tens of millions of civilians continue to
suffer in conflicts, not because of a lack of legal
protection - obligations under international law are
clear - but because international humanitarian law is
routinely flouted by both States and non-State actors.
Further promotion of international humanitarian law
is therefore essential. We commend the International
Committee of the Red Cross for its determined
leadership in strengthening compliance. Increasingly,
situations on the Council's agenda involve non-State
armed groups. We applaud practical measures such as the
deeds of commitment that encourage armed non-State
actors to comply with humanitarian and human-rights
norms. An outstanding example is Geneva Call's deed
of commitment banning anti-personnel mines, signed
by 42 non-State armed groups from 10 countries. The
Council should continue to explore creative ways of
promoting compliance by non-State armed groups, as
it has done to prevent grave violations against children.

When laws protecting civilians are violated, we
must ensure that all efforts are made to bring those
responsible to justice. As a first step, we support
the Secretary-General's recommendation that the
Council establish and support fact-finding missions
to document violations of the law in order to inform
decision-making and pave the way for criminal-justice
proceedings. Investigating and prosecuting violations
of laws protecting civilians is, in the first instance, a
national responsibility. The Council should ensure
that peacekeeping and special political missions are
mandated to assist host States in strengthening the
rule of law and boosting their capacity to investigate
and prosecute serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. There will,
however, be occasions when national authorities
are unwilling or unable to do so. In such cases, the
Council must be proactive in ensuring an appropriate
international response so as to avoid any impunity for
the perpetrators. It is vital that the Council consider
referring situations involving genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), and that the Council support action by the
ICC.

In conclusion, protecting civilians is primarily a
national responsibility. But where national authorities
fail and mass atrocities occur, the international
community, including the Council, must be prepared
to act to meet our responsibility to protect. Australia
will continue to be a voice for Council action in
such circumstances. That is, after all, the legitimate
expectation of the many millions of civilians who
desperately need protection, and a defining benchmark
against which the United Nations itself should and will
be judged.

