Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Seeing is believing.
Members of the Security Council delegation to Central
Africa visited the region. They saw and heard what was
going on with respect to the security situation in the
region. They have come back convinced that the region
has done a lot to promote peace and security. Their
optimism is not misplaced. I congratulate Ambassador
Jean-Marc de La Sabliere, the head of the mission, and
all the other members of the Council delegation on
their efforts to forge close working ties with the
leadership of the countries of the region.

The countries of the region have assumed
ownership of the work to stabilize the region, as
epitomized by what is going on in Burundi. Through
bilateral and tripartite mechanisms, the countries of the
region are addressing the issues of security, peace and
development. The international community, through
the United Nations, should not only monitor closely the
implementation of those agreements and follow closely
the roles and activities of the States of the region, as
recommended in the report (S/2004/934), but also
should give help where necessary and be actively
involved. As His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta
Museveni of Uganda told the delegation, close
involvement of regional States in the affairs of the
region, in close partnership with the United Nations,
has borne fruit and could serve as a model of
cooperation.

Uganda has a considerable stake in the stability
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and believes
that, in order to achieve durable peace, that country
needs a strong central Government with a strong army
to assert its authority over the entire territory. With
strong authority, issues such as the alleged illegal
exploitation of the country's natural resources can be
controlled.

Uganda now believes that any threat posed to
neighbouring countries by negative forces in the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo can
be addressed through the existing tripartite
mechanisms, as well as through bilateral and regional
agreements, with the involvement of the African Union
where this is necessary. In that way, the sovereignty of
States of the region would be safeguarded.

I would like to emphasize a point made by my
President concerning the greater involvement of
regional players such as the parties to the 1999 Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement in the international peace
processes under way in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. My country is ready to play any role the
international community may deem necessary.

On the issue of armed groups in Ituri, which are
outside the transitional process, it is important that they
be integrated in the Transitional Government. My
President has already informed the Council of the
understanding reached between him and President
Kabila on that issue. Uganda does not believe in or
condone impunity. However, caution should be
exercised here lest the vigorous pursuit of the alleged
perpetrators drive them underground and impede the
process of integration. Crime has no statute of
limitation, and those involved could, if need be, always
be dealt with later, once institutions of government
have been strongly established.

Lastly, the Council delegation touched on the
humanitarian situation in northern Uganda. The
Uganda Government has gone the extra mile by
offering to talk to the rebels and by declaring a
unilateral ceasefire in certain areas in order to allow
them to assemble. The leadership of the rebels has not
responded yet. It is in their interest to do so.

Otherwise, the military campaign has scored
tremendous success with scores of abducted children
rescued and large numbers of rebels surrendering.
More than 700 rebels have been trained and absorbed
into the Uganda armed forces as a sign of
reconciliation. Soon, rebel activity in northern Uganda
will be history.

I close, Sir, by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I wish
you well.

