It is a pleasure to submit this statement on behalf of a group of States endorsing the Safe Schools Declaration. In the fifth anniversary of its launch, the Safe Schools Declaration has become a well-known political commitment to the protection and continuation of education in armed conflict, which includes a pledge to use the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict. Since the first International Conference on Safe Schools in Oslo, in May 2015, followed by the Conference of Buenos Aires in 2017 and the Conference in Palma de Mallorca in 2019, 104 States have joined this international community. As such, the Safe Schools Declaration is moving towards its progressive universalization. We are appalled by the number of grave violations against children in 2019, as verified in the Secretary-General's report on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525), amounting to 25,000 violations in 19 situations, and most particularly by attacks against schools, teachers and students, as well as by the 400 per cent increase in the denial of humanitarian access to children. We call on all parties to facilitate safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access. We urge all parties to armed conflict to fully comply with international law - including human rights law, international humanitarian law and international refugee law - to facilitate safe access to education in armed conflict and to apply effective protection measures for children in armed conflict. We support child protection mandates in peace operations and gender- responsive measures in the protection of education. Increased accountability, in order both to fight impunity and to prevent grave violations against children, including by resorting to the International Criminal Court, when applicable, as a court of last resort is key. We call for increasing the effective protection of children in prevention, response and accountability measures. In this regard, the Secretary-General's report is a fundamental tool for holding accountable perpetrators of grave violations against children, for changing the behaviour of warring parties and for informing the positive action of the Security Council. In this regard, the annexes containing the list of perpetrators play a key part in the efficiency of the report. We request the Secretary-General to continue supporting an impartial, independent and legitimate monitoring and reporting mechanism and a list of perpetrators based on the facts in the different situations of the children and armed conflict agenda, as well as to release his reports on children and armed conflict further in advance of future open debates in order to follow up thoroughly on this important issue. We wish to highlight the importance we place on a transparent process in this regard and to reiterate that the signing of an action plan alone should not form the basis for delisting in the Secretary-General's report. Education is a human right and a precondition for development. Continued access to safe education can help protect children and youth from the impacts of armed conflict. Access to education throughout a conflict is essential. It ensures that no generation is left behind and greatly aids a country's ability to recover from conflict and to achieve sustainable development. Attacks on schools not only deprive girls and boys of learning opportunities, but can also put them at risk of injury or death, while increasing the risk of recruitment, forced labour, sexual abuse or child, early and forced marriage. Such attacks can lead to higher drop-out rates as parents opt to keep their children at home. Girls are often disproportionately impacted and are less likely to return to school even when the situation has become safer. We wish to highlight the role of the Safe Schools Declaration, which includes the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict. Its implementation is enhancing the protection of students, teachers and schools. The Declaration and the Guidelines have planted the seed for a new standard of international behaviour that will help safeguard the civilian character of educational facilities during wartime. We commend all States that have endorsed and are implementing the Declaration. We are building a community of practice that strengthens the protection of children and education. We welcome the fourth International Conference on Safe Schools, which will take place in Nigeria, and we call once again on all States that have not yet done so to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration and to benefit from the exchange of positive experiences in its implementation.
