Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me start by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the Under-Secretary-General for their
briefings today. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative and his team for their continued
dedication to Kosovo.

Since the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) was authorized by the
Security Council in 1999, Kosovo's development from
a conflict zone into a democratic country has been
significant, and UNMIK has played an important role
in achieving that progress. Due to the change in the
situation on the ground in these past 20 years, the United
Kingdom supports a strategic review of the Mission to
ensure that UNMIK's efforts are properly tailored to
the current needs and addresses the challenges that
Kosovo still faces. We continue to call on Kosovo to
implement the necessary reforms that would allow it
to strengthen further the rule of law, good governance,
reconciliation and security.

The United Kingdom echoes the concern expressed
by the Special Representative about the prolonged
disengagement by both Pristina and Belgrade from the
dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU). We
welcome the recent efforts of Germany and France to
reinvigorate the process. Progress on the normalization
of relations between Kosovo and Serbia is in the
interests of both countries, including in respect of their
EU aspirations.

But the provocative language and actions of both
Governments risks future progress. We call on the
leaders to react in a measured, proportionate fashion
that is reflective of the standing of their offices and
to focus on reaching a comprehensive, sustainable
agreement that enjoys domestic support. It is also
important for both sides to implement all agreements
already reached in order to build confidence between
the parties.

We welcome the progress noted in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/461) on the common
border crossing points and call for the resumption of
coordination to enable the full implementation of the
integrated border management technical protocol.

We welcome the important work done by UNMIK
and the Government of Kosovo to address legacy issues,
including by overseeing returns of displaced persons,
verifying survivors of conflict-related sexual violence
and investigated cases ofmissing persons. Justice for all
victims and their families is crucial to future stability.
We cannot allow a culture ofimpunity to exist. We call
on both Pristina and Belgrade to provide all necessary
support to existing domestic war crimes courts so as
to ensure that outstanding war crimes cases are heard.

Corruption and organized crime negatively affect
the people of Kosovo and those across Europe. We
welcome Kosovo's efforts so far to tackle this scourge
and urge that these efforts continue and, indeed, be
increased and developed further. The Kosovo police
operation on 28 May was a legitimate operation carried
out in accordance with the law, which resulted in the
arrest of 19 police officers suspected of involvement in
smuggling and organized crime and targeted multiple
ethnicities across a number of municipalities. It is with
regret that we note the injuries sustained.

We are aware of the detention of two UNMIK
officials during the course of the police operation.
International personnel acting in the course of their
duties must be treated in accordance with international
law,just as they too must follow their missions' mandates
and codes of conduct. It would be inappropriate for
me and other members of the Council to comment
further on that specific incident without clarification
of the facts, and so we look forward to the outcome of
UNMIK's internal review before commenting further.

The United Kingdom welcomes the establishment
of the Anti-fraud Unit, progress on legal reforms
to increase transparency in political parties and the
recent convictions in several high-profile corruption
cases. However, despite some progress on the rule
of law, stronger, more consistent implementation of
the rule of law and good governance structures are
needed and will help Kosovo's integration into the
international community.

The United Kingdom will continue to support
Kosovo as it moves forward with its efforts to develop
as a stable, prosperous, multi-ethnic State, including
through our support of UNMIK. We strongly urge the
Governments of Kosovo and Serbia to desist from the
divisive rhetoric that has become all too common and
to return to the EU-facilitated dialogue, in the interests
of their peoples and European stability.

