Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for his valuable briefing. I would
also like to pay tribute to all humanitarian and medical
personnel for their efforts in the field to alleviate the
human suffering in Syria under very difficult and often
dangerous conditions, as the high number of aid workers
injured or killed shows. I will present this statement on
behalf of the co-penholders of the Syrian humanitarian
file - Belgium, Germany and Kuwait.

We meet today at the first Security Council
meeting in 2019 on the humanitarian situation in
Syria, moving on from 2018, which sadly witnessed
a continuation of the dire humanitarian situation
in Syria. It is appropriate here to take a moment to
review the situation. According to United Nations
statistics, there are almost 12 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance, more than 5 million of whom
are children. There are more than 5.6 million registered
refugees in the neighbouring countries, including
2.5 million children. More than 1 million people
live in hard-to-reach areas. Behind those alarming
numbers are countless stories of the continued human
suffering of Syrian civilians - children, women and
the elderly - who have become victims of one of the
most egregious conflicts of our times. As that human
suffering persists, the international community and,
in particular, the parties involved in the conflict must
work together to improve the humanitarian situation and
access in Syria in order to make a tangible difference
for civilians on the ground.

As we enter the new year, serious humanitarian
challenges on the ground remain. There are still
challenges, obstacles and constraints, either
bureaucratic, security or other, that limit sustainable
humanitarian access to those in need. We call on all
parties to continue to facilitate safe, unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access to all parts of Syria. We
emphasize the need for such assistance to reach those
in need in an impartial, non-discriminatory manner,
in accordance with humanitarian principles and based
on needs. Syria and the neighbouring countries are
witnessing a cold winter. That has exacerbated the dire
living conditions of many of those in need, which has
led to the deaths of a number of civilians, including
children, over the past few weeks. On 15 January,
UNICEF issued a statement that must move our
conscience and humanity:

"The lives of babies continue to be cut short by
health conditions that are preventable or treatable.
There are no excuses for this in the twenty-first
century. This tragic man-made loss of life must
end now. History will judge us for these entirely
avoidable deaths."

It is necessary to address the continued tragic
suffering of 42,000 people in Rukban camp whose
survival depends on the arrival of humanitarian
assistance. That is especially true for children and
women, who make up approximately 80 per cent of the
camp population. We had hoped that the most recent
convoy that arrived at the camp last November would
pave the way for sustainable humanitarian access to
the camp, but that has not yet materialized. Such lack
of access is unacceptable. As we have just heard from
Mr. Lowcock, things are moving forward on the latest
convoy, and we urge all parties concerned to cooperate
in order to enable immediate, sustainable, unimpeded
and safe access to Rukban and for the required approvals
to be granted swiftly.

The protection of civilians from conflict, death
and human rights violations has remained one of
the greatest challenges in the Syrian crisis since its
outbreak in 2011. We are following the developments
in northern Syria closely and reiterate that the Russian-
Turkish memorandum of understanding on a ceasefire
in Idlib, home to nearly 3 million people, half of whom
are internally displaced persons, needs to be sustained.
A ceasefire not only in Idlib but nation-wide would
enable the flow of humanitarian assistance and the
evacuation of the wounded and sick, in accordance with
international law and as provided for in resolution 2401
(2018). The situation in Idlib is fragile, and we all recall
the warning by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock that
a military operation in Idlib could lead to the worst
humanitarian disaster of the twenty-first century.

In recent weeks, fighting in different areas of Syria,
including Deir ez-Zor, has led to dozens of civilian
casualties. Persons displaced because of armed clashes
face serious dangers, such as being killed or hurt by
explosives and being without shelter, food or water
for prolonged periods in cold weather. The escalation
in violence has also destroyed civilian infrastructure.
We reaffirm that all parties must take all measures
to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure in
accordance with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We also call on the parties to the conflict to respect
Security Council resolutions pertaining to civilian
structures, in particular resolution 2286 (2016) on the
protection of hospitals and health facilities in conflict.

We strongly condemn the arbitrary detention and
torture of individuals in Syria, notably in prisons and
detention facilities, as well as the frequent kidnappings,
abductions, hostage-taking and forced disappearances,
and demand an immediate end to those practices and the
release of all arbitrarily detained persons, starting with
women and children, as well as the sick, the wounded,
persons with disabilities, elderly persons, humanitarian
personnel and journalists. The abduction and killing
of a humanitarian worker in Idlib earlier this year was
a shameful act, and we condemn it in the strongest
terms. That is a reminder to us all of the daily risks that
humanitarian workers face as they help others. Parties
to the conflict have an obligation not only to protect the
lives of humanitarian workers but also to ensure that
they can work unhindered and free of fear.

There should be accountability for those who have
committed violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. We stand firm in our commitment
to fighting impunity. In that context, we renew our
support for the work of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism for Syria.

With regard to refugees, we would like to reiterate
that any return of Syrian refugees to their homes must
be a safe, voluntary and dignified return. There are
clearly defined conditions for this that must be met,
as set out in the thresholds for return established by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. Measures such as arbitrary detention
and expropriation, to name but a few, contravene any
efforts that would allow Syrians to return. We also
reject attempts to make demographic changes in Syria.

We express our full support to the Special Envoy,
Mr. Geir Pedersen. We must work with him to advance
the political process, which is the only way to reach a
sustainable solution to the crisis and to avoid further
human suffering in Syria, through a political settlement
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).

In conclusion, Belgium, Germany and Kuwait,
as co-penholders and significant donors to the
humanitarian response in Syria, will continue to
spare no effort to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
people and to ensure that the Security Council upholds
its responsibilities in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

