Mr. Crown: Microsoft welcomes this opportunity
to contribute to this important discussion. I should say
that others, such as Mr. Afifi, academics, educators
and civil society organizations across the globe, are
more expert on the precise narratives and ideologies of
modern terrorist groups. I do not presume to know what
constitutes the most effective messaging to change
minds or to keep minds from being bent towards
terrorism. But I do understand deeply the challenge that
Internet companies face in dealing with the phenomenon
of terrorism, and I hope that my comments will help us
find a principled way forward.

As a representative from the Internet and
communications technology sector, the question I will
address is: "As understanding of effective counter-
messaging evolves, how can we best work together?"
For the industry, those of us in the Internet business,
the scale of the terrorist challenge is daunting. Drawing
just from public sources, we know that there are
tens of thousands of terrorist Internet accounts that
refuse to die. As one is taken down, another quickly
springs up in its place. Account names and identifiers
change. Content is edited. But terrorist propaganda and
communication continue.

Within 15 minutes of the Paris attacks of
13 November, there were 7,500 tweets. Within two
weeks, there were 1 million views of videos on the
Internet praising the attacks. Another company in our
sector has noted that every day their 1.6 billion users
across the globe submit 1 million reports ofobjectionable
postings across all their content categories. The point is
that there is no single elegant solution. If there were,
industry would have adopted it. There is no silver bullet
that will stop terrorist use of the Internet. Microsoft,
like others in the industry - but I can only speak for
Microsoft - approaches the challenge of terrorism and
violent extremism on the Internet from the perspective
of a technology company with global reach, and with
aspirations that are just as ambitious.

Terrorist abuse of Internet platforms is a
complicated topic. I think it is important to ground
any discussion about the future work together and the
future of the global Internet in a clear understanding of
the past and the present.

One comment on the past: it is an obvious, but easily
overlooked, historical fact that what we know today
as the Internet was conceived in trust. Initial sharing
technologies assumed well-intentioned people working
proactively together for good ends. It evolved from
connections among research facilities. Of course, the
Internet, once released to the world, quickly attracted
bad actors. Any technology can be used either for good
or for evil. That was true of fire - think of arson - of
gunpowder and of the printing press. It is true also of
our information technology products and platforms.

The industry is built on the idea that by enabling
communication, we can unleash human potential.
Microsoft's mission is to empower every person and
every organization on the planet to achieve more.
Nothing could be more in conflict with the aspirations
of our industry than the misuse of our technologies to
spread violence, to destroy and to kill.

As we look at the challenge today, where do we find
ourselves? I think it is important to understand that
when we talk about what companies can do and should
do, we need to keep in mind that there is no monolithic
information and communication technologies (ICT)
industry. If you consider the big players on the global
stage, actually we are a collection of companies who
offer different technologies and different platforms.
Microsoft services and Microsoft the company
are different from Google, which is different from
Facebook, which is different from Twitter. All of us
differ in significant ways. We compete fiercely - at
times incredibly fiercely * but we have come together
before when we have seen our platforms abused. Perhaps
the best example of our joint work as an industry is
cooperation on a global scale to combat child sex abuse
material.

As we think about addressing the challenge of
terrorist abuse of our services, the Internet technology
industry is similarly united. We unanimously condemn
terrorism. To respond more effectively, we need to find
better paths forward, paths that all stakeholders can
walk together.

In today's discussion, I especially want to
underscore the potential of public-private partnerships.
Public-private partnerships can, and should, be a part
of our global response to this challenge. Once one
recognizes that terrorist use of the Internet is a global
challenge, it becomes clear that this problem will not be
solved by Internet technology companies alone, or by
States, or by non-governmental organizations, acting
alone. We must work in a coordinated way.

That realization is what led to the formation last
month of a new multi-stakeholder effort, under the
umbrella of the Security Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. Meeting in Geneva,
in partnership with ICT for Peace, which will serve
as a coordinating function, and a range of Internet
companies, Government actors, academics and civil
society organizations, we came together to build a new
level of understanding. Our focus will be to develop
creative, cooperative efforts to address the challenge of
terrorist use of the Internet.

Of course, any effective and trustworthy public-
private partnership must be grounded in transparency.
We will, therefore, seek maximum transparency in that
effort, and reports on the subject should be appearing
in the coming year. I would, however, like to telegraph
a couple of things to watch for. We have to embrace
certain unfortunate truths. There is no universally
accepted definition of terrorism or extremism, neither
at the international level nor at the regional level. It is
true that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights provide international standards that point to
appropriate and lawful regulation of the expression
and communication of ideas. But the United Nations
itself has noted that those principles have never been
reduced to an internationally binding instrument that
sets forth definitive norms. That is no surprise, since
defining lines in the area are very hard to draw. But we
can broadly agree on especially harmful actors, and we
can focus attention in a principled way.

So the goal of public-private partnerships for
addressing the terrorist use of the Internet, including
through the creation and use of counter-narratives
or other positive speech, should not be a search for
a single right solution. The path to success will be
through dialogue and learning. I have colleagues in
the law field in more than 50 countries, and just last
week in Redmond, Washington, Microsoft's corporate
headquarters, we held the annual summit of our
corporate external and legal affairs department. As
Microsoft and as an industry, we uniquely appreciate
that we need to be open to alternative views and
solutions that work differently across the globe.

As we explore alternatives, including the use of
counter-narratives, whatever form they might take,
we must anchor ourselves in the rule of law, including
international law. We must protect timeless values,
including the freedom of expression, which includes
the right both to seek and to receive information, and
the rights to privacy. Our activities in that realm must
be principled, but they must push beyond what we
are doing today. Already there are some interesting
proposals that the new working group under the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) will explore. They include simplified, perhaps
common, models and processes that can make it easier
for stakeholders, including Governments, to bring to
companies' attention Internet content that, on its face,
violates companies' terms of use. Companies have
established terms of use in order to moderate what
happens in the communities that they have built, and
there are opportunities for principled collaboration on
the use of the terms that we have provided. There are also
opportunities to improve efficiency and transparency
measures, so that Governments, under the rule of law,
can work more effectively with companies to pursue
criminal investigations, including investigations of
terrorists and violent extremists.

The work with CTED presents an important new
forum for sharing practices across the industry and
beyond. We will share experiences, research and ideas
aimed at improving the effectiveness of responses to
terrorism on the Internet, while advancing the rule
of law and protecting and respecting human rights. 1
would like to underscore that last point. The rule of
law and the protection and respect for human rights are
critical for Microsoft. I know through my work with
colleagues across the industry that the rule of law and
the protection and respect for human rights are critical
for all of the major Internet companies. Any plan for
coordinated action must be based on that foundation.

We at Microsoft have published a global human
rights statement that sets forth our philosophy. We
believe that active engagement in the more than 100
countries where we do business is the right approach.
We were an early signatory to the United Nations
Global Compact and, across the planet, we are a strong
advocate for the United Nations Guiding Principles
on Business and Human Rights. We are a founding
member of the Global Network Initiative, and I
represent Microsoft on the board of directors of that
organization, which brings together companies, civil
society, academics and investors. Our focus is one
of principled respect for freedom of expression and
privacy on the global Internet.

As we work together across sectors, we should
also act with a certain humility, acknowledging that
we do not have perfect knowledge. But we must not let
that stand in the way of principled action. So my key
message today is that we need more discussion, and we
need exploration of new and improved ways to address
the misuse of Internet communication platforms.
When it comes to combating terrorists' misuse of the
global Internet - including when we work together
to improve the use of counter-narratives in the fight
against terrorists and their ideologies - as long as we
are anchored in the rule of law, as long as we protect
and respect human rights and as long as we cooperate
transparently in a way that enhances the public's trust,
there is no discussion topic that should be off the table.
I look forward to that discussion and to deploying
new strategies.

