Mr. O'Brien: The conflict in Syria continues to
grind on, day by day, month by month. It is a conflict
where there can be no victory on the battlefield, a
conflict which will not end by the use of force. All that
this relentless, senseless fighting provides are hollow
advances or retreats, leaving behind utter devastation
for the civilians left in its wake. I do not need to paint
a picture for Council members. Members have seen
them, along with the rest of the world. It is an outraged
world, not an indifferent world, an indignant, furious
world that cannot understand why the Security Council
cannot fix the conflict.

We must be clear: 13.5 million people are caught
in a protection crisis that threatens their lives on a
daily basis. It affects so many because we have seen
time and again a complete, disgraceful disregard for the
rules of war, which subjects civilians to the horrifying
reality of bombs raining down on schools, hospitals
and residential areas every day. The use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in urban areas is
unconscionable, with the utmost serious consequences
for civilians in the immediate and long term. We know
this. Those fighting know this. Those who support
the different parties know it too. And certainly those
civilians who have suffered years of war know this.

When explosive weapons are used in populated
areas, 92 per cent of the people killed or injured are
civilians - 92 per cent. And those who might be lucky
enough to survive the bombs but whose homes are
destroyed and are forced to flee face a whole new set
of protection challenges, from mines and unexploded
ordnance, to forced conscription, sexual abuse and
violence, to restrictions on basic rights such as freedom
of movement. It is our duty as fellow human beings to
stand up and say, enough, to demand an end to these
practices, to stop the needless death and to help those
whose lives have already been destroyed.

Each month, the United Nations and humanitarian
partners do all in our power, in the face of extreme
difficulty, to reach those who are most in need. Again,
my admiration for the courage and persistence of the
humanitarian aid workers on the ground, from the
United Nations and all our international and particularly
national partners, knows no bounds, and I pay tribute to
them. They should not be a target, but, sadly, in Syria
today, they are.

So far this month we have reached the hard-to-reach
locations of Talbiseh and Al-Rastan, in northern Horns,
with convoys, and reached besieged east Harasta, in
rural Damascus. Despite our best efforts, we continue
to have supplies consistently removed from our trucks
before we can even deploy. Nearly 200,000 treatments
have been forcibly removed this year alone. The removal
of these treatments is the removal of life-saving aid for
those in need - treatments, medicines, a chance at
life - and it must be brought to an end. We must be
able to deliver based on need.

Further, the United Nations and humanitarian
partners continue to be delayed and blocked by
bureaucratic restrictions that limit our ability to reach
civilians living in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
Delays in facilitation letters continue to slow the
process for deploying inter-agency cross-line convoys.
This need not be a cause for delay; they are not for the
thousands of facilitation letters that are approved each
month to areas where regular programming deploys. For
example, the World Food Programme (WFP) requested
1,795 facilitation letters to provide aid, of which
only three did not receive a positive response from
authorities. Although the most egregious bureaucratic
restrictions are from the Government of Syria, we
are increasingly seeing other groups operating in
non-Government-controlled areas also implementing
procedures that slow the process or impinge upon
humanitarian principles.

I therefore call on all parties to the conflict
to allow needs-based, unhindered and sustained
access to humanitarian actors. They must also be
safe. I am also placing on the record, here before the
Council today - and asking it to do something about
it - my specific concern regarding recent security
threats against humanitarians delivering aid.

While we were eventually successful in delivering
to east Harasta on 19 June, the case of an attempted
convoy two days earlier illustrates the bureaucratic
and security challenges faced by the United Nations
and our humanitarian partners. Delays in loading the
convoy resulted in a late departure from the warehouse,
slowed further by long forced stops at checkpoints.
After they sat for hours at the last Government of Syria
checkpoint, the green light to remove the barriers and
allow the trucks to cross was given only as evening
approached. The security risk of waiting additional
hours in the darkness while the barriers were removed
was too great, so the decision was made to abort and
return the next day. At that point, the convoy came
under sniper fire as unknown gunmen lying in wait
attacked. A Syrian Arab Red Crescent driver was hit
and another grazed by sniper fire as the convoy began
its return to Damascus.

I can report that, thankfully, the injured driver
survived and is in stable condition. My thoughts and
best wishes go out to him and his family. I condemn such
acts in the strongest terms and call for accountability
for those responsible. Those who deliberately direct
attacks against humanitarian workers are committing
war crimes.

The impact of the shots fired goes beyond any single
person. They are an attack on the entire humanitarian
community and, ultimately, a clear effort to prevent
the delivery of aid to those in need. The safety of
humanitarians going about their work is critical because
in so many parts of Syria, they are the only lifeline for
survival for communities trapped, injured and deprived
by the conflict.

Changes in the access landscape have been
shaped by the signing of local agreements between
the Government of Syria and non-State armed
opposition groups. These are agreements reached
without the involvement of the United Nations. While
the result of these agreements often means increased
freedom of movement, commercial access and greater
humanitarian access, they should not be viewed as
entirely positive developments. They usually also
include the relocation of those who fear reprisal or
conscription, often to areas where they face serious
security and protection concerns.

As a result of these changes, two towns have been
removed from the list of besieged locations. The first is
the town of Madaya, in rural Damascus. Following an
agreement reached as part of the negotiations regarding
the objectionable tit-for-tat arrangements for the four
towns of Fo'ah, Kafraya, Madaya and Zabadani, access
has improved in Madaya. The United Nations was able
to conduct an assessment visit on 8 June, and the 25,000
to 30,000 civilians who remain in the town are now able
to move in and out of the town by public transportation
or private vehicle.

Secondly, the Al-Waer district of Homs city, where
I visited, across the line, in December 2015, is also
being removed from the besieged list. After reaching a
local agreement in March, more than 19,000 individuals
moved from the area to Idlib, Jarabulus and northern
rural Homs. On 20 May, the Governor of Homs
announced that the evacuation process was completed
and that the area was again under Government of Syria
control. As a result, access to the area has also been
reopened, and the United Nations, the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent and non-governmental organizations are able
to deliver to the area, in which an estimated 17,500
individuals remain.

There are now 11 besieged locations, with a total
population of 540,000. Of these, seven are besieged by
the Government of Syria, one by both the Government
of Syria and non-State armed opposition groups, two
by non-State armed opposition groups and one by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). I call once
again for safe, unhindered and sustained access to all
those in need, in particular for these 540,000 people,
who are trapped and desperate for our assistance.

Notwithstanding the access challenges that remain
in Syria, I would also like to acknowledge an important
positive development on access. Earlier this month,
WFP was able to successfully deploy a convoy oftrucks
from Aleppo, through Manbij and to Qamishli, in
Al-Hasakah governorate. This is a key development, as
it will allow us to deliver at scale to north-east Syria, an
area that has been short of supplies since the closure of
the cross-border access point with Turkey in December
2015. While we have been able to deliver assistance
via an air bridge from Damascus, the operation was
expensive. The annual savings from moving the mode
of delivery from air to land are equivalent to the cost
of providing food aid for 100,000 people for one year.
And as needs increase, we should now be able to deliver
at scale.

This is particularly important with growing needs
in north-east Syria due to anti-ISIL operations in the
area. We have reports of civilian deaths by air strikes in
the region, including one that resulted in the deaths ofa
reported 59 people, leaving another 70 wounded, in Abu
Kamal, in eastern Deir ez-Zor governorate, on 15 May.
At the same time, civilians in these areas face continued
threats from ISIL. The air strike in Abu Kamal was
followed by reported retributive attacks by ISIL against
those whom they accused of providing coordinates.

We have similar concerns in Raqqa city, where on
6 June the Syrian Democratic Forces, supported by
coalition forces, began an operation to take the city
from ISIL, and in the past few days have fully encircled
it. The Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights said yesterday that at least 173 people
had reportedly been killed by air and ground strikes
since 1 June. Conditions inside the city are reported to
be dire, with limited access to food, water and basic
services. While nearly 25,000 people have fled since the
latest phase of operations began, the number of those
remaining in the city is estimated to be between 50,000
and 100,000. People fleeing fighting in Raqqa face a
variety of risks, including punitive measures by ISIL,
threats posed by mine contamination, family separation,
forced recruitment at checkpoints and concerns for the
displaced who enter camps and whose identification is
taken away or withheld and their movement restricted.
People are terrified and do not know where to go for
safety. We must do more to see that the civilians who
are caught up in this fight are protected. I am sure that
members can imagine being caught up, through no fault
of one's own, not knowing what decision to make, and
especially what decision to make for one's children.

The United Nations and its humanitarian partners
are responding to the needs of those who leave as part
of its broader response in the north-eastern region.
Between 8 and 15 June, food assistance was delivered to
more than 94,000 people, while 24 tons ofmedicine were
dispatched to hospitals in Al-Hasakah and Qamishli
towns, as well as to camps in Mabrouka, Ayn Issa and
Al-Karama in Raqqa and Al-Hasakah governorates.

The signing, on 4 May, of a memorandum on the
creation of de-escalation areas created an opportunity
to improve the situation of many civilians in Syria. It
is critical to ensure that de-escalation succeeds and
that we can see a sustained calm in those areas. The
temporary reduction of violence in some areas is a
positive development. However, others are seeing not
just continued fighting but even an increase. I am
particularly concerned about the situation in Daraa,
where intense aerial bombardment and fighting has
resulted in civilian deaths and further damage to
civilian infrastructure. The fighting is also getting
close to the southern border and has resulted in delays
to some cross-border humanitarian shipments from
Jordan. Despite the insecurity that has caused delays,
the United Nations and its partners have been able to
continue cross-border deliveries to those in need. As we
sit comfortably around this table, however, we should
never underestimate the sheer courage it takes for the
humanitarian aid workers there on the ground to persist
with such deliveries. We owe them protection, as well
as our limitless thanks and financial support.

I should also highlight the fact that we are delivering
aid to those in the Berm and have now reached 75 per
cent of the population at Ruqban since the second
cycle started, in early May. Our access to both Berm
areas is in large part owed to the strong support we
receive from the Government of Jordan. I would like
to thank the Jordanian authorities for their positive
collaboration. I look forward to their increased support
in ensuring that lifesaving assistance continues to be
delivered to the people in need. As the United Nations
and humanitarian partners are working on the ground
to reach those people, I remain hopeful that the results
of next week's meeting in Astana on de-escalation will
bring about a positive development and see a sustained
reduction in the fighting and, along with that, improved
and unhindered humanitarian access to these areas.

In conclusion, I repeat my call to the Council to act
now to protect civilians. I urge those sitting around this
table who are active in the conflict to fully incorporate
the protection of civilians into their military planning,
and those with influence on the parties to the conflict to
prioritize the protection of civilians in all engagements
with them. These are legal obligations under the laws
of war, and they should not be bent, broken or avoided.
Accountability is key and, of course, wherever possible,
evidence is being collected, photographed, documented,
preserved and stored for use in the appropriate courts
in due course - preferably soon, so as to deter the
continued flagrant and even blase disregard for life
and the law that we are seeing. I therefore call on all
Council members to do more to ensure humanitarian
access, thereby enabling us to reach those in need.
While the besieged population's numbers have once
again decreased, their needs remain great, and those
who have moved to other hard-to-reach areas continue
to require our urgent and sustained support as well.

Immediate steps must be taken to preclude further
attacks on humanitarian workers. That is not solely a
matter of humanitarian protection; it is about ensuring
that those in need can continue to be reached. One
important step in that regard is to end the bureaucratic
delays that leave convoys vulnerable because they are
waiting at checkpoints or operating at night. Another
is to ensure there is no impunity for such attacks. I
also urge those with influence to identify and, where
possible, help to secure the release of the 29 United
Nations staff members who are missing or detained
in Syria.

Finally, and most important, we need to see a
sustained reduction in violence, which is so necessary
for progress on any front. Ending the fighting will
ease the burden on civilians and create an environment
conducive to assistance. Now is the time. It was the
time last month, the month before and the year before.
More delay, hauntingly, means more deaths, and more
people maimed, more injured and more scarred in body
and mind for the rest of their time on Earth. Will I be
saying the same thing next month? Yes, if we sit on our
hands or wring them impotently. This problem is in the
Council's hands - but together, and jointly. I would
urge Council members to hold one another's hands. Let
us not just say "no more". In the name of humanity, let
us deliver no more death for Syrians.

