Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are very glad to see you, Sir, preside over
the Council. We thank you for convening today's
meeting and welcome in this Chamber the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs from the Economic Community of
West African States.

Today's meeting is further proof of the great
interest that the international community and the
Security Council have shown in cooperating to resolve
the complex problems of maintaining and restoring
international peace and security on the African
continent. It is proof of our common aspiration to work
out effective strategies to combat the scourge of the
illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and mercenary activities.

Russia firmly condemns mercenary activities and
has consistently supported international efforts to
eradicate this criminal phenomenon. Such services
have become particularly in demand in the recent
decades, during which armed mercenaries have been
used in the struggle against legitimate Governments
that had freed themselves from colonial dependence on
certain States. Everyone is aware of the tragic
consequences of the involvement of mercenaries in
regional and national conflicts. We have become aware
of them from the tragic examples in Sierra Leone, cote
d'Ivoire, Angola and other countries.

Mercenary activities are highly unethical and
illegal, according to the generally recognized principles
of international law. An important landmark in the
process of establishing universal approaches to
defining the illegal nature of this phenomenon was the
adoption of the first Protocol Additional to the Geneva
Conventions, which fleshed out the legal content of the
concept of a mercenary. The entry into force in 2001 of
the International Convention against the Recruitment,
Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries has
significantly expanded the means available to combat
this scourge.

Without a doubt, the establishment of effective
mechanisms to counter mercenary activities requires a
corresponding measure of political will in order to
consistently carry out international standards in
national legal systems. Current Russian law includes
special norms that carry criminal penalties not only for
direct involvement of mercenaries in armed conflict,
but also for activities for their recruitment, training,
financing and other logistical support.

Recently within the United Nations there has
been substantially heightened interest in the problem of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and its
impact on regional security. Of great significance in
this regard were the 2001 Conference and the
Programme of Action adopted at it. This summer there
will be the first biennial review conference on the
implementation of the Programme, which undoubtedly
will facilitate the further resolution of pressing
problems connected with the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects.

Many practical questions related to the supply of
small arms and light weapons, including brokerage,
end-user certificates and others, will be discussed
during the meeting of the group of governmental
experts to be convened by the Secretary-General. We
believe that the Security Council should focus its
attention on instances in which the illegal trade in
small arms and light weapons is directly related to
conflict situations in Africa that are on its agenda.

The Russian Federation has consistently called
for tough measures in cases in which weapons are
supplied by illegal armed groups. We believe the
Security Council is justified in imposing an embargo
on arms shipments in conflict regions. This certainly
will have a positive impact, and the examples of Sierra
Leone, Angola and other crisis situations have
convinced us of this.

During the past years we have managed to fine-
tune the oversight mechanism for monitoring the
Council's weapons embargoes. This has been made
very clear by the regular reports of the Chairpersons of
the relevant sanctions committees. Of course, much
remains to be done, particularly to enhance the
effectiveness of monitoring of the investigation of the
facts of embargo violations.

We consider it justified that in the context of
carrying out peacekeeping operations under United
Nations auspices, the peace agreements between the
parties should include specific provisions for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants. It is also essential to endeavour to
include in the mandate of such operations adequate
resources to collect and destroy illegal small arms and
light weapons used in conflicts. It is important to help
countries of the West African region to implement
measures to monitor and combat the illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons.

Of great significance is developing practical
measures to combat the illegal shipments of small arms
and light weapons at the preventive stage and in the
post-conflict phase of settlement. Regional
organizations have a solid body of useful experience,
including in Africa. We believe that the measures
proposed within the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) - such the establishment of
an information-exchange mechanism in the area of
small arms and light weapons, the introduction of a
regional register that would provide data on the
national stocks of such weapons in the ECOWAS
countries and other practical steps - deserve to be
approved and supported.

It is also necessary to take steps to improve
domestic legislation to stop small arms and light
weapons from falling into the illicit trade system.
Above all in countries in which such legislation is
lacking, steps must be taken to upgrade and codify a
national system of export controls and to establish a
broad-based exchange of information between States
regarding existing legislation and practical experience
in this area.

We hope that today's meeting under your
presidency, Sir, will allow us to move forward on all
these issues.

