Mr. Sajdik: I am truly honoured to briefthe Security
Council today once again following my intervention
on 12 February (S/PV.8461), in which I spoke about
the functions of the Trilateral Contact Group and its
working groups, the role of the Normandy Four and
its oversight mechanism, enshrined in resolution 2202
(2015) of 17 February 2015.

At the previous meeting on this subject, I spoke one
day before our regular negotiating rounds in Minsk.
Today, it is one day afterwards. Yesterday in Minsk,
I had the opportunity to stress that, according to the
international election observation mission led by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the presidential election in Ukraine had been
conducted in a way that allowed competition and
respected fundamental freedoms. Perhaps, this fact is
a bigger victory for the people of Ukraine than for the
winner of the electoral race, President-elect Volodymyr
Zelensky. In that process, however, the voters, inter alia,
clearly signalled their expectation of a lasting peace in
the eastern part of the country.

The past years have seen a growing and deepening
divide between certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions - that is to say, the territories that are not
under the control of the Ukrainian Government - and
the rest of Ukraine. It is a divide that has also been
fuelled by rhetoric from certain areas in the past
months, advocating their further integration with
Russia - rhetoric that has been void of any initiative as
to how to reintegrate with the Government-controlled
part of Ukraine. It is a divide that is symbolized by
the use of a different currency in certain areas and
by the fact that there are only five entry and exit
points through which a constantly growing number of
people - currently some 37,000 - cross the contact
line daily, taking often six hours or more to finally get
to the other side. This is a real humanitarian issue.

In my 12 February briefing, I urged that the
conditions of the existing crossings and opening new
entry-exit checkpoints be improved, but nothing has
happened so far. As Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller just outlined, the conditions at the crossing
point of Stanytsia Luhanska, the only exit point in the
Luhansk region, which is a pedestrian bridge, are as
bad as ever. The sides have been unable to agree on
the technical aspects for erecting an auxiliary bridge
to substantially improve the conditions of getting
across. The main point of contention is the width of
the auxiliary bridge. In their demands, the sides are
literally 80 centimetres apart, but neither is willing to
make concessions. As a result, elderly people aged 80
years or older who have to travel to the Government-
controlled part of the region to collect their small
pensions still have to venture down slippery wooden
ramps, with injuries being a common feature.

With the sides drifting further and further apart,
the efforts of the coordinators of the security, economic
and humanitarian working groups - with Ambassador
Apakan coordinating the security working group with
extraordinary ability and patience - have mostly
focused on mitigating the effects of the deepening
divide on the populations on both sides of the contact
line. By concentrating on the protection of civilians, the
number of civilian victims decreased last year by more
than half in comparison to 2017, and that is fortunately
a continuing trend. The number of casualties from
gunfire or shelling has dropped significantly, but mines
and unexploded ordnance are ubiquitous dangers near
the contact line. More and more mines, particularly
anti-tank mines, continue to be laid. The region is now
one of the most landmine-contaminated areas in the
world. Therefore, demining and an end to remining are
essential for the population.

I wish to welcome the decision of the Ukrainian
Parliament this morning to amend the financing
provisions of the law on demining, which paves the
way for active donor engagement in that literally vital
activity. Together with Ambassador Apakan, I have
many times called on the sides to urgently carry out
humanitarian demining around such areas as schools,
hospitals and crossing points. Ceasefires brokered
by Ambassador Apakan have tremendously helped
to reduce shelling and civilian as well as military
casualties. I therefore regret to state that we have not
been able to broker a special ceasefire on the occasion
of the Easter festivities this year. The sides wanted it
but could not agree on a text. It is therefore our hope
that the upcoming Orthodox Easter weekend, followed
by the May holidays, will still be peaceful.

In the economic sphere, we have managed, for
example, to more or less ensure regular water deliveries
to the population, especially in certain areas of the
Luhansk region, and improved mobile telephone
communications across the contact line. But it is not
enough to mitigate the effects of the divide; we have to
undertake every effort to narrow and even eradicate it.
Statements by the future leadership of Ukraine make
me optimistic that there is resolve to actively work
against that divide.

Yesterday's ukase will most likely not be helpful in
that regard. What is really urgently needed is to stop the
growing economic disconnectivity across the contact
line and reverse the disruptive measures that triggered
the brutal interruption of economic links in March 2017.
I am referring to the blockade and economic ban on
the one side and the so-called external administration,
which is nothing other than the expropriation of
companies under Ukrainian jurisdiction on the side of
certain areas. That should also include the resumption
of railway transportation services for passengers. Ways
can be found to finally pay the pensions of all those
eligible in non-Government controlled areas, starting,
for instance, with true hardship cases. Scenarios based
on pragmatic solutions also exist thanks to the creative
proposals of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Narrowing the divide is also necessary in the
political area, especially with regard to the special
status of certain areas.

The ultimate goal of our efforts has to be the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, to which, as I
stated in my 12 February briefing, there is no alternative.
It is in that vein that I welcome the recent remarks of the
Secretary General of the OSCE, Ambassador Thomas
Greminger, on the idea of a joint United Nations-OSCE
mission in eastern Ukraine. I firmly believe that close
international cooperation of that kind would be key to
the resolution of the conflict in eastern Ukraine.

