Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's open debate
on this important issue, and we appreciate your wise
leadership of the Council for the month of November.
We would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and Mr. Sma'il Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union (AU), for their
insightful briefings this morning.

I would like to express my condolences regarding
the peacekeepers from Tanzania, Malawi and Mali who
lost their lives while carrying out their sacred missions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered this morning by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and we would like
to add the following comments in our national capacity.

We must reaffirm the importance of Africa in
African-led peacekeeping operations. The partnership
in peacekeeping between the United Nations and the
AU is a successful one, and of the several examples
of that, the most notable is the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
which is nearing its closure. UNAMID is a success
story in terms of African-led joint coordination and
efforts. It was preceded by the African Union Mission
in the Sudan, which was transformed into the hybrid
operation that is currently preparing for closure and has
successfully made the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and development. The drawdown began
in September on the margins of the high-level week of
the General Assembly.

After reviewing the situation on the ground, the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
recommended in its report (see S/2015/446) that the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU
be strengthened by providing additional funding
specifically directed to African-led peacekeeping
operations. That recommendation was implemented
through the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security, which was signed in April 2017 here in New
York. However, the Framework will become effective
only when the necessary financial and political
obligations are implemented.

In coordinating peace efforts in Africa, we must
consider regional and subregional perspectives, along
with those of neighbouring countries, so that we can
resolve conflicts where they arise and address them
on the basis of the principle of African solutions for
African problems. We urgently need to improve the
coordination between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council, in addition to enhancing
the partnerships between the Security Council and
the regional and subregional organizations working
to maintain peace and security in Africa, such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. And
we want to focus on the importance of strengthening
the capacity of African countries with regard to all the
various aspects of peacekeeping forces - military,
police and civilian personnel - so that we can truly
silence the guns in Africa by 2020.

We also want to highlight the importance of
enhancing partnerships between peacekeeping
operations and host countries. In that regard, we
note the successful coordination experience of the
Government of the Sudan and UNAMID establishing
a triangular mechanism that brings together the
Sudanese Government, the United Nations and the
AU and oversees all of that peacekeeping operation's
developments and needs.

We all know the growing importance of ensuring
financing for African-led peacekeeping operations,
which will help them to address conflicts before they
intensify and spin out of control, at which point such
conflicts are much more difficult to address. In that
regard, we note the AU's efforts to establish a Peace
Fund providing 25 per cent of the funding needed
for AU-led peacekeeping operations, enabling the
African continent to contribute to addressing its own
security challenges.

The latest developments in the Horn of Africa
promise a bright future for the region following the
implementation of the peace agreement in South Sudan
and the efforts to advance the peace process in the
Central African Republic, in addition to the positive
developments between Ethiopia, Eritrea, Djibouti and
Somalia and bilaterally between Somalia and Eritrea.
All these positive developments will require support
from regional and international partners so that we
can foster development efforts in those countries and
enhance regional complementarity, which is continuing
to make progress.

