Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
successful presidency of the Security Council and on
having chosen the theme of strengthening collective
security through general regulation and reduction of
armaments. We agree that this is among the factors that
are conducive to peace and development.

Our understanding is that the Security Council's
review of this theme today is based on its connection to
threats to international peace and security, on the basis
of Article 24 of the Charter, which explicitly sets out
the mandate of the Security Council, and Article 26,
which requires the agreement of the General Assembly
on any proposal made by the Council concerning any
approach relating to arms regulation. It is also based on
United Nations system-wide coherence, taking into
account the fact that United Nations bodies are
mutually reinforcing and complementary, and
preserving the mandate of the multilateral disarmament
machinery when dealing with any issue related to
disarmament and international security.

Chapter VIII of the Charter sets out the
importance of activating the role of regional and
subregional organizations and of fostering cooperation
between those organizations and the United Nations on
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Building on that concept, the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the League of Arab States and the African
Union are examples of regional organizations that are
active in legislating and implementing disarmament, in
compliance with the United Nations approach in this
field. This enables those organizations to successfully
complement the role played by the United Nations in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Accordingly, in the light of the principle of collective
security, the United Nations has the responsibility to
provide those organizations with the support they need
to effectively play their role, especially in regions
experiencing armed conflicts and visible and hidden
flows of arms.

The world's annual expenditure on armament has
reached nearly $1 trillion. Considering the
interrelationship among disarmament, security and
development, it is easy to imagine what we could have
done to achieve development goals if that amount of
money had been invested in improving conditions of
human life worldwide, and the amount of the Security
Council's time and effort that could have been saved.

It would thus be useful if the Member States
implemented the General Assembly's repeated
resolutions on the relationship between disarmament
and development, which emerge from the work of the
First Committee. Such resolutions are adopted
annually, by an overwhelming majority. They set out a
practical approach to address new challenges facing the
international community regarding development and
the elimination of poverty and the pandemic diseases
that afflict humanity, through a preventive approach
based on the benefits gained from reallocating
armament-oriented expenditures to the attainment of
development goals.

Foreign occupation of the lands of other peoples
is a serious threat to international peace and security,
for it leads not only to chaos, economic destruction,
flows of weapons and the depletion of the international
community's resources, but also, consequently, to the
loss of development opportunities. In fact, the
international financial crisis that the world is facing
today is convincing evidence of that clear fact.

The State of Qatar believes that the commitment
of Member States to implement the arms regulation
and reduction agreements that they have undertaken is
the basis for the success of these agreements and for
bringing them to fruition. That would in turn bring
about prosperity and development for all mankind.

Thus, it is worth recalling that measures to verify
respect for those commitments are set out in the
relevant agreements themselves, and are based on the
consent of relevant States parties. In that regard,
non-compliance with such agreements should not be
used as a pretext for unilateral action or for employing
means beyond the scope of multilateralism and
international legitimacy. Otherwise, the international
community would lose the benefits of its pre-eminent
agreement: the Charter of the United Nations, which
should be preserved and abided by in order to achieve
security, peace and development.

