Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of Panama, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe and Ambassador Khalilzad
for the briefings that they have given us. We also take
note of the concern the Secretary-General has
expressed on the question of Iraq. We also thank
former Special Representative Ashraf Qazi for his
important work at the head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The delegation
of Panama is aware of the very difficult conditions in
which he and all UNAMI personnel have worked.

Iraq is experiencing a critical situation, and great
attention must be devoted to it not only by the Security
Council but by the international community in general.
We are deeply concerned by the humanitarian situation
as a consequence of the violence taking place in Iraq.
The UNAMI report on human rights in Iraq which was
released on 11 October shows the darkest side of this
conflict: millions of Iraqis forced to abandon their
homes, many of them living in dire conditions, without
access to food and basic services, with children being
particularly vulnerable to disease.

In view of this situation, the United Nations must
take on a more active role in Iraq, providing assistance
in order to strengthen the Iraq Government's capacity
to respond in the best possible way to the humanitarian
needs of its people. UNAMI should carry out its work
in an impartial but not a neutral way. Its activities
should take into account all political, religious and
tribal sectors. Otherwise, it will only feed resentment
and create more violence. Only in that way will
progress be achieved in the social and material
reconstruction that can bring with it a reduction in
violence and the return to their homes of the current
4.2 million displaced and refugee Iraqis.
National reconciliation requires a true
commitment from the international community to
rebuild the institutions of a country that is divided by
deep wounds from the past. We call on the United
Nations to redouble its efforts in its activities to
achieve inclusivity in the political process and dialogue
in Iraq. We stress the preponderant role of leaders of
Iraq in this context. Those Iraqi leaders need to have
political courage. Only in that way can violence be
reduced, and only by reducing violence can due respect
for the human rights of millions of Iraqis be
guaranteed.

We recognize the progress noted by the
International Compact with Iraq in its mid-year report,
and we trust that the international community,
especially neighbouring countries in the region, will
continue to support this initiative.

We also would like to recognize the importance
of Iraq's presence and participation in the Council's
deliberations. It is important that in the future the
Council continue to listen to Iraq's opinion on the
participation of the United Nations in the conflict.

