Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Briefly, I wish to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the Council
presidency and to express appreciation for the efforts
of Ambassador Pleuger and his team last month.

I appreciate your convening this open meeting on
the situation in Bougainville, Sir, which demonstrates
the importance the United Nations attaches to the
peace process under way. I also wish to express my
appreciation to the Assistant Secretary-General of the
Department of Political Affairs, Mr. Danilo Tiirk, for
his useful and thorough briefing on the development of
the aforementioned peace process.

Last December we expressed our satisfaction at
the completion of Stage II of the weapons disposal
process, which made it possible for section 14 of the
national constitution, the new Organic Law on Peace-
Building and the planned referendum to enter fully into
force. My delegation can note today that not only have
the difficulties been overcome, but also that the
progress stemming from the Peace Agreement has been
very significant politically for all parties involved. We
thus welcome the significant progress made and
congratulate the parties for their efforts in the search
for a lasting peace.

We wish to highlight particularly two aspects of
post-conflict reconstruction: the weapons disposal plan
and the work for the approval of the future
constitution. The developments of the past five months
in both areas have been encouraging. We also
encourage the Bougainville Constitutional Committee
to continue its work on the third and final draft, which
will enable completion of the constitutional process.
We also appreciate the work carried out by the United
Nations Observation Mission in Bougainville
(UNOMB), in the Consultative Committee and in the
constant search for dialogue and integration among the
parties in conflict.

We must recognize the many remaining
challenges facing Bougainville, among which one
could stress the need to develop the proposed
constitution and especially the preparation of elections,
which, according to what Mr. Turk told us this
morning, would be held at the end of this year, which
we welcome.

We also wish to highlight that, in order for peace
to be lasting, it is necessary to establish an efficient
administration and a viable and self-sustaining
economy. In the meantime, the relevant United Nations
bodies must continue to closely coordinate their efforts
in Bougainville with the donor community to establish
and consolidate peace. In that context, we appreciate
the work being done in the area by the United Nations
Development Programme and other specialized
agencies, Australia, New Zealand, the European Union,
Japan and civil society.

Finally, we wish to recognize the work done by
the Department of Political Affairs, particularly
Ambassador Noel Sinclair. We believe it is very
important that they continue to be linked to the peace
process in Bougainville until its conclusion.

