Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I would lik to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this debate. I also thank
Special Representative of the Secretary- General Sandra
Honore for her briefing. I reiterate my Government's
appreciation and respect for her leadership and consistent
support for the consolidation of peace and democracy
in Haiti. I also wish to acknowledge the contribution
of the Permanent Representative of Haiti, Ambassador
Regis, and I am pleased to see the Force Commander
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), Major General Jaborandy, among us.

The latest report of the Secretary General
(S/2014/617), based on the findings of the strategic
assessment mission and his own recent visit to Haiti,
gives us reason for both optimism and caution. The
challenge before us is to balance these two - optimism
and caution - in a way that does not jeopardize the
fulfilment of the aspirations of the Security Council
when it established the peacekeeping operation in Haiti
10 years ago.

Since the earthquake, Haitian gross domestic
product has been growing at an average of 4 per cent a
year, with impressive gains in areas such as agriculture,
as highlighted by the representative of Nigeria earlier
today. Although significant progress has been made
towards stabilization in the country, Haiti still
deserves careful assistance to successfully overcome
the remaining obstacles on the security and political
fronts in particular. The legacy of MINUSTAH, and
thus of the United Nations in Haiti, depends on a
correct, responsible and informed balance between
the preservation of the immense investment and gains
made in stabilization and institution-building, on the
one hand, and the recognition that the Mission should
not stay in Haiti in perpetuity, on the other.

Brazil wishes to underline the centrality of ensuring
the holding of free, fair and inclusive elections. We
urge Haitian leaders to work together to allow for
the organization of the overdue legislative and local
elections as soon as possible. We expect the political
dialogue to lead, in the near future, to new concrete
commitments and to promote national reconciliation
and the institutional strengthening of all branches of
the Haitian State, thus allowing for the normalization
of democratic life in the country.

But it would be short-sighted for Haitian leaders to
assume that in the absence of their clear commitment
to institutional stability, elections and the consolidation
of democracy, the international community would
be willing to sustain the presence it has had for the
past 10 years through MINUSTAH. Brazil concurs
with the understanding expressed by the Secretary-
General that "a conditions-based deepening of the
current consolidation process" (S/2014/617, p56)
would be viable, responsible and adequate. We support
his recommendation of a two-step drawdown of
MINUSTAH, as it is based on a military assessment
that deemed a force of two battalions and of 2,370
troops to be consistent with the realities on the ground
and on the assessment of the ability of the Government
of Haiti to assume a greater responsibility for security.

The driving forces behind the reduction of
MINUSTAH's presence in Haiti should be the holding
of elections and the overall Haitian security sector's
ability to perform, including the Haitian National Police,
not financial considerations or artificial budgetary
ceilings. As per the military evaluation conducted,
we agree that the troop reduction recommended
by the Secretary-General allows for the necessary
capability to face upcoming challenges and tensions
that may occur associated with political campaigns and
elections, while avoiding the risk of a security vacuum
due to a premature departure of MINUSTAH. A
further decrease in troop levels should not be presumed
on the basis of today's realities, as it is contingent on
developments that are still some time ahead of us,
mainly the presidential elections.

Even ifthe proposed drawdown strategy is adequate,
we must still increase our efforts to ensure that stability
gains secured so far become sustainable. To that end, a
lighter military presence should be accompanied by a
stronger role played by national institutions, especially
the Haitian National Police, the judiciary and the
corrections system. We encourage the Haitian National
Police to benefit from MINUSTAH's efforts to ensure
a successful handover of responsibility for security
in critical areas and to continue to participate in joint
operations with the Mission.

A successful consolidation strategy leading to long-
term stability in Haiti would also involve recognizing
that development assistance, both from the United
Nations system and other actors, should be scaled-up
to at least the same pace as the military disengagement.
Job creation, income generation and investment in
education should be high on the list of all stakeholders.
That process must be guided by the Government's
priorities and, in an inclusive way, owned by Haitians
themselves.

MINUSTAH should continue to contribute to an
environment of stability through social and economic
progress by keeping its mandated tools to develop quick
impact and community violence reduction projects,
as well as an adequate engineering capability. As
MINUSTAH's drawdown strategy unfolds, we highlight
the importance of enhancing the Mission's civilian
component, in particular its ability to coordinate, with
the support of the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary- General and the United Nations Development
Programme Resident Coordinator, the activities of the
United Nations system and the United Nations country
team on the ground. In that connection, we stress the
importance of further integrating the activities of the
United Nations family in Haiti with MINUSTAH's
activities towards promoting the strengthening of the
State institutions directly associated with the core areas
of its mandate, including in the domain of access to
justice and the rule of law.
(spoke in French)

Brazil welcomes the initiatives of the Government
of Haiti and MINUSTAH to fight the cholera epidemic.
In that context, the reduction of the number of
people affected by the disease by 82 per cent is very
encouraging. The Haitian Government and the United
Nations are certainly not alone in those efforts. The
tripartite cooperation of Brazil, Cuba and Haiti recently
opened three hospitals intermediary-level hospitals and
a rehabilitation centre in the Port-au-Prince area and
has trained hundreds of community health workers
to support, among others, cholera treatment and
prevention measures.

In conclusion, Brazil renews its commitment to
and long-term solidarity with Haiti, which is reflected,
among other initiatives, in its technical cooperation,
economic assistance and 10 years of dedicated
contributions to MINUSTAH. Haiti must be able to
count on the international community in addressing
complex challenges related to security, stability,
democracy and development. The time is not ripe
for international disengagement. However, we must
redouble our confidence in Haitians' abilities to meet,
with international support, the challenges in a climate
of dialogue and cooperation.

