Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): Sweden associates itself
with the statement just made by the observer of the
European Union.

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate, and the Secretary-General for his report in
document S/2012/746. We agree that progress has been
made. However, the international community must
continue to enhance its ability effectively to manage
the building of peace. Let me point to three challenges

Sweden sees in this regard.

The first is to ensure a well-coordinated response
from the international community. We note with
interest the new policy on United Nations transitions
in the context of mission drawdown or withdrawal.
Successful implementation will require early planning,
jointly conducted by United Nations actors and host
nation counterparts, in order to ensure smooth transition
at all stages.
That the United Nations is delivering as one is one
important key in achieving a smooth transition, but
it is not enough. Sweden would like to emphasize the
importance of other aspects such as focusing on the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework on
peacebuilding priorities; ensuring that peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts work in tandem; and ensuring
that the United Nations system as a whole finds ways to
coordinate more closely with the international financial
institutions (IFIs) and bilateral partners, not least in
regard to ensuring and mobilizing predictable and
sustainable funding.

The second challenge is ensuring a strengthened
dialogue with and support to the host country through a
joint compact. The international community will serve
the host country best if it can ensure a sustained and
common message on key issues. The establishment
in the country configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) of so-called statements of mutual
commitments has proved to be a useful tool for
dialogue and joint guidance. Equally, the New Deal
for International Engagement in Fragile States and
its compacts offer an excellent opportunity for the
host country to elaborate a basis for joint efforts with
bilateral partners, IFIs and the United Nations system.
This will help to further national ownership, promote
the use of national financial systems, and link security
and peacebuilding priorities to financial sustainability,
transparency and the fight against corruption. In setting
up such instruments of mutual commitments, we
should build on existing experiences, ensure alignment
with national priorities, and avoid duplication or
parallel reporting. One common basis for dialogue,
commitments and reporting should be the aim.

The third challenge relates to the importance of
inclusivity. Sweden welcomes the focus on inclusivity
in the Secretary-General's report - an aspect that is
key to dealing not only with reconciliation after violent
conflict, but also with the root causes of conflicts. It
is particularly important that we take a harder look at
the way natural resources and land issues are handled,
the role of extractive industries, adherence to the rule
of law, and how revenues are collected and used for the
common good.

The report sensibly suggests that United Nations
entities should ensure that factors contributing to
marginalization should be identified early and addressed
in peacebuilding strategies. Sweden's heavy engagement
in Liberia, bilaterally and by means of chairing the PBC
Liberia configuration, aims at supporting inclusivity,
reconciliation and decentralization efforts. Moreover,
the justice and security hubs in Liberia funded by the
Peacebuilding Fund will also help to provide services
and a governmental presence throughout the whole
country.

We also support the emphasis in the Secretary-
General's report on enhancing efforts on gender.
Regional cooperation can support this, as is shown by
the regional dialogue on enhancing women's leadership
in peace and security in West Africa, organized
recently by the United Nations Mission in Liberia in
collaboration with other United Nations missions in
the region. The recommendations were clear - to
enhance the role of women in peacebuilding efforts, in
particular as mediators, including in peace missions of
the Economic Community of West African States.

On the more structural side of our work in regard
to peacebuilding, Sweden supports increased regular
interaction between the PBC and the Security Council.
We should build on the interactive dialogues of the past
year. The Security Council could be more specific in
seeking advice from the PBC, including in the context
of peacekeeping mandate renewals.

At the same time, we would invite the PBC for its
part to further demonstrate the specific contributions it
can make to the deliberations of the Security Council
and the United Nations system as a whole. In the end,
the effectiveness of the PBC will and must be measured
in terms of its impact at the country level. To achieve
impact, enhanced linkages to the field are crucial.
Effective support to the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and the country teams are essential
elements in that regard.

