Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous renewal, for a period of
12 months, of the authorization on which the action
of the European Union military operation in the
Southern Central Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA) is based in order to fight against
the smuggling of migrants and human trafficking on
the high seas off the coast of Libya. The unanimous
support of the Security Council for the European
Union's commitment to peace and stability in Libya is
a recognition of the key role played by the EUNAVFOR
MED operation SOPHIA in disrupting the smuggling
networks and in saving tens of thousands oflives every
year, as the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/807) recalls. The authorization of the Council
is a sine qua non, allowing the operation to have the
appropriate means to effectively combat the smuggling
of migrants, in cooperation with the Government of
National Accord, led by Prime Minister Serraj.

The text comes to the point by renewing the
authorizations under resolutions 2240 (2015) and 2380
(2017) through which the Security Council expresses its
deep concern about the extent of migrant smuggling in
the Mediterranean and the humanitarian, political and
security consequences for Libya and beyond. However,
it is regrettable that the text is not more explicit in
recalling the Council's positions on that serious issue,
especially with regard to the applicable international
legal framework, in particular the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, the United Nations
Convention on Transnational Organized Crime and the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.

As the report of the Secretary-General points
out, too many migrants - many of them women and
children - continue to risk their lives trying to cross
the Mediterranean. They are the victims of traffickers
who exploit their distress. The human rights violations
to which those vulnerable people are exposed shock the
world's conscience. Moreover, the migrant smuggling
and human trafficking fuel economic predation and
jeopardize the fragile political balance in Libya. That
is why the Council adopted its first sanctions against
six smugglers of migrants in June, at the initiative of
France and its European and American partners.

Finally, France recalls, as stated in resolution
2240 (2015), that migrants should be treated with
humanity and dignity and with full respect for their
rights and that all States must fulfil their obligations
under international law, including international human
rights law and international refugee law. It also recalls
the obligation to protect the human rights of migrants
regardless of their migration status.

