Mr. Tarragfi (Brazil) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to thank the French presidency of the
Council for having convened this meeting on such an
important subject.

(spoke in English)

I also wish to congratulate Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy on her appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. Let me also thank her and
Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive Director of UNICEF, for
their respective statements. I am also grateful to the
Secretary-General for submitting his report on children
and armed conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We hope that the recommendations of the
report will be fully implemented so that the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict in that country
can be stopped once and for all.

The problem of children and armed conflict
continues to draw attention at a very high level. An
effective response to that issue is essential. We are
confronted by alarming figures. Nearly 90 per cent of
the casualties in armed conflicts are civilians, mainly
women and children. In the past decade, an estimated
20 million children worldwide were forced to leave
their homes because of conflict. More than 2 million
children have died as a direct result of armed clashes.
Three hundred thousand children have been used as
soldiers in more than 30 countries. The United Nations
has a key role to play in changing that sad reality.

In the Middle East, the fate of children has been
no less distressing. Even Brazilian children have not
been spared the bombardments of Israel on Lebanon.
Three of those children living in the country died last
week. Such indiscriminate attacks on the civilian
population, from all parties, must stop immediately.
The position paper circulated by the presidency
of the Security Council on 6 July mentions that
important new developments have occurred since the
last debate on this matter. Those developments show
that we have finished the phase of completing the legal
framework required to deal with the issue. We have
consolidated the main guidelines in various
instruments, such as the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, the International Labour
Organization's Convention No. 182 on the worst forms
of child labour, and the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Having entered the era of application, as the
Secretary-General indicated in his 2005 report, we are
now in the process of designing mechanisms to fully
implement the legal framework I have just mentioned.
The adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) is the most
visible development in that new phase. It establishes a
set of concrete measures and the institutional basis for
the Security Council to carry out its mandate.

The issue of children and armed conflict
constitutes a problem of a complex nature. It requires a
comprehensive approach that encompasses social,
economic, security and human rights perspectives.
Brazil is of the view that an adequate and effective
response to this multifaceted problem must comprise
coordination of all its elements. It is therefore
important to have the involvement of other relevant
bodies of the United Nations system.

We expect that the Security Council, based on its
Working Group established under resolution 1612
(2005), will work in close coordination with the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. That joint effort is required to address all the
aspects of the issue, including the demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers. There should also be
coordination with UNICEF, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the United
Nations Development Programme.

Likewise, we should profit from the contributions
that civil society, especially non-governmental
organizations, can make to coordination efforts. Such
broad and comprehensive coordination is essential to
maximize the effect of the Council's actions in
stopping the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict.

I should not let pass this opportunity to highlight
the importance of the independent review of the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. At this point, it is not realistic to expect
that the evaluation will be completed by 31 July, but it
is important that the conclusions of the independent
review indicate how effectively the mechanism can
link the work of the Security Council to that of other

organs of the United Nations, as well as shed light on
the division of responsibilities.

In closing, I wish to reiterate that Brazil is fully
committed to the cause of promoting and protecting the
rights of the child in general and is determined to
support effective measures designed to protect children
affected by armed conflict.

