Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf

of the European Union (EU) and its member States.

The acceding country Croatia, the candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia, the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

First, I would like to join previous speakers in
condemning in the strongest terms the attacks that
took place today at the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu. Our deepest sympathies and condolences
go to the families and friends of those affected by this
heinous crime.
We welcome the initiative taken by the United
Kingdom to hold this open debate on conflict
prevention and natural resources. However, we regret
that the Council was unable to speak in one voice on
this important issue.

I would also like to thank the Deputy-Secretary
General, World Bank Managing Director Caroline
Anstey, Mr. Kofi Annan, as Africa Progress Panel
Chair, and Associate Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme Rebeca Grynspan
for their statements.

Managing, extracting and exploiting natural
mineral resources are often cited as key factors in
triggering, escalating or sustaining violent conflicts.
There is also a worrying correlation between military
activity linked to the illegal extraction of natural
resources and episodes of sexual Violence.

For instance, the African Great Lakes region is
characterized both by instability and mineral-rich
soils. The illegal exploitation of, and trade in, natural
resources has led to the development of a number of
initiatives. Some are aimed at delinking the trade in
minerals sourced from the control of armed groups,
while others aim to promote good governance and
transparency of financial revenues and the adoption of
responsible business principles.

The impact of those and other existing initiatives
has to be assessed against their objectives; they
cannot address the root causes of violence and
instability by themselves. Experience shows that a
more comprehensive approach is needed to break the
linkages between instability and violent conflict in
mineral-rich countries, one that deploys the full range of
development, trade, security and diplomatic instruments
at the disposal of the international community and that
ensures a human rights perspective.

For its part, the European Union has focused
on promoting conflict-sensitive management of the
international diamond trade and the forestry sector, as
well as on the transparency of the revenues generated
by the extractive industry. We have adopted policy
frameworks and business standards relevant to the
promotion of transparency in the supply chains. The
following are some examples.

The European Union played a crucial role in
setting up and implementing the Kimberley Process
certification scheme. The Kimberly Process needs to
be strengthened to meet future challenges in the global
diamond-supply chain and provide assurances for
consumers that diamonds are not tainted by violence.
One of the unique features of the Kimberly Process is
its tripartite structure, which involves Governments,
industry and civil society. We take this opportunity
to call on all parties involved to recognize the full
diversity of opinions within and about the Kimberly
Process and to continue to work together to enhance
the scheme's credibility.

The EU also supports the Regional Initiative
against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources,
launched by the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). The EU will provide
technical assistance that will contribute to building
the capacity of the ICGLR and its member States'
national administrations in relation to natural resources
and conflicts, notably through the establishment of a
regional certification scheme.

With regard to the United Nations, the Eureopean
Union is fostering an inter-agency approach through
the EU-United Nations Partnership on Natural
Resources and Conflict Prevention, as well as with
the World Bank and other international stakeholders.
Participating agencies are leveraging their respective
skills and knowledge to better assist third countries in
preventing and addressing natural-resources-related
conflicts. Furthermore, the EU takes note of the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission and encourages it
to enhance its interaction with the Security Council
in this area. The European Union also supports
the implementation of the United Nations guiding
principles on business and human rights.
The European Union is funding the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative. With regard to
internal legislation, in 2011 the European Commission
proposed a reform of the accounting and transparency
directive that requires EU oil, gas, mining and timber
companies to publish specific payments to partner
Governments. The reform was politically agreed in May
2013, and we envisage its entry into force in August.

The EU has also adopted the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development Due
Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains
of Minerals from Conflict-affected and High-risk
Areas. In addition, the European Commission is
considering a comprehensive EU supply chain initiative
for the responsible sourcing of minerals originating
from conflict areas. In that respect, the European
Commission launched a public consultation in March
to gather views from stakeholders. On that basis, the
Commission expects to publish a communication and a
legislative proposal later this year.

In our experience, it is important that the
international community, including the Security
Council and the relevant United Nations bodies, build
on existing initiatives and seek convergence and
complementarities. Inclusiveness and the partnership
of all stakeholders at all stages of the value chain are
also essential.

Finally, natural resources play a critical role
in fuelling and financing conflict, but also in
creating strategic incentives for peacebuilding and
peace-supporting action. Peace agreements have to
create conditions in which belligerents have more of
an incentive to become part of a peace economy than
to remain in the shadow economy. The implementation
of legitimate methods of exploitation and trade for
concerned minerals should be encouraged by specific
incentives. It is therefore important that all initiatives
be undertaken pursuant to relevant international law,
include appropriate safeguards and are carefully
evaluated for their impact on domestic reform, conflict,
poverty and insecurity.

