Mr. de La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
had the privilege a few days ago of reporting to the
Security Council on the mission we carried out in
Central Africa. Today, at the outset of this meeting, I
will go to the heart of the matter and touch on the
recommendations the mission has made to the Council.
Members will find these recommendations in the report
(S/2004/934), from paragraph 47 on.
I will begin by saying that the Security Council
mission arrived at a time when in both the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi there had been
action in a new phase that should lead us to the end of
the transition - that is to say, elections next year. It is
absolutely crucial for the officials in both countries to
take the necessary steps so that the transitions in both
countries are irreversible. The closer we get to the end
of the transition, the harder it is, of course - we know
this - and the more those officials have to act
decisively. But it is also crucial that in this phase the
Burundians and the Congolese receive the support of
the international community, support that is essential.

As regards the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there is an authority that brings together the
main players from the international community that
support the country, and that is the International
Committee in Support of the Transition (CIAT). It is
absolutely essential that the joint committees that were
decided between the CIAT and the Congolese
authorities be able to get to work. That is the case for
one of them; but for the two others, we recommend
that they begin working very quickly. We also believe
that the international community, on this very
important question of disarmament of the ex-FAR/
Interahamwe, which I will come back to later, has to
assist the Congolese authorities to build an integrated
army, integrated brigades. We also believe that, with a
View to elections, the international community should
help to build an integrated police force as well.

With regard to Burundi, I draw attention to
paragraph 53 in our report, where we mention the need
for financial assistance for Burundi, which should
receive disbursements consistent with their absorption
capability.

As my colleagues all know, the mission dealt
with the question of the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, relations between Rwanda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the presence of
ex-FAR/Interahamwe, and threats of intervention into
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security
Council dealt with this last issue in the presidential
statement issued yesterday, so I will not come back to
it. On this issue, the Council has simply followed the
recommendations that were made by the mission.
There is a problem we have to deal with, as emerges
clearly from the Council's statement yesterday.

Turning to Burundi, I would say briefly that our
general impression was that the peace process is on
track, the spirit of reconciliation is quite present, and
on many items since our return the Security Council
has taken positions along the lines suggested by the
mission. The Council renewed the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB) and
expressed its intention to review measures that could
be taken with respect to the FNL against those who
would compromise the peace and reconciliation
process. Finally, the Council was also able to respond
to the Gatumba massacre. So I think that the Council
has certainly followed the path recommended by our
mission.

In conclusion, I will briefly mention the situation
in the region. On several occasions, the mission
mentioned the conclusions of the Great Lakes
Conference, which is an important political event. The
mission suggests in its conclusions and recommendations
that the commitments that were made should be swiftly
implemented and priorities should be set.

So there, in a nutshell, is a summary of the
recommendations made by the mission. We also
mention the follow-up to the mission by the Security
Council in the last two weeks, a follow-up that was
carried out quite quickly in many areas.

