Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
today. What we have heard from Mr. Pascoe is of grave
concern to my Government. This is a moment of hope
for many people across the Middle East and North
Africa. Their voices are being heard as never before.
New democratic processes are under way in Egypt and
Tunisia, reflecting a long-pent-up desire for more open
and representative government. Other Governments
across the region are responding positively to the
demand for reform.
11-31393

In Syria, the Government has so far chosen a
different path. What we have seen in recent weeks is a
systematic attempt to stifle the legitimate demands of
the Syrian people through violence and oppression.
Despite the best efforts of the Syrian Government to
bar access to international media and to suppress
independent coverage of what is happening, we have
witnessed the repeated and deliberate targeting of
civilians and the use of tanks and other heavy
weaponry against peaceful protestors.

Mr. Pascoe spoke ofthe 350 to 400 demonstrators
killed by the security forces over the past few weeks.
The Syrian army has imposed a siege on the city of
Dar'a, including cutting all phone lines, water and
electricity. The military is firing indiscriminately in the
city itself. The security forces are also attacking
several surrounding towns and suburbs of Damascus.
We condemn utterly and without reservation the
violence and killings perpetrated by the Syrian security
forces against civilians, who are expressing their views
in peaceful protests.

We now need to see four things. First, the violent
repression must stop immediately. The Syrian
Government has a responsibility to protect peaceful
protestors, not to attack them. President Al-Assad must
order his forces to show maximum restraint. The
protestors themselves must ensure that their actions are
peaceful.

Secondly, President Al-Assad's Government
needs to respond to the legitimate demands of the
Syrian people with immediate and genuine reform, not
brutal repression. The emergency law should be lifted
in practice. On 21 April, the Permanent Representative
of Syria told the Security Council that legislation had
been enacted recognizing the right to peaceful
demonstration, but the reality on the ground stands in
stark contrast to that commitment.

Thirdly, those responsible for the violence must
be held to account. We strongly support the Secretary-
General's call for an independent, transparent and
effective investigation into the killings. The
perpetrators of violence against civilians, and in
particular those who have ordered it, must be brought
to justice.

Fourthly, the international community needs to
speak with one voice in condemning the violence in
Syria. The United Kingdom is working intensively
with its international partners to persuade the Syrian
authorities to stop the violence and to respect the basic
and universal human rights to freedom of expression
and assembly. We will look at further measures with
our European Union and other partners if the violence
does not stop. That may include targeted financial and
travel sanctions against those responsible for the
violence, as well as their families and business
interests.

Syria is at a fork in the road. Its Government can
still choose to bring about the genuine reform that
alone can provide peace and stability for Syria in the
long term, or it can choose ever more violent
repression, which can only bring short-term security
for the authorities, but at a terrible cost to Syria's
people and the country's future. We urge President
Al-Assad to take the first course, which is the only way
for Syria to regain its place at the heart of the Middle
East.

