Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1773 (2007) to extend the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for
one year. That vote is a clear signal of the Council's
support for the United Nations peacekeepers on the
ground in south Lebanon and of its commitment to the
full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

Although the primary aim of this technical
resolution is to extend the mandate of UNIFIL, it also
reaffirms the Council's resolutions on Lebanon,
including resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and
1701 (2006), as well as the three presidential
statements on Lebanon adopted since last summer.

We commend the progress that has been achieved
since the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006) last
summer. The Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) has
deployed throughout the country for the first time in 30
years. Together with the reinforced UNIFIL, the LAF
has helped to create a new strategic reality in south
Lebanon.

At the same time, the deadly 24 June attack
against UNIFIL and the 17 June rocket attack against
Israel demonstrate that there are unauthorized armed
elements and weapons in south Lebanon and that they
pose a danger both to regional stability and to the
safety of United Nations personnel. In that regard, we
reiterate our condolences to the families, colleagues
and Governments of those peacekeepers killed in the
line of duty in Lebanon.

We welcome UNIFIL's intention to redouble its
efforts to carry out its mandate in response to these
attacks, especially in terms of coordination with the
Lebanese Armed Forces. We urge UNIFIL and the LAF
to move quickly to establish joint patrols and co-located
checkpoints, particularly along the Litani river, to
ensure that no unauthorized weapons are transferred
into south Lebanon. We look forward to hearing more
from the Secretary-General on those efforts in his next
report.

These and other threats to peace, as well as the
violence perpetrated by Fatah al-Islam in the north of
Lebanon, underscore the need to fully implement the
provisions of the Taif Accords and resolution 1559
(2004), calling for the disbanding and disarmament of
all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militia. Peace will
never be fully secured until that call is met.
We also reiterate our deep concern about
continued illegal weapons transfers across the Syrian-

Lebanese border in violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
Those weapons transfers directly threaten both the
stability of Lebanon and the safety of United Nations
peacekeepers. We join the Secretary-General in calling,
yet again, on Syria and Iran to honour their obligations
under the arms embargo established under resolution
1701 (2006).

One year has now passed since the cessation of
hostilities between Israel and Hizbullah and the
adoption of resolution 1701 (2006). While we are
pleased by the progress that has been achieved, we
deplore the fact that the cause of this conflict -
namely, Hizbullah's abduction of the two Israeli
soldiers - has not been resolved. The Council must
not relent in demanding progress on that issue, as well
as on all the others required for a ceasefire and a long-
term solution between Israel and Lebanon, in order to
fulfil the promise of the resolution that we adopted last
summer.

