Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this open briefing so quickly. Through you, I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for the
important statement that he made this morning. Mali
endorses the report of the Security Council mission to
the Great Lakes region. We fully support the statement
made this morning by the head of the Security Council
mission, the Ambassador of France, Jean-David
Levitte, to whom we pay a warm tribute for his
excellent work in leading that mission.

Mali actively participated in the Security Council
mission, and, having listened carefully to the
statements made by earlier speakers this morning, I
should just like to make the following points.

On the Lusaka peace process, we welcome the
partnership now developing between the Council and
the Political Committee of the Lusaka Agreement. The
establishment of this partnership - a partnership such
as we have always called for between the Security
Council and subregional organizations involved in
settling conflicts - should be maintained so that the
process can move forward, bearing in mind that the
parties signatories to the Lusaka Agreement remain the
driving force behind that dynamic. We reiterate the
appeal to the parties in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to speedily make available to the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) the necessary
information so that the post-disengagement stage can
begin, with a view to shifting to phase III of the
deployment of MONUC.

On the Arusha process, we also appeal to the
armed groups, primarily the Front pour la defense de la
democratie (FDD) and the Forces national pour la
liberation (FNL), to cease hostilities immediately and
without conditions, and to join the political process. As
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there can be
no military solution in Burundi. Arusha remains the
viable framework, and it must be preserved, under the
leadership of President Mandela. In this regard, we
agree with the views expressed earlier by the
Ambassador of the United Kingdom.

Lastly, we have already commended the Council
for its commitment to the Great Lakes region; we
believe that we should now give an impetus to the new
negotiating structure established with the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Agreement, following the
deployment of the MONUC observers.

The Security Council must remain vigilant and
must closely monitor the parties' fulfilment of their
commitments. Peace may still be far off, but it is now
within our grasp.

