Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil will vote against the
draft resolution. In doing so, we are honouring the
purposes that inspired us in the efforts that resulted in
the Tehran declaration of 17 May. We will do so
because we do not see sanctions as an effective
2

instrument in this case. Sanctions will most probably
lead to the suffering of the people of Iran and will play
into the hands of those on all sides who do not want
dialogue to prevail. Past experiences in the United
Nations, notably the case of Iraq, show that the spiral
of sanctions, threats and isolation can result in tragic
consequences.

We will vote against the draft resolution also
because the adoption of sanctions at this juncture runs
counter to the successful efforts of Brazil and Turkey
to engage Iran in a negotiated solution with regard to
its nuclear programme.

As Brazil has stated repeatedly, the Tehran
declaration adopted on 17 May is a unique opportunity
that should not be missed. It was approved by the
highest levels of the Iranian leadership and endorsed
by Iran's parliament. The Tehran declaration promoted
a solution that would ensure the full exercise of Iran's
right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy while
providing full, verifiable assurances that Iran's nuclear
programme has exclusively peaceful purposes. We are
firmly convinced that the only possible way to achieve
this collective goal is to secure Iran's cooperation
through effective and action-oriented dialogue and
negotiations.

The Tehran declaration showed that dialogue and
persuasion can do more than punitive action. Its
purpose and result were to build the confidence needed
to address the whole set of aspects of Iran's nuclear
programme. As we explained yesterday, the joint
declaration removed political obstacles to the
materialization of a proposal by the International
Atomic Energy Agency in October 2009. Many
Governments and highly respected institutions and
individuals have come to acknowledge its value as an
important step to a broader discussion on the Iranian
nuclear programme.

The Brazilian Government deeply regrets,
therefore, that the joint declaration has neither received
the political recognition it deserves nor been given the
time it needs to bear fruit. Brazil considers it unnatural
to rush to sanctions before the parties concerned can sit
and talk about the implementation of the declaration.
The Vienna Group's replies to the Iranian letter of 24
May, which confirmed Iran's commitment to the
content of the declaration, were received just hours
ago. No time has been given for Iran to react to the
10-39596
opinions of the Vienna Group, including to the
proposal of a technical meeting to address details.

The adoption of sanctions in such circumstances
sends the wrong signal to what could be the beginning
of a constructive engagement in Vienna. Also of great
concern was the way in which the permanent members,
together with a country that is not a member of the
Security Council, negotiated among themselves for
months behind closed doors.

Brazil attaches the utmost importance to
disarmament and non-proliferation, and our record in
this domain is impeccable. We have also affirmed, and
reaffirm now, the imperative for all nuclear activity to
be conducted under the applicable safeguards of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, and Iran's
activities are no exception. We continue to believe that
the Tehran declaration is sound policy and should be
pursued. We hope that all parties involved will see the
long-term wisdom of doing so.

In our View, the adoption of new sanctions by the
Security Council will delay rather than accelerate or
ensure progress in addressing the question. We should
not miss the opportunity to start a process that can lead
to a peaceful, negotiated solution to this question. The
concerns regarding Iran's nuclear programme raised
today will not be resolved until dialogue begins. By
adopting sanctions, this Council is actually opting for
one of the two tracks that were supposed to run in
parallel - in our opinion, the wrong one.

