Mr. Yacouba (spoke in French): I thank Security
Council members for their questions.

I received a question on the primary role that the
army plays in managing issues related to terrorism and
on the support that the United Nations police can provide
in that aspect. On the ground, the analyses done by all
of the various partners point, first and foremost, to
security issues that require appropriate responses. Mali
has already adopted a national prevention strategy to
counter violent extremism, terrorism and transnational
organized crime, which is truly a comprehensive
approach. All the various parts of the structure have
their role to play.

From a security perspective, we have civil defence
missions within the framework of national defence. The
army has a role to play, but it is limited to supporting
the security services, which work with the justice
system to ensure the legal framework for operations. At
that level, I believe that the police of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, and the Mission in general, have worked to set up
appropriate structures, including the specialized police
and the specialized investigative brigade, which are
wholly responsible for dealing with all issues related
to terrorism.

At the core of the structures of the police and the
gendarmerie, we established investigative brigades with
the ability to work on the ground to collect evidence
of criminal activity, which is often very ephemeral. At
any given time, we have people ready to be deployed
on the ground at the request of the specialized brigades
or of police officers already on the ground. I therefore
believe that we have our role to play in that regard. We
often receive requests from investigative judges to help
them with their investigations.

Two other questions that more or less can be
answered as one concerned, first, the difficulties
involved in the deployment of the Malian defence and
security forces and obstacles hindering community-
based policing. In that area, a national strategy on
security sector reform has also been adopted. There
is a secretariat responsible for the implementation of
security sector reform, but unfortunately, although the
structure has been established, I believe that the issue
of political will remains.

A new Permanent Secretary was appointed
approximately two weeks ago. We hope that she will be
able to move things forward. We are doing everything,
as we wait, in responding to the most urgent cases
in anticipation of the implementation of the security
sector reform. As I said, community-based policing is
essential to peace and security. Even ifwe deploy people
on the ground, if they lack an accurate perception of the
situation and trust is absent, they will not be able to
enjoy the cooperation of the local population or collect
the intelligence needed.

That is why we are making the case for creating
an environment of inclusivity. I think that the case we
made before Ministry of Security was successful. Since
then, a recruitment drive has been carried out based
on a quota system by region. The Ministry of Defence
has also, for the first time, authorized a quota for the
Malian army and the national guard, and we hope that
the presence of people from those communities in
those forces will create the necessary conditions for
improving the security situation on the ground. Those
are the aspects that I wanted to speak to.

The other aspect concerning deployment involves,
first, the lack of equipment. Even if people are ready
to be deployed, if the necessary infrastructure and
equipment are lacking, we cannot deploy them, as their
mere physical presence is not enough. They must be
provided with the means necessary to protect themselves
and the population. I take this opportunity to thank the
countries that contribute to the Trust Fund in Support
of Peace and Security in Mali, which has allowed us
to accomplish much in terms of the redeployment of
security and defence forces in both the north and the
centre of the country.

