Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): The recent agreement
between the Government of Angola and the Uniao
Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA)
on a timetable for the finalization of the peace process is
a most welcome sign of progress. The agreement raises
the hope that the parties now are ready to complete the
remaining tasks in the Lusaka Protocol. The reports that
President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi are planning to
meet in Angola soon are also encouraging.

There are still difficulties on the way ahead,
however. The responsibility for achieving sustainable
peace in Angola primarily remains with the Angolan
parties themselves. That being said, we continue to see an
important role for the United Nations in assisting in the
completion of the peace process.

Sweden supports an extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)

 

for another three months. The continued presence of the
mission will contribute to paving the way for a more secure
and stable political environment in Angola. We support the
retention of a military task force in Angola, as proposed by
the Secretary-General, which will be able to assist in the
fulfilment of remaining military tasks within the peace
process and be able to respond to security needs on the
ground.

Since MONUA was established in June 1997, the
civilian aspects of the peace process have gained in
importance. We hope that the peace process is now
irreversibly moving into a peace-building phase. In order to
achieve the remaining goals, there is need for a strong
civilian police presence in Angola - strong in numbers and
in ability. MONUA's civilian police perform essential tasks
in the human rights field, including their efforts to
strengthen the rule of law and measures to support and
assist the Angolan National Police. In this connection, we
also welcome the ongoing efforts to strengthen MONUA's
human rights component.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's
comprehensive report in mid-March, including his
recommendations on the possible reconfiguration of
MONUA and his Views on the United Nations presence in
Angola after 30 April 1998.

