Mr. Carneiro (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): First and
foremost, I should like to thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address the members of the Security
Council in order to present the views of the Government
of the Republic of Angola on the current stage of the
development of and the prospects for the peace process
under way in my country, which has now reached its
most crucial and decisive phase.

Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of the
Government of the Republic of Angola, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I also bring our greetings to your predecessor,
Ambassador Nabil Elaraby, for the dynamic manner in
which he led the activities of this organ during his term
of office. I should also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our gratitude for the work of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali; his Special
Representative for Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye;
and the troika of observers - the United States of
America, Russia and Portugal - and for their efforts
towards peace in Angola.

Approximately two years ago, as we undertook the
process of implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, we
were aware of its complexities, and of the obstacles and
difficulties that lay ahead. Nevertheless, we had hoped
and prayed that by this point in time we would be much
further advanced in the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol. We had thought that by now peace would have
been restored and that national reconciliation would be

 

my Government's most pressing priority. Consequently,
from the very start we concentrated all of our efforts
towards that goal.

In spite of those efforts, the process has moved
forward slowly; the reasons for this are well known to the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) and to the members of this Council, which,
repeatedly and in a variety of resolutions and declarations,
have addressed those who have been hampering progress
towards a definite and lasting peace.

After the last meeting in Libreville between His
Excellency the President of the Republic and the leader of
the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola
(UNITA), significant progress was achieved in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, aside from the
effective cessation of hostilities, particularly regarding
military actions and the strengthening of the political
dialogue between my Government and UNITA.

At the risk of being excessively detailed, I would like
to underscore some of those achievements so far. All stages
of the withdrawal of the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA) to
the nearest quartering areas have been completed and troop
movements considered unreasonable by UNAVEM. III have
been corrected. The process of selecting and inducting
UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed Forces is already
under way. This process started with the incorporation of
60 UNITA officers, who participated in training seminars
for the selection and induction of UNITA forces, many of
whom are already working in quartering areas, including
Negaje, Ngove, Conduimbala and Vila Nova. The confining
to quarters of the rapid reaction police is already concluded.
The national police is now training personnel appointed by
UNITA who, in the framework of the Lusaka Protocol, will
provide physical security for the leaders of that
organization. Amnesty legislation has been adopted and
promulgated for all crimes committed in the armed conflict
after 31 May 1991. The President of the Republic has
already made a public statement to that effect, as requested
by the leadership of UNITA. The Meehens Corporation has
been hired to remove mines along roads and thus provide
security for the free circulation of goods and people. This
company has been working along the country's main roads
and railways. The Government has agreed to the opening of
15 quartering areas for UNITA forces in the province of in
Lunda Sul. The joint tasks between the Government and
UNITA teams have not yet been completed. Their aim is
to revise provisions of Angolan constitutional law.
Implementation of the programme to disarm the civilian
population has already begun. Although this is not the
Government's responsibility, it has supported the
transportation of UNITA forces to the quartering areas in
many ways.

These and other achievements could have been more
significant with greater cooperation from UNITA. We are
looking forward to 15 July, when generals who had left
the armed forces to join UNITA will return to their units.

In spite of these positive steps, the peace process is
still hampered by obstacles which, if they continue, might
entail further delays and even backsliding. We are
referring specifically to the quality of UNITA forces and
of the materiel sent to the quartering areas. After
successive appeals and procedures used by the UNITA
leadership, we came to realize that the quantity and
quality of weapons and war materiel delivered so far are
just a small part of what is available to UNITA's military
branch. We cannot conceive, for example, that only 1,721
kilogrammes of ammunition were available in the four
quartering areas already closed by the Joint Commission.

As a result, this exercise under UNAVEM's
supervision lacks credibility and is not tolerable. In
addition to being unacceptable, it breeds mistrust between
the two parties and weakens the peace process. The lack
of transparency of this process is reflected not only in the
slow pace of its implementation but also in the large
number of deserters and the quality of the men sent to the
quartering areas. According to figures provided by
UNAVEM. III, of the 52,850 men confined to quarters by
10 July, more than 6,000 had already deserted. Thousands
are children, and more than 18,000 have not surrendered
any weapons.

Those members who have monitored the issue of the
domestic Angolan conflict for some time will easily
realize that the types and weights of the weapons and the
quality of the troops that UNITA has delivered raise
questions about the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol, which calls for the withdrawal, quartering and
disarmament of all UNITA military forces. Accordingly,
it is incumbent upon the Council and UNAVEM. III to
take action that will help improve performance in the
quartering process, which UNAVEM. itself considers
unacceptable, thereby ensuring that the peace process will
become irreversible. In keeping with the Lusaka
agreements, we must underscore that the effective and full
quartering of the UNITA forces, including the laying
down of arms and technical means of war, is a sine qua
non condition for the smooth unification of the Angolan
Armed Forces and consequently for the implementation of

 

the political provisions relating to national reconciliation.
As a consequence, full transparency of this verification
process must be assured.

We are also concerned by the proliferation of armed
elements under UNITA command performing alleged law
enforcement roles in areas already vacated by UNITA
forces. This is a flagrant violation of the Lusaka Protocol.
Part II of annex 5 of the Protocol bans any means of
surveillance or law enforcement which is not specifically
allowed by law and by the relevant provisions of the
Bicesse Accords and the Lusaka Protocol.

As I stated at the outset, we are now reaching the
decisive juncture in the peace process of a country that has
not known peace for over 30 years. Today we have the
basic foundations for the creation of a democratic, united
and prosperous society where all political forces, regardless
of their differences, must play an important role. Creation
in the near future of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, including the invitation extended to the
UNITA leader by His Excellency the President, is
undeniably an expression of this principle and this desire.

By 30 July 1996, we should conclude the induction of
UNITA forces into the Angolan Armed Forces, followed by
the re-establishment of Government control over areas
currently controlled by UNITA and by the free and
unimpeded circulation of goods and persons throughout the
territory. At that point, UNITA will have regained its
political status as a legal political party; its members will
occupy seats at the National Assembly and it will
participate in the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation.

The accomplishment of these tasks requires further
strengthening of the climate of trust between the two
parties. I take this opportunity to reiterate the appeal made
to UNITA by His Excellency President Jose Eduardo dos
Santos:

"Trust the Government as an honest partner and
emulate with rigour and seriousness the positions
adopted thus far by the Government, strictly honouring
all the commitments from Bicesse and Lusaka".

At this crucial stage of the peace process, it is also
essential for Angola's neighbouring States to suspend any
negative actions that might reduce the chances of success.
The constant violations of Angolan territory by illegal
aliens and by foreign enterprises is an issue that must be
considered by the sanctions Committee of the Security
Council. Paragraph 19 of resolution 864 (1993) clearly
calls on all Member States, and particularly Angola's
neighbours, to maintain a posture conducive to peace in
our country, refraining from actions that may violate the
most elementary precepts of security of any nation.
Consequently, we appeal to the Security Council also to
act in accordance with its high responsibilities in this
area.
Social and economic stability in Angola requires the
social reintegration of the thousands of soldiers to be
demobilized beginning this month. This will prevent them
from turning to weapons again as a means to ensure their
survival, thus endangering peace and stability in our
nation. In view of the current economic crisis in our
country, my Government is not in a position to rise to
this challenge on its own. We therefore appeal to the
international community for assistance. Allow me here to
express our appreciation to the many Governments that
have shown their willingness to support these social
reintegration programmes, and to request that they start
their implementation in coordination with the
Government.

This year, 20,000 soldiers will be demobilized out of
a total of 67,000. Let me remind the Council that 40,000
soldiers are already demobilized as a result of the Bicesse
process and have not yet received any help in their
reintegration into civilian life. This large number of
military men will require major assistance from the
Government of Angola. We cannot allow all efforts
invested in the peace process to fail because we have not
been able to provide minimal assistance to those who, for
many years, were raised in a culture of war.

At the same time, the launching of economic
rehabilitation in the regions that have been hardest hit by
war will go far towards bringing about a climate of peace
and confidence for the thousands upon thousands of
refugees and displaced persons who were compelled to
leave their homes during the hostilities, but who will be
ready to go back as soon as the situation normalizes. In
this connection, special mention should be made of the
implementation of the demining programmes, many of
which are already under way, and of the efforts under the
community rehabilitation programme submitted last year
at Brussels. We would like to appeal to the Governments
and institutions that have pledged their financial support
to honour their commitments in order to ensure the full
accomplishment of the programme.

 

Allow me also to express the profound gratitude of the
people and Government of Angola to all nations that have
provided troops, personnel and materiel to UNAVEM. III,
and also to pay tribute to those who lost their lives to the
cause of peace in Angola. A particular word of recognition
goes to the members of the demining team from Uruguay
and Pakistan, who sustained injuries on 17 June in the
fulfilment of their mission.

As this process nears its conclusion, UNAVEM. III
will have to issue statements, as called for by its mandate.
We call upon the Security Council to send a special mission
to Angola as soon as possible, to assess the peace process
and to recommend measures appropriate to the situation,
before declaring the Lusaka Protocol fully implemented.

The draft resolution on which the Council is about to
vote today meets the requirements of the internal situation
on the ground. My Government will have no further
objection to agreeing to the extension of the mandate of
UNAVEM. III for another three months. My delegation
feels that this period is a reasonable one and will make it
possible to fulfil all the remaining tasks of the Lusaka
Protocol.

Finally, allow me to refer to the letter addressed to the
President of the Security Council, and through him, to its
members, by the Mission of Angola. It expresses the
concern of my Government regarding UNITA's
performance in incorporating its troops into the Angolan
Armed Forces. We see this as related to the military
situation and to the revision of some elements of Angola's
constitution: it is a last-minute attempt to use delaying
tactics to slow the peace process. The Council should give
particular attention to this matter, and should urge UNITA
to assume a truly constructive position.

