Mr. Pascoe: Ending the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and establishing an independent and viable
State of Palestine, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security, are long overdue. In a rapidly
changing regional context, serious progress towards
that goal is urgent. The deadlines that were set a year
ago with respect to resolving all permanent status
issues and completing the Palestinian State-building
agenda are upon us. However, despite continued efforts
to assist Israel and the Palestinians in finding a way
back to the negotiating table, the political deadlock
persists. Differences remain profound between the
parties regarding what terms should frame
negotiations, and mistrust is deepening.

The status quo is unsustainable and damaging to
both sides. In a stark reminder of the fragility of the
situation, the recent period witnessed a serious
escalation of violence marked by terrorist attacks
targeting several civilian vehicles and one military
vehicle in southern Israel on 18 August. The
coordinated attacks resulted in the death of eight
Israelis, including two soldiers and six civilians.
Egyptian security forces cooperated with the Israeli
Defense Forces (IDF) on their side of the border to
counter the attacks. However, five Egyptian security
personnel died in the operation.

Citing intelligence attributing the attacks to a
Palestinian group based in Gaza, Israel conducted 45
air strikes on Gaza that killed 19 Palestinians,
including three civilians. Thirty Palestinians, including
at least 10 militants, were also injured. The IDF also
conducted search operations in Hebron in the West
Bank, reportedly arresting about 120 Hamas members
2

and injuring 55 Palestinians. Gaza militants
indiscriminately fired more than 100 rockets and
projectiles into Israel, killing one Israeli civilian and
injuring 27.

The Secretary-General and the Quartet strongly
condemned the terror attacks. They also expressed their
concern at the risk of escalation and called for restraint
from all sides. The Secretariat provided an initial
briefing on these developments on 19 August. On
20 August, Israel conveyed regret over the Egyptian
deaths, which had heightened the tensions between the
two countries.

The Office of the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process was actively engaged and
supported important efforts to restore the calm out of
Gaza that had prevailed since April. Special
Coordinator Serry visited Cairo on 21 August to work
closely with the Egyptian Government in this regard
and met with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Chief of Intelligence. A fragile calm was restored
earlier this week, but we remain concerned by the risk
of escalation. In this context, we reiterate that the
cessation of hostilities is a key element of progress
towards the implementation of resolutions 1850 (2008)
and 1860 (2009). The militants' indiscriminate firing of
rockets towards civilian areas is unacceptable, and the
Secretary-General has consistently condemned such
acts. We reiterate the Secretary-General's call for all
sides to act with restraint.

Preserving calm is all the more important to give
ongoing diplomatic efforts aimed at resuming
meaningful negotiations a chance. The Secretary-
General has continued to encourage the parties to
overcome their differences and to support Quartet
engagement in this regard.

However, with no political breakthrough and with
Israeli settlement activity continuing, the Palestinian
leadership confirmed its intentions to approach the
United Nations in September. On 28 July, the
Palestinian Liberation Organization Executive
Committee announced its support for the leadership's
intention to go to the General Assembly and the
Security Council. On 4 August, the Arab Peace
Initiative Committee announced the Arab League's
plan to call on United Nations Member States to
recognize a Palestinian State within the 1967 lines,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and to move to
submit an application for full United Nations
11-48082
membership. The Committee confirmed its decision at
its meeting on 23 August. The Government of Israel
has reiterated its opposition to Palestinian action in the
United Nations. We continue to hope that the
international community will be able to shape a
legitimate and balanced way forward to help the parties
resume meaningful negotiations that will realize the
two-State solution.

We have consistently shared our assessment that
the Palestinian Authority's State-building agenda has
successfully laid the foundations of a Palestinian State,
notably in the key areas in which the United Nations
works with the Authority. Credible reforms have led to
tangible economic and security improvements. Those
achievements must be consolidated and bolstered by
genuine political prospects for Palestinian statehood to
be achieved in the course of substantive negotiations.

The Palestinian Authority also needs to have the
financial means to sustain its State-building and reform
agenda. Due to shortfalls in donor funding, the
Palestinian Authority is experiencing a serious fiscal
crisis and needs $250 million in additional
commitments immediately to meet its obligations. We
call on the donors to provide timely and generous
support.

In a development that is a source of serious
concern, the Government of Israel has announced a
series of new settlement expansions in the West Bank.
In total, some 5,200 units are planned in occupied East
Jerusalem. Another 277 units were also approved in the
West Bank settlement of Ariel - the largest number
approved outside East Jerusalem in a single settlement
by the current Government. The Secretary-General
reiterated that settlement activity in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, is contrary to international
law. On 16 August, the Quartet expressed great concern
at these announcements and reiterated its statement of
12 March 2010, which condemned a similar
announcement by the Government of Israel. The
Quartet also reaffirmed that unilateral action by either
party cannot prejudge the outcome of negotiations and
will not be recognized by the international community.

In a more positive development, on 2 August the
Israeli Supreme Court ordered the evacuation of the
illegal settlement outpost of Migron, and we look
forward to its implementation.

The intention of the Government of Israel to
relocate some 2,300 Bedouins living in Area C is also
11-48082

worrying. The land where this Bedouin community
lives has been allocated for the construction and
expansion of the Ma'ale Adumim bloc of settlements in
East Jerusalem. On 22 August, the Israeli High Court
of Justice rejected an appeal to reroute a section of the
barrier around the West Bank village of Al-Walajeh,
thus enabling construction on a route that risks
encircling the village and cutting it off from free access
both from East Jerusalem and from the rest of the West
Bank.

Additional tensions continue to arise from settler
violence, IDF incursions and ongoing restrictions on
movement and access. On 1 August, the IDF shot and
killed two Palestinians during a search-and-arrest
operation in the Qalandiya refugee camp. Five Israeli
soldiers were injured in that operation. While violent
attacks by settlers on Palestinians decreased during the
reporting period, several such incidents resulted in one
Palestinian child being injured and property damage,
while one settler was also injured. On 2 August, the
IDF issued restraining orders against 12 settlers from a
village south of Nablus who were suspected of so-
called price tag activities against Palestinians. The
Secretary-General has consistently called for
perpetrators of such incidents to be brought to justice.

As Muslims celebrate the month of Ramadan,
restrictions remain on access for prayers at the Al-Aqsa
mosque. The Israeli authorities initially eased access to
East Jerusalem for West Bank Palestinians, allowing
about 117,000 Palestinians to enter the city on the
second Friday of Ramadan. But it tightened restrictions
again last week. On 17 August, the Israeli authorities
extended the closure of Orient House and the Chamber
of Commerce in East Jerusalem pursuant to their
ongoing ban on Palestinian Government institutions in
the city. These actions are contrary to Israel's
obligations under the Road Map. As the Quartet
reiterated on 16 August, Jerusalem is a core issue that
must be resolved through negotiations.

The living conditions of the population of the
Gaza Strip remain a priority for the United Nations.
Imports into Gaza have increased by 12 per cent since
our last briefing. This is a step in the right direction.
However, restrictions remain in place, limiting
improvements in people's livelihoods, which have
deteriorated over the three years of closure. To address
Gaza's humanitarian needs and rebuild the foundations
of its economy, a comprehensive easing of the closure
3
is needed, along with a substantial improvement in the
security situation.

We reiterate that humanitarian activity is a
mainstay of assistance for over 1 million Gazans, and it
is key that humanitarian organizations be able to
exercise their functions unhindered and independently.
The Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
has helped to defuse tensions around the closing of a
medical non-governmental organization (NGO) in
Gaza over its refusal to allow in-house auditing by the
de facto Ministry of the Interior. We welcome the
reopening of this NGO on 14 August. However we are
concerned over new orders by the Gaza de facto
authorities that would require staff of civil society
groups to register with them to travel outside the Gaza
Strip in their official functions.

The 17 August decision of the de facto Ministry
of Education to prevent eight students from Gaza from
travelling to the United States on scholarships is also
of concern and goes contrary to the efforts of the
international community to help restore normalcy in
Gaza. In another disturbing event on 28 July, armed
men attacked and vandalized a United Nations facility
used for summer camps for children.

Israeli Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit has remained
in Hamas captivity since 25 June 2006. I call on his
captors to allow humanitarian access to him and to
release him without further delay. Indirect talks have
reportedly been held between Israel and the Gaza de
facto authorities, under Egyptian auspices, towards the
conclusion of a prisoner exchange deal, and we hope
an agreement can soon be reached.

Fatah and Hamas representatives continue to
meet on the implementation of the reconciliation
accord agreed in Cairo in May. We continue to support
reconciliation efforts within the framework of the
commitments of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
the positions of the Quartet and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

The reconciliation accord envisages that elections
will be held following the formation of a technocratic
Government of unity. On 22 August, President Abbas
issued a decree postponing local elections without
setting a new date, stating that conditions should first
be in place for the election commission to work in all
of the territory. The elections had been set for
22 October.
I would like to turn to the situation in Lebanon,
where a number of security incidents of concern
occurred. On 26 July, a convoy of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) was targeted
outside the city of Saida, injuring five peacekeepers.
This was the second such attack within two months,
which the Secretary-General strongly condemned. A
brief exchange of fire between the Lebanese Armed
Forces and Israel Defense Forces near the Wazzani
River took place on 1 August. The Council was briefed
on these incidents two days ago. Despite these events,
the situation in the UNIFIL area of operations
remained generally quiet and stable.

Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace continued
on an almost daily basis and in high numbers. In
addition, two explosions took place in Beirut on
29 July and 11 August in circumstances that remain
unclear. The latter killed two persons who were
reportedly handling an explosive device and injured
two others. On 13 August, there was a shooting
directed at the property of Member of Parliament
Suleiman Franjieh.

On 5 and 6 August, heavy clashes between armed
factions erupted in the Ain al-Hilweh Palestinian
refugee camp following an assassination attempt
against the military commander of Fatah in Lebanon. A
ceasefire was agreed upon after hours of fightng that
left a number of people injured. One school of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East was hit by a rocket-
propelled grenade, causing material damage to two
classrooms.

Against this background, during his visit to
Lebanon from 16 to 19 August, President Abbas
reaffirmed his position that the Palestinian refugees in
Lebanon "have no need for weapons, inside or outside
the camps, because they are protected by Lebanese
law". The President also inaugurated a new Palestinian
embassy in Beirut, marking the upgrading of the PLO's
diplomatic representation in Lebanon and his efforts to
seek Lebanon's support for the recognition of a
Palestinian State at the United Nations in September.

On 3 and 4 August, the Lebanese Parliament held
its first session since the formation of Prime Minister
Mikati's Government on 7 July. At that session, among
other items, the Parliament adopted a law that defines
the maritime zones under Lebanon's sovereignty.
11-48082
The work of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon has
continued and remains a major issue in Lebanon. On
9 August, the Lebanese authorities notified the Special
Tribunal that they were unable to arrest and transfer
those accused in the assassination of former Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri. On 18 August, the President of
the Special Tribunal ordered the public advertisement
of the indictment. The United Nations supports the
important work of the Special Tribunal and expects full
cooperation from the Government of Lebanon.

Allow me to turn briefly to events in Syria. I
know that Mr. Fernandez-Taranco briefed the Council
on 1 and 10 August. High Commissioner Pillay, Under-
Secretary-General Amos and I briefed the Council on
18 August, and I tried to present a short update to the
Council two days ago. The Secretary-General has
repeatedly urged President Assad to immediately end
violence against the Syrian people and to engage in
meaningful reform. Yet while he pledged to do so,
President Assad has not upheld that commitment. As
the Secretary-General said earlier this week, it is
troubling that he has not kept his word.

The Syrian security forces have continued to use
excessive and lethal force against the popular protests,
including in the provinces of Homs, Hamah, Dar'a,
Idlib and Dayr Az Zawr, as well as in and around
Damascus. Many civilians have been killed and
injured, and large-scale arbitrary arrests have
continued. The official Syrian media report that
security and military personnel have also lost their
lives over the past days.

In an interview on 21 August, President Assad
remained silent on the violence committed against
civilians, continuing to blame the violence on armed
attacks against the army, police and security posts. He
also outlined a timetable for the political reforms
announced earlier, including parliamentary elections in
11-48082
February 2012 and a revision of the Constitution.
However, the failure to rein in security forces
undermined the credibility of such announcements, and
the international community has remained quite
sceptical.

The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has issued a deeply disturbing report on
the widespread and systematic violations of human
rights since March, concluding that the scale and
nature of the abuse committed may amount to crimes
against humanity. We welcome the decision by the
Human Rights Council on Tuesday to establish an
international commission of inquiry, and hope that the
Syrian authorities will extend their full cooperation to
the commission.

As planned, we sent a United Nations team to
look at the overall humanitarian situation and to get a
better understanding of the humanitarian needs of the
population most affected by the violence in Syria. The
team was able to visit several sites across the country,
including rural Damascus, Horns, Tartus, Talkalakh,
Baniyas, Latakia, Idlib, Hamah and Aleppo. It has just
completed its visit today, and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will provide a
debriefing as needed, in the next few days.

Many world leaders, including those from the
region, and of course the Secretary-General, have
urged President Assad to immediately halt military
operations that are killing his own people. He must
heed the international community's appeal, and we call
upon him to do so without further delay.

