Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking Mr. Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia, and Mr. Smith, Director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, for their comprehensive briefings. The year 2020 is crucial for Somalia, as it embarks upon multisectoral reform, including the holding of universal suffrage elections, strengthening its security sector and promoting economic and social development. The Mutual Accountability Framework, agreed in October 2019, is important and ambitious. We hope for its continued implementation. In that connection, I would like to highlight three issues regarding the political, security, and humanitarian situations. First, it is necessary to resolve the political impasse between the Federal Government and the federal member states. The key national priorities, as set outin the Mutual Accountability Framework, require strong cooperation between the Federal Government and the federal member states. The two must engage in constructive dialogue to peacefully resolve all outstanding differences. Ending the political deadlock is essential to accelerating political progress, consensus- building, and reconciliation. We commend the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary- General, the African Union, the European Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to facilitate dialogue on how to achieve national priorities. We concur with the Secretary-General's view that the organization of elections in a timely and peaceful manner remains a priority for 2020. We therefore welcome the adoption of the electoral law and hope the 2020 electoral timeline can be met. Secondly, we remain deeply concerned about the ongoing threat posed by Al-Shabaab. We condemn all its recent attacks, including those employing improvised explosive devices in Afgooye and Mogadishu, and would like to express our deepest condolences to the families of the victims. We welcome the completion of a joint threat assessment of security conditions on the ground. It is necessary to continue assessing the implications of the planned drawdown of an additional 1,000 personnel of the African Union Mission in Somalia later this month in order to ensure that the security gains achieved thus far will not be reversed. We are encouraged by the Government's commitment to the implementation of the transition plan, including the continued military operations, force-generation efforts and institutional capacity-building. We would like to reiterate the importance of accelerated and coordinated international assistance to support force-generation and capacity-building. That is crucial to producing a well-trained and -equipped Somali security force that is eventually able to take over security responsibilities. Thirdly, it is important to alleviate the humanitarian situation in Somalia. Recent flooding has compounded the dire humanitarian situation, with an increasing number of people being displaced and in need of assistance. In this regard, we call on all international partners to provide the much-needed humanitarian relief and assistance so as to ensure the long-term recovery and resilience of the Somali people. Lastly, I commend the Federal Government for demonstrating leadership and determination in implementing its reform agenda while tackling multidimensional challenges. I wish to reaffirm Indonesia's respect for Somalia's sovereignty and territorial integrity and to pay the utmost tribute to the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and all actors working to ensure lasting peace and stability in Somalia.
