Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
deliver this statement on behalf of the co-penholders
that put forward resolution 2417 (2018), on conflict
and hunger, that is, C6te d'Ivoire, Kuwait, Sweden and
the Netherlands.

Tuesday's open debate (see S/PV.8264) on the
protection of civilians, which you organized, Madam
President, provided ample evidence of the timely nature
of our resolution, and of its necessity. As stated in the
report (8/2018/462) of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians, the number of food insecure
people is increasing, mainly due to armed conflict.
Recent reports from the World Food Programme and
the United Natiions Food and Agriculture Organization
confirm that deeply concerning trend.

Today's resolution is a landmark text, wherein
the Security Council for the first time unequivocally
condemns the use of starvation as a method of warfare.
It also clearly acknowledges the fact that conflict can
lead to increased food insecurity, and recognizes the
need to break the Vicious cycle between armed conflict
and food insecurity. Most important, the text places the
most vulnerable people in conflict situations firmly on
the agenda of the Council. Innocent civilians suffering
from hunger due to the consequences of war are at
the heart of the text, as is respect for international
humanitarian law and accountability.

I would like to highlight three important aspects
of the resolution. First, with regard to early warning,
the Secretary-General will brief the Council whenever
situations occur where people are severely food insecure
as a consequence of war. Secondly, on humanitarian
assistance, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access
must be granted, in line with international humanitarian
law. Thirdly, with regard to utilizing its toolkit, the
Council can consider sanctioning, as appropriate, those
who unlawfully deny humanitarian access or starve
civilians. It can also task peacekeeping operations with
facilitating humanitarian access.

It is truly an encouraging sign that the Council has
managed to agree unanimously on some of the basic
norms of humanity. We would like to thank all Council
members for their genuinely constructive engagement
throughout the negotiation process. Today we managed
to take another significant step towards making the use
of starvation as a method of warfare a crime of the past.

