Mr. Lambert (Belgium) (spoke in French): My
delegation fully associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union. We wish to offer a few additional
comments to highlight Belgium's support with respect
to this matter, which is one of great importance to us.

Belgium welcomes the Security Council's recent
adoption of resolutions 1882 (2009), 1888 (2009) and
1889 (2009), which in our view reflect increased
political will to reduce the devastating impact of armed
conflict on civilians. In that connection, Belgium
thanks the Human Rights Council for its adoption in
October of its resolution 12/5, on protecting the human
rights of civilians in armed conflict.

Belgium believes that Security Council resolution
1894 (2009), adopted today, marks a significant step
forward in a process the Council began 10 years ago
when it added protection of civilians in armed conflict
to its agenda.
Although over the past 10 years the United
Nations has undeniably made real progress on the
protection of civilians, civilians remain the principal
victims of conflict. Hence, a great deal remains to be
done. We therefore hope that today's resolution will
make it possible to genuinely strengthen the protection-
of-civilians portion of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and to implement those mandates on the
ground. The study recently prepared by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is a useful
tool for helping us reach that goal.

Belgium attaches great importance also to the
safety, security and freedom of movement of
humanitarian personnel. We were particularly pleased
that that aspect of the protection of civilians was more
fully reflected in today's resolution.

Another requirement in the sphere of the
protection of civilians is the fight against impunity.
That challenge must be taken up at both the national
and the international levels. Here, Belgium stresses the
fundamental role of the International Criminal Court.

Finally, I recall that Belgium attaches great
importance to the principle of the responsibility to
protect, for which the General Assembly has just
reaffirmed its support and which is intended to protect
civilians from the most serious crimes: genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

