Mr. Eltinay (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): In
addressing the Council for the first time this month, I have
the pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, first, on your
presidency of the Council in the month of February and,
secondly, on the wisdom and dynamism with which you
have performed the duties of President. Allow me also,

 

through you, to congratulate Ambassador Cardenas,
Permanent Representative of Argentina, on his
outstanding leadership of the work of the Council in
January.

Today we are discussing a matter of the greatest
importance for the peoples whose fate it has been to
become victims of the colonialism of foreign settlers. The
world has witnessed a number of cases of attempted
colonialism by settlers, but those cases disappeared,
thanks to international resolve and the resolve of peoples.
Only the Israeli settlement colonies have remained a case
apart, defying international will and all the instruments
and principles at the foundation of international relations.

The practices of Israel as an occupying Power in the
Arab territories seem to stem from Israel's conviction that
such practices are the legitimate right of an occupying
Power. On the pretext of protecting Israeli security, these
practices violate all instruments and humanitarian
principles. Supported either overtly or covertly by certain
Powers, Israel has defied all the resolutions of
international legitimacy adopted by the United Nations,
thus enjoying an immunity that seems to erase its
obligations under any resolutions or principles.

There can be no doubt that international instruments
and the resolutions of the Organization have rejected the
annexation of territory by force and have prohibited
changing the nature of occupied land in the interest of the
occupying Power. This includes the building of settlement
colonies, which is one aspect of colonialism through
settlers. The Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 is clear
in expressing this principle, but the Israeli occupying
authorities do not take into account such instruments or
conventions except within the framework of their own
interests. Thus, they blatantly defy international
humanitarian law and all resolutions having international
legitimacy, including resolution 465 (1980) and the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the latest of
which is resolution 36/49 C.

The pretext that the protection of the security of the
State of Israel allows everything prohibited by
international instruments and principles is not acceptable.
It is not surprising that this has become the only pretext,
for Israel has no other justification for continuing to build
and expand its settlements. We wonder, as do others,
what the relationship is between implanting immigrants
from other countries in the midst of a people whose
territories have been occupied and surrounding their cities
and towns with such settlements.
 

Ever since the signing of the Declaration of Principles
between the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and
Israel in September 1993, Israel has attempted by all
possible means to use the peace process to its own
expansionist ends and has violated many of the provisions
of the agreements. For example, it has not respected the
deadline for redeploying its forces in the occupied
territories and initiating negotiations concerning the future
of the settlement colonies. The settlements have been
expanded, and new ones have been built, around the city of
Jerusalem, which is supposed to become the subject of
negotiations at a later stage.

It cannot be denied that Israel wants peace in
exchange for nothing at all on its part. For Israel, peace
means imposing its own criteria. It does not really mean a
comprehensive and just peace, which is the only acceptable
kind. When Israel speaks of a wave of violence, it is
attempting to hide the truth. Israel's prevarication in the
peace process and its obduracy over accepting legitimate
resolutions reveal its intentions. The State terrorism
practised by Israel reveals its intentions towards the
Palestinian people, whom it wants to liquidate and to
prevent from establishing its independent State, with
Jerusalem as its capital.

Our delegation wishes to reaffirm its full belief in a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace, which cannot
become a reality as long as Israel continues to view the
whole matter so narrowly, and in the absence of any serious
steps towards such a peace. Israel should respect all
resolutions, and we call upon the Security Council to adopt
practical measures to ensure the implementation of its
resolution 465 (1980) and to guarantee that Israel meets its
commitment to cease building settlements and changing the
demographics of the occupied Arab territories.

