Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): The Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic, in recent
consultations, made a very pertinent remark. He said,
'UN OMIG may be a small operation, but it is an operation
of great importance: We fully concur with that evaluation.
The mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) is special in that it is built upon close
cooperation with the peace-keeping forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) in the area.
The stakes involved in this joint undertaking are high.

We are deeply concerned about the situation as
described in the report of the Secretary-General. We
deplore the lack of progress in the political process, as well
as the standstill regarding the return of refugees.

The resolution just adopted by the Council is an
appropriate response to this situation. It calls upon both
parties to reach substantive progress in the political
negotiations. The parties must understand that UNOMIG's
presence is predicated upon a viable political process.

In this context, I would like to underline that Germany
accepts that the Abkhaz side too has understandable and
legitimate concerns. We continue to be willing to listen to
the Abkhaz case. At the same time, it must be clear that a
political solution must be based on the principles contained
in the relevant resolutions of this Council, in particular on
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Georgia.

With regard to the return of refugees, it is our
opinion that the Abkhaz side has to a large extent failed
to honour its commitments. The resolution therefore calls
upon the Abkhaz side to accelerate this process
significantly. We would hope that the authorities in
Sukhumi would be able to accept timetables to this effect.
We note that in November the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy and the Special Representative of the
President of the Russian Federation suggested that the
Abkhaz side accept the return of 3,000 returnees until the
beginning of January- that is, in the space of
approximately six weeks.

The resolution renews UNOMIG's mandate for a
period of four months. At the same time, it foresees a
thorough review of the situation before the mandate
expires. We hope that the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy, as well as the Representatives of the
Russian Federation, will underline in their contacts with
the parties, that progress in all areas must be achieved
during the coming months.

For the time being, my delegation believes that all
possibilities under the existing mandates of UNOMIG and
the CIS peace-keeping force should be examined in order
to improve the situation on the ground. We attach
particular importance to operative paragraph 7 of the
resolution.

Finally, we note with satisfaction the willingness
expressed by the Russian Federation to brief the Council
more frequently on the operation of the CIS
peace-keeping force in the area. Greater transparency can
only be helpful in achieving our common goals.

