Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
for his briefing. I also thank Foreign Minister Dacie
and Ambassador Citaku for their statements.

Since 1999, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has made
critical contributions to assisting the people of Kosovo
in developing multiethnic democratic institutions
to uphold the nation's rule of law, while respecting
the rights of all of its citizens. We thank Special
Representative Tanin and his long line of predecessors
for their dedication and service to that effort. But as
we hear today, and as we too often convene in this
Chamber on this topic, we must acknowledge what we
acknowledge every three months. UNMIK's mandate
has largely been accomplished. The only reason we
continue to meet with such regularity has nothing to do
with the security situation in Kosovo. It has to do with
politics.

Let us be clear. Now is the time to seriously reduce
the footprint of the United Nations Mission. We have
some very talented staff in UNMIK whose skills are
desperately needed in other missions. There is no need
for all of them to remain in Kosovo. In that regard,
it is appropriate to reduce UNMIK's budget, and we
welcome the reduction in UNMIK's budget request. The
Council seems stuck in the past, needlessly convening
here every three months, and we repeat our call to
extend the Secretary-General's reporting period on
UNMIK from every three months to every six months.

Pristina and Belgrade are rightly focused on the
dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU). They
now need to redouble their efforts to normalize relations
through those discussions. European Union High
Representative Mogherini's continued leadership is
critical to advancing that important effort. Discussions
without implementation, however, will lead nowhere.
For the sake of regional stability and Kosovo and Serbia's
EU aspirations, we call upon Pristina and Belgrade
to fully implement the commitments they have made
throughout the dialogue talks, including those made in
August 2015 regarding telecommunications, energy,
freedom of movement and the establishment of the
association/community of Serb majority municipalities
without any more delay.

We were pleased to witness the peaceful democratic
transition of power from former Kosovo President
Jahjaga to President Thaci, underscoring Kosovo's
democratic maturation. We also applaud the well-
managed collection of ballots in Kosovo for Serbian
elections, supported by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. That is exactly the kind
of cooperation needed between the two countries to
improve the lives and protect the rights of their people.

Kosovo has made some strides. The signing between
Kosovo and the European Union of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement and the decision of the
European Commission to support Visa liberalization
are enormous milestones signaling confidence in
Kosovo's path towards European integration. Those
are significant developments that have the potential to
meaningfully impact the economy and the lives of the
people of Kosovo.

We also witnessed an extraordinary moment in
April. The participation of Kosovo athletes in the
European Judo Championships, a competition hosted
in Kazan, Russia, was appropriately a source of great
pride, and all the more so when Kosovo judo competitor
Majlinda Kelmendi took the gold medal home to Kosovo.
It was a powerful and inspiring moment of victory for
a country that deserves it. Her victory, as well as the
decision ofthe Union of European Football Associations
and, just last Friday, the Federation Internationale de
Football Association to accept Kosovo's participation
will inspire Kosovo's young people and are wonderful
examples of the change that has taken place. After
years of isolation, Kosovo's athletes can indeed pursue
their dreams and do so as proud representatives of
their country.

On the economy, more must be done. While
Kosovo's Government has adopted some pro-growth
economic policies, there is still serious work to be
done on the economic issues that continue to hold
Kosovo back, including corruption and unemployment.
Specifically, Kosovo should implement e-procurement;
it should be more transparent about ongoing corruption
cases in the civil service, and it should pass legislative
amendments to ensure that political appointees who are
convicted of corruption do not get to retain positions of

power. Stronger policies and actions will result in less
corruption, and less corruption in Kosovo, as in any
country, will lead to more opportunities for all.

As we have discussed here in so many different
contexts, law enforcement cooperation across borders
is an essential component of any viable strategy to
combat terrorism and counter organized crime. That
is especially true in the Balkans. Kosovo's police
continue to demonstrate their professionalism and
capabilities, in cooperation with their neighbours and
the international law enforcement community, but for
too long, Kosovo's police have been excluded from the
international community of police. It is critical that
Kosovo fully integrate into that community, including
the International Criminal Police Organization.
Including Kosovo in our collective effort to counter
common threats does more than benefit Kosovo. It
serves the entire Balkans region and all ofus worldwide.

Once again, the United States would like to thank
Kosovo for its contributions to the global fight against
terrorism and efforts to counter the scourge of foreign
terrorist fighters. Kosovo's work through its national
strategy to counter violent extremism and its law
criminalizing foreign terrorist fighters are important
contributions to that effort, rendering all the more
offensive and counter-productive - I would say - the
recent rhetoric of some officials in the region suggesting
that recognizing Kosovo is akin to recognizing the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.

In closing, let me direct some words to my
colleagues, representatives of States Members of
the United Nations. A minority of them have not yet
recognized Kosovo. The United States urges them to
consider taking steps to better integrate the citizens of
that young country into the international community. It
is the right thing to do, it is in line with Charter of the
United Nations, and it will serve us all. Small steps,
such as partnering with Kosovo through INTERPOL
and other organizations, is in all of our interests and
will serve well our collective efforts to advance peace
and security.

