Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): Since the Polish
delegation associated itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union by the representative of
Ireland, I would only like to briefly comment on the
issues which are of particular importance to my
delegation.

Like other members of the international community,
we too are gravely concerned about the situation in
Burundi. The future of that country is at stake, as is the
peace and security of the region as a whole. This is a real
emergency. The time has come for the Burundi leaders to
find their way to peace, democracy and security. We urge
them to start immediately meaningful political dialogue.
It has to address the very roots of the conflict, which, as
the Secretary-General rightly observed in his report, is not
susceptible to a military solution. All political forces in
Burundi and all segments of the society have to be given
a seat at the negotiating table.

May I confirm the support of the Polish delegation
for the regional leaders, the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), and former President Julius Nyerere, who have
already displayed patience and skill in their efforts to
facilitate the search for a political solution in Burundi. My
delegation also wishes to declare its support for the work
of the United States special envoy and that of the special
representative of the European Union. We hope that the

 

parties in Burundi will be willing to profit from that form
of international assistance.

We urge the leaders in Burundi to declare an
immediate cease-fire and to put an end to the continuing
violence in the country. Let me express, as we have on
many previous occasions, our deep sympathy and
compassion for the people of Burundi, who are paying
dearly for their leaders having been, so far, unable to speak
one to another. The humanitarian situation in Burundi
continues to cause us considerable concern. The parties to
the conflict should be aware of their responsibility for the
peoples' lives and well-being.

This is an important debate. We are convinced that the
views expressed in this Chamber will guide us in our
search for the best response to the situation in Burundi.

