Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I join my colleagues
in thanking today's briefers for their valuable
presentations. I have three brief points to highlight.

First, the security situation is deeply concerning
to say the least. Ukraine strongly condemns the armed
clashes that took place on Monday in Gogrial state,
which involved local communities. A cattle dispute was
transformed into a full-scale armed battle, during which
a number of people were killed and many more wounded.
That serves to underline the fact that the situation in
South Sudan remains extremely fragile, even in areas
that were previously considered peaceful. We took note
of the fact that, in response to the incident, President
Kiir declared a three-month state of emergency in some
parts of the country. He also ordered the establishment
of an investigation committee. It is important to ensure
that those involved in the killings are held accountable.

We are no less concerned about the recent reports
that Government troops have begun their military
advance towards the stronghold of the position in
Pagak. Armed clashes between the two sides in
neighbourhoods of the city have already resulted in
thousands of civilians fleeing their homes.

As to my second point, on the political process, we
have been closely following the ongoing consultations
in the region on how to advance peace in South
Sudan. We welcome the conclusion of the recently
held extraordinary session of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development Council of Ministers on
South Sudan, which adopted guidelines to spearhead
the revitalization of the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan and the road map towards
the high-level revitalization forum.

It is not the first time that we expect the parties
to demonstrate, once and for all, real goodwill towards
reaching an agreement on the restoration of the
permanent ceasefire and to start preparations, with
a realistic timeline, for the holding of democratic
elections. Unless that process is all-inclusive, it has no
chance of succeeding.
My last point is with regard to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). We lament that
obstructions to the work of UNMISS and humanitarian
organizations work are continuing. Those obstructions
negatively affect the Mission's ability to effectively
implement crucially important tasks mandated by the
Security Council. The Mission and humanitarian actors
must have unhindered access to the affected areas in
order to help those in need, in particular in the areas
affected by the recent armed clashes. Ukraine remains
convinced that the Security Council should speak with
one voice. It has to continue to be engaged with the
Government of South Sudan, both collectively and
bilaterally, in order to remove impediments UNMISS
operations and the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force. We have no doubt that such a
deployment is in the best interests of the Government if
it genuinely seeks peace in the country.

