Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Republic of Senegal for convening this
important open debate on water, peace and security,
in connection with the agenda item "Maintenance of
international peace and security", and for submitting
a concept note (S/2016/969, annex) on the topic. This
issue is equally important for the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The international community, including the Security
Council, has increasingly been paying attention to the
protection of natural resources in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding.

Water is indispensable for the survival of
humankind. Attacks against, and limitations of
access to, water resources during armed conflicts are
frequently used as a method of warfare, including with
a View to starving civilian populations or changing the
demographic composition of a territory by displacing
people or preventing them from returning to their
homes and properties.

International humanitarian law provides for the
protection of access to water in the context of the
limitations imposed on military operations during
armed conflicts. It also regulates the use of water
resources and access to water in occupied territories.
The principle of permanent sovereignty over natural
resources also applies to occupied territories.
Furthermore, it is recognized that the right to clean
drinking water and sanitation is a human right,
bringing into operation the relevant international legal
instruments. It is important to consistently stress the
critical need for the implementation by all Member
States of international law applicable to the protection
of the environment in areas affected by armed conflict,
in line with their legal responsibilities.

The continued aggression by Armenia against
Azerbaijan has led to the seizure of almost 20 per cent
of the sovereign territory of my country. It has claimed
the lives of tens of thousands of people, ruined cities
and livelihoods and resulted in the forcible expulsion
of more than 1 million Azerbaijanis from their homes
and properties. It has also had a devastating impact on
the environment, with destroyed forests, burned and
degraded soil and polluted water resources.

Since the beginning of the aggression, the armed
forces of Armenia have deliberately employed methods
and means of warfare to cause widespread, long-term
and severe damage to the environment of Azerbaijan,
includingitsoccupiedterritories,andtodeprivehundreds
of thousands of Azerbaijani citizens of water resources.
The Sarsang reservoir - which was built in 1976 to
supply drinking water to more than 500,000 people in
the Upper and Lower Karabakh areas of Azerbaijan and
irrigation water to more than 100,000 hectares of fertile
land in the six districts of the Republic - has been
under Armenian military occupation since 1993. The
current technical condition of the Sarsang dam poses
a serious threat to approximately 400,000 Azerbaijani
citizens living downstream from it.

In its resolution 2085 (2016), adopted on 26 January
2016, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe described Armenia's actions as environmental
aggression aimed at creating humanitarian and
environmental problems for the citizens of Azerbaijan.
The Assembly warned ofthe serious threats ofa disaster
and a humanitarian crisis that the state of disrepair
of the Sarsang dam posed to the whole area. In view
of that urgent humanitarian problem, the Assembly
demanded Armenia's immediate withdrawal from the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan and and that it stop
using water resources as tools of political influence or
instruments of pressure to its benefit. There is evidence
of deliberate transboundary pollution in rivers from
tailings originating in Armenia, which crosses the
international border of Azerbaijan and ends up in its
farmlands and forests.

Armenia bears full responsibility for its breaches
of international law, including those that have caused
damage to the environment of my country. That and
Armenia's persistent refusal to start meaningful peace
negotiations and its attempts to escalate the situation in
the conflict zone once again confirm the need for urgent
and effective action to invoke Armenia's responsibility
through targeted efforts by the international community,
which would bring an end to the impunity enjoyed by
the aggressors and ensure the liberation of the Nagorno
Karabakh region and other occupied territories of
Azerbaijan from the Armenian occupation.

There can be no durable peace if the environment
that sustains livelihoods is destroyed, polluted and
barbarically exploited. It is critical to protect the
environment in peacetime and during war and to
cooperate in combating environmental crimes and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources.

