Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I too
welcome the presence of the Secretary-General at
today's meeting.

The situation in Gaza is of grave concern to my
Government, as it is to the entire international
community. My Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary
have been in regular contact with the Government of
Israel, with the Palestinian Authority and with partners
in the Arab world. And, as my French colleague noted,
European Union foreign ministers met yesterday and
set out the steps that we in the European Union believe
need to be taken to address this crisis.
One thing is clear: it has to be brought quickly to
an end. The cost in terms of civilian lives is simply
unacceptable. To achieve that we need to see four
steps.

We need to see an immediate and permanent
ceasefire. Hamas must ensure a complete and
unconditional end to the rocket attacks into Israel that
triggered this crisis. And Israel must cease its military
strikes, which have continued for too long and which
have caused many civilian casualties.

Secondly, we need urgent action to restore
supplies of food, fuel and medicine to the population of
the Gaza Strip. That means opening up the crossings
into Gaza to allow the entry of those supplies, and it
means ensuring that the supplies can be distributed
properly within the Gaza Strip. Israel must meet its
humanitarian obligations, and the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East will, as always, have a vital role to play and
will almost certainly need more support.

Thirdly, we need to see the crossings into Gaza
reopen on a sustainable basis. The European Union
stands ready to help in that effort, as it did after the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access. Alongside
the reopening of the legitimate crossings, there must
also be action to clamp down on the illegal smuggling
trade across the Egypt-Gaza border, which militants
have exploited to bring more weapons into Gaza. There
must also be a new effort towards Palestinian
reconciliation under the leadership of President Abbas.
We believe that steps along those line will contribute to
a durable ceasefire.

And fourthly, the parties and the entire
international community must reinvigorate the
collective efforts to achieve peace in the Middle East.
Resolution 1850 (2008), which the Council adopted
only a few weeks ago, mapped the way forward. It
highlighted the importance of both the Annapolis
process and the Arab Peace Initiative. We need a
comprehensive approach, aimed at a two-State
solution, which allows a secure Israel and a viable
Palestinian State to live side by side in peace and
security.

The current crisis is yet another reminder that
there can be no military solution to the problems of the
Middle East. The only way forward is through a
political solution based on that common vision.

The Security Council has an important role to
play in setting out the steps that need to be taken by the
parties and in giving authority to a durable ceasefire.
We will study the draft resolution circulated by our
Libyan colleagues on behalf of the Arab Group. For a
resolution of the Security Council to secure broad
support, it will need to reflect the responsibilities of all
the parties and contribute to a durable ceasefire. The
United Kingdom will work for agreement along those
lines.

