Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): We
welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2043
12-30478
(2012), which establishes the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria, with a mandate of
monitoring the cessation of violence and the full
implementation of the Joint Special Envoy's six-point
proposal. After so many months of obstruction, Syria
must understand the unanimous message being sent by
the international community as well as the meaning of
its commitments to put an end to an intolerable
situation.

One week ago, we adopted a resolution providing
for the deployment of an advance observation mission
(resolution 2042 (2012)). After 13 months of senseless,
bloody repression, which has produced more than
11,000 dead and has destabilized the entire region, a
strengthened mission is absolutely essential. It should
be deployed as soon as possible.

The adoption of today's resolution, however,
should not lead us to forget that the situation on the
ground remains worrying owing to the refusal of
Damascus to genuinely meet its commitments. As the
Secretary-General emphasized in his letter to the
Council last Thursday (S/2012/238), the Syrian
authorities have not implemented the measures to be
immediately put in place, as they committed to the
Joint Special Envoy to do. They Syrian army has only
given the impression of having retreated.
Bombardment and firing with heavy weapons
continues.

The deployment of the first observers in Syria has
in no way changed the regime's lethal behaviour. Homs
and Idlib continue to pay the heavy price of unbridled
repression. In Dar'a and Duma, snipers are continuing
their heinous deeds. Throughout the entire country, as
it has done for 13 months, the regime is continuing its
bloody repression of demonstrations, to carry out
torture, arbitrary arrests, forced disappearances and
sexual violence. The humanitarian urgency is greater
than ever. By its daily nefarious actions the Syrian
regime is violating the decisions of the Security
Council and demonstrating its contempt for it, as well
as for the Joint Special Envoy and, more generally, the
entire international community.

Against that backdrop, we know that we are
taking a risk in voting for today's resolution. We
believe that Mr. Annan's plan is a last opportunity for
peace that we should not miss. That is the reason that
France supported the adoption of resolution 2043
12-30478
(2012). We did so with determination and without
illusions.

As the Secretary-General has said, in order to
fully carry out its mandate, this Mission should be
provided with significant personnel, who should be
deployed as soon as possible to cover all the regions
affected by the developments. The observers must have
full freedom of movement. Any obstruction by the
Syrian authorities is to be reported to the Security
Council. In implementation of resolution 2043 (2012),
the Syrian authorities must ensure the security of
observers while guaranteeing that there is no hindrance
to their deployment throughout the country, in their
contacts with the population or in their
communications; nor are there to be any reprisals of
any sort against the population. In that regard, I should
like to underscore that the use of air transport is
absolutely crucial to the success of the Mission. It is
only under those conditions that the observers will be
able to effectively carry out their duties. France will
remain vigilant vis-a-vis its demand for Syria's full
cooperation with the observation Mission.

I would like to recall that our goal in deploying
the Mission is not just an end to repression; above all,
it is the launching of a political transition in Syria
towards a democratic system, so that the Syrian people
can at last freely choose their destiny. Both of those
must move ahead in tandem. We can wait no longer.
More civilians are dying with each passing day.

The observers must be deployed now and must be
able to work without obstruction. Violence must stop.
The Annan plan must be comprehensively
implemented, in particular when it comes to the
freedom to demonstrate, which must be fully observed.
We will judge the Government of Syria on its actions.
The observers should be able to tell us whether Syria's
obligations are properly being met. Were that not to be
the case, we will have to consider other options,
including possible sanctions available to the Security
Council and the international community.

