Mr. Smith: It is a great pleasure and an honour to
have been invited to make this statement before the
Security Council. It gives me the opportunity, early in
my tenure as Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
to express my appreciation for the confidence and trust
that you, the members of the Council, have shown in
me, in approving my appointment to this position.

On 10 December 2007, the Council adopted
resolution 1787 (2007), which extended the mandate of
CTED until 31 March 2008 and which requested me, in
consultation with Council members, to recommend
changes to the organizational plan of the Executive
Directorate. I duly carried out that review of the
Directorate's organization and methods of work,
consulting with all the members of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, the wider United Nations
membership, CTED staff, other relevant United
Nations agencies and experts outside the system.

I presented a revised version of the organizational
plan to the Committee on 24 January 2008, where it
was subsequently endorsed and forwarded to the
Security Council. It is now before the Council in
document S/2008/80, dated 8 February 2008.

When the Council adopted resolution 1373
(2001) on 28 September 2001, following the heinous
attack on the World Trade Center in this city two weeks
earlier, it was underlining for the whole world the
threat that terrorism poses to us all. It also set out in
that resolution the measures that all countries needed to
take to combat that threat, including criminalizing
terrorist acts, denying terrorists safe haven and
financial resources, preventing terrorists from crossing
borders and increasing cooperation with each other in
order to prevent terrorist attacks and bring perpetrators
to justice. All of those elements of resolution 1373
(2001) remain critical to addressing that threat and that
resolution remains as relevant today as it was six and a
half years ago.

At the same time, it is worth noting that
considerable progress has been made. Most countries
in the world have now criminalized terrorism. We have
seen hundreds of new ratifications of the key counter-
terrorism conventions and protocols, and there has
08-27612
been an almost unprecedented level of international
exchange of information and cooperation among
relevant agencies across borders, with the purpose of
disrupting planned terrorist attacks and enabling the
arrest and prosecution of those engaged in terrorism.

Given those developments, the need today is less
to ensure that countries understand the seriousness of
the challenge and more to ensure that they have the
capacity and the expertise to implement the counter-
terrorism measures set out in resolution 1373 (2001).
To put it another way, these days the Counter-
Terrorism Committee tends to spend less time
establishing whether countries have put in place
appropriate legislation and counter-terrorism
machinery, and more time evaluating how effective
their border control arrangements, their counter-
terrorism coordination machinery and their law
enforcement capabilities are. In this process, we have
become more aware of the capacity, resource and
infrastructural constraints that are impeding full
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) in particular
countries and regions.

The general progress made in the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) was part of the background
for my review of CTED's organizational plan. At the
same time, that review was very much informed by
three specific priorities that were repeatedly raised
with me in the course of my consultations with
members of the Council and the wider United Nations
membership. The first of these is the consistency of our
judgements across various countries and regions -
something that is critical to the credibility of all our
work. The second is facilitation of technical assistance.
If we are to add real value to countries' counter-
terrorism efforts, we need to be able to find solutions
to the vulnerabilities that we identify. And the third is
communication. There is clearly a need to explain,
particularly to the wider United Nations membership,
what we do and how we can help countries in their
efforts to confront terrorism.

Let me say a little about the specific proposals in
the revised organizational plan and how they address
those concerns. The principal organizational change to
CTED is the establishment, within the Assessment and
Technical Assistance Office, of five cross-cutting
functional groups in the areas of, respectively,
technical assistance; terrorist financing; border control,
arms trafficking and law enforcement; general legal
issues; and issues raised by resolution 1624 (2005), as
08-27612

well as the human rights aspects of counter-terrorism.
Those groups have been meeting regularly since their
establishment and are already producing useful
revisions of strategy, in the case of the technical
assistance group, and revised criteria for harmonizing
technical judgements about the implementation of
particular elements of resolution 1373 (2001), in the
case of the other groups.

Additionally, two smaller units have been
created: one, a quality control unit to review
documents before they leave the Executive Directorate
and to ensure that they are consistent in style and
format; and the other, a communications and outreach
unit to develop more proactive communications
strategies. Both of those units have been working
actively over the past few weeks and are having a
positive impact on the work of the Directorate.

As regards our methods of work, the revised
organizational plan suggests several innovations. First,
it proposes a more flexible approach to visits to
countries, to allow for more focused visits tailored to
the needs and situation of the country concerned.
Secondly, it proposes a more comprehensive
engagement with donors, the better to match their
capabilities and programmes with the vulnerabilities
identified in our dialogue with countries. Thirdly, it
suggests that CTED become more actively involved in
the work of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force - a proposal that simply
recognizes that implementing the requirements of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) implements,
at the same time, most part of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. Finally, it suggests greater effort to
strengthen collaboration and cooperation with the
experts of the Security Council Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004). It
also highlights the usefulness of strengthened relations
with international, regional and subregional
organizations.

I am confident that implementing those changes
in the structure and work of CTED will improve the
credibility and usefulness of our work in future.

Let me now mention two particularly significant
pieces of work on which we are currently engaged.
First, we are close to finalizing the 192 Preliminary
Implementation Assessments - or PIAs - one for
every Member of the United Nations. This is a new and
innovative tool that will greatly enhance our dialogue
3
with Member States on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). Some 160 of these have
already been adopted by the Committee and sent to the
capitals of the States concerned.

Secondly, we are putting the finishing touches to
a revision of "Survey of the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)" - a
document in which, I know, the Committee and this
Council have taken considerable interest. That survey
looks at how countries in all regions and subregions
across the globe are proceeding in their counter-
terrorism efforts generally, where they are
encountering difficulties and what gaps and
vulnerabilities remain to be addressed in particular
regions. I am hopeful that members will find it a
valuable diagnostic tool to inform consideration of
what next steps should be taken to address the ongoing
threat of global terrorism.

The appalling bombing of the United Nations
offices in Algiers on 11 December 2007 serves as a
sober reminder that, notwithstanding the positive
efforts we have collectively made, terrorism continues
to be a serious threat to us all, and it continues to
evolve and to manifest itself in new and dangerous
ways. Member States have to do more to address this
threat, and we, the United Nations, have to do a better
job to help them in that endeavour. It is my hope that,
with the renewal of CTED's mandate and the
implementation of the proposals set out in the revised
organizational plan, the Directorate will be able to
assist the Security Council, through the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, to make an appropriate
contribution to this collective global effort.

