Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): Italy is shocked and dismayed
by the news that Srebrenica has been overrun by the
Bosnian Serb forces. In our opinion, this event marks a
major turning point in the Bosnian crisis. It constitutes a
flagrant violation of the Agreement of 18 April 1993,
brings grave new suffering to the already sorely tried
civilian population, and unacceptably humiliates the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and the
role of pacification and humanitarian assistance it is so
unselfishly trying to perform in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This is why yesterday, in our Parliament, the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Italy, Mrs. Susanna Agnelli, expressed
her firm condemnation of the Bosnian Serb offensive.

In this difficult moment, I wish to express my
Government's full solidarity with the UNPROFOR forces,
particularly with the courageous Dutch soldiers operating
in the Srebrenica territory, sharing the hardships of the
civilian population they are protecting and facing
overwhelmingly superior forces. They are doing so in
particularly distressing psychological conditions, since a
large number of their fellow soldiers are still being held
hostage by the Bosnian Serbs.

 

In these circumstances, the Security Council cannot
remain inactive. It must send a clear and firm signal to the
Bosnian parties and particularly to the Bosnian Serbs.
Today's draft resolution, which we support and co-sponsor,
is a step in this direction and is intended to foster the
presence of UNPROFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
we continue to consider indispensable both for humanitarian
relief and the promotion of peace negotiations. It requests
the Secretary-General to use all resources available to him
to restore the status of the safe area of Srebrenica. We
strongly hope that this objective will be achieved by
peaceful means through negotiation and persuasion.

Finally, I wish to emphasize that today's draft
resolution reiterates the importance of renewed efforts to
achieve an overall peaceful settlement of the Bosnian crisis.
We continue to believe that the only possible solution is a
political one, and that any attempt to settle the conflict by
military means will only prolong it and further increase the
suffering of the civilian population. In this perspective, it is
an essential condition that the Bosnian Serbs accept the
Contact Group's peace plan as a starting point. We hope
that the international community can step up its pressure
and its efforts at persuasion in this direction.

