Mr. Vaz Patto (Portugal): I thank Ambassador
Ne'stor Osorio for the 90-day report on the activities of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I reiterate my delegation's full support for the
challenging work that is being accomplished under his
able leadership. I also congratulate the Panel of Experts
on its reappointment by the Secretary-General and
thank the experts for their valuable assistance.

We commend the work of the Committee, which
has contributed decisively in slowing down Iran's
capability to advance its nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes. We believe that the sanctions regime
plays a very important role in fostering the resumption
of serious and credible talks, as well as a meaningful
level of cooperation between the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and Iran in order to clarify
outstanding issues and to draw a conclusion on the
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. It is clear,
however, that these efforts are still insufficient.

Despite the intensified dialogue between the
Agency and Iran since January 2012, no concrete
results have been achieved so far. Iran has yet to show
a willingness to fully comply with the resolutions of
the Security Council and the IAEA Board of Governors
by suspending all enrichment-related and repossessing
activities and heavy water related projects, and by
granting unrestricted access to the IAEA in all its
nuclear sites. It is a matter of special concern that
activities at the Parchin site, as referred to in the most
recent report of the IAEA Director General, are not
under effective verification and monitoring by the
Agency. Iran is not providing the necessary cooperation
to enable the Agency to provide credible assurance
about the absence of undeclared nuclear material and
activities, and therefore to conclude that all nuclear
material in Iran is for peaceful purposes.

Last month during in a visit to Tehran, Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon emphasized the need for
engagement and diplomacy in resolving the country's
nuclear issue. He called on Iran to cooperate with
the IAEA to rebuild international confidence in the
peaceful nature of its nuclear activities. Portugal
seconds the Secretary-General's appeal and reiterates
its long-standing commitment to a diplomatic solution
of the Iranian nuclear issue in accordance with the dual-
track strategy, bearing in mind that the Agency must
address fully the international community's concerns
about the nature of the nuclear programme in Iran.

