Ms. Vogt: I wish to commend the Security Council
for its dedicated attention to the situation in the Central
African Republic since the beginning of the conflict
there in December 2012, and especially following
the coup d'etat on 24 March against the Government
of Francois Bozize and the attendant degradation
of security in the whole country. The Council's
deliberations have been followed with much interest
within the country and in the region. Expectations are
high among the people of the Central African Republic
for the outcome of this particular meeting, since there
is a growing sense of despair among the population,
who see no immediate reprieve to the ordeal that
presently confronts them. There are expectations that
the international community will show solidarity with
their plight and decide on some clear steps to bring an
end to the impunity with which armed groups have
unleashed a reign of terror on the entire population.

The report before the Council (S/2013/261) provides
an analysis of the situation in the Central African
Republic since the launch of the Seleka offensive in
December. It underlines the impact of the rebellion on
the people; the State's capacity and infrastructure; on
security and human rights; on the humanitarian situation,
especially where medical matters are concerned; and
on access to food, basic needs and services, as well as
the high risk of famine if the current situation persists.
It also analyses the regional implications of the Seleka
rebellion.

The Secretary-General stresses in the report
that even at the best of times the State capacity and
infrastructure of the Central African Republic were
rudimentary, while health services were at emergency
levels similar to situations seen in countries that
have been in conflict for a long time. Now, even
those facilities have all but disappeared. An already
challenging human rights environment, marked by
systemic violations of rights even by law enforcement
officers, has collapsed into a state of anarchy and total
disregard for international law as elements of Seleka
have turned their vengeance against the population.

Indiscriminate and often targeted killings, rampant
rape, assaults on the innocent population, the flagrant
recruitment of children as soldiers, the looting of
homes, notjust of the rich but even of already struggling
citizens - not even the SOS village was spared, nor
were churches or convents. These acts continue, almost
two months since Se'le'ka took over the reins of power.
The leadership is unable or unwilling either to control
the ranks of the militia groups or to rein in local
commanders.

The leaders of the region have strongly mobilized
to fill the security vacuum that the rebellion created
and try to contain the situation in the Central African
Republic, as the country appears to have become a
safe haven for different foreign rebel forces seeking
to exploit the natural resources for which the Central
African Republic is known. Public evidence shows that
strip mining of the diamond and gold resources of the
Central African Republic have exponentially expanded
in areas controlled by Sele'ka since the rebellion began.

Further complicating the picture is the growing
insecurity in the neighbourhood as the conflict now
poses a direct threat to the security of its neighbours,
especially the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Chad and Cameroon. These serious threats to the
peace and security of the people of the Central African
Republic and the Central African region make the
re-establishment of security and the rule of law in the
Central African Republic the highest priority issue.

The various summits held in Libreville, N'Djamena
and most recently Brazzaville laid out solid political
ground rules for the new regime in Bangui to follow,
as well as a clear road map of tasks that must be
accomplished to enable the restoration of a democratic
dispensation in the Central African Republic. First, all
hostilities must cease and the security must be restored
throughout the territory of the Central African Republic;
and secondly, constitutional order must be restored,
pursuant to the January Libreville Agreements, with
the Prime Minister assuming executive powers, while
the self-proclaimed President Michel Djotodia heads
the National Transitional Council and is Head of the
Transition.

The scenario, as implemented by the de facto
authorities, suggests a different setting. The Transitional
Council, which was supposed to be representative of
all political persuasions in the country and to assume
the legislative role of the National Assembly, fell short
of this expectation as controversy surrounded the
procedure through which its members were nominated;
hence the decision of the Heads of State at the 18 April
summit at N'Djamena to expand the membership of
that body to 135. The transitional arrangement is to last
for a period of not more that 24 months, ending with
elections in which the leaders of the transition would
not be eligible to present themselves.

While Mr. Djotodia openly declared his acceptance
of the decisions of the Heads of State of the Economic
Community (ECCAS) of Central African States, he
has proceeded to do the contrary. He insists on his
role as President, constantly referring to the decrees
naming him President and his appointment of the Prime
Minister, whom he claims to have the power to remove,
contrary to Libreville. He continues to run the country
by presidential decrees.

The international community, especially the
African Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie and the Security Council, as well as
many Member States bilaterally, have firmly declared
their support for the ECCAS political framework for
the Central African Republic. However, if this is to
work, a number of important measures would have
to be taken. The distinctive roles and responsibilities
of the executive Prime Minister and the Head of the
Transitional Government would have to be defined in
the framework of a transitional charter that would lay
the ground rules for engagement during the period of
the transition.

With respect to human rights, the Se'leka offensive
destroyed much of Central African Republic's justice
system. In the 10 jurisdictions of the Republic, Seleka
elements have destroyed most of the infrastructure that
supported the justice system, including courthouses,
appeals courts, court dossiers, prisons, prison
registries and prosecutor files. The justice system,
including prisons, will need to be rebuilt entirely,
after vast resources have been spent on it through the
Peacebuilding Fund. The destruction of administrative
files related to birth and citizenship will undoubtedly
create a problem during the registration of voters for
the upcoming elections.

The Seleka offensive dismantled the policing
architecture. National security and defence
forces - the gendarmerie, police and national
army - have disintegrated, and despite repeated calls
for them to resume their duties, to date only a small
number of the police and national armed forces officers
have resumed their functions.

The current crisis underscores the urgency need for
security sector reform and to create an effective and
inclusive security sector capable of providing security
throughout the country. Broader security sector reform
should be based on political consensus. It should
include the restoration of State authority, the collection
of small arms and light weapons, and community
recovery programmes, as well as the reintegration of
ex-combatants into formal security and defence forces.

The abuses and violations committed by Seleka
combatants and other armed elements, including cases
of rape, maiming, recruitment of children and forced
marriages, are a source of grave concern in terms of
the protection of civilians. They constitute serious
violations of human rights and humanitarian law. The
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the Secretary-General have
expressed their concern about the deteriorating security
situation in the Central African Republic.

It is critical that the Council unequivocally
pronounce itself on the need for these abuses to stop now
and for perpetrators to be held individually accountable
for their actions. We believe that the time is ripe for
the Council to consider the imposition of individual
sanctions against the architects and perpetrators of
these gross violations. We do not want a desperate
population to be left with no choice but to take the law
into its own hands. The International Criminal Court
(ICC) is also closely monitoring developments in the
Central African Republic, and the Prosecutor of the
ICC has issued a statement warning that the crimes
committed against civilians were under close scrutiny
by her Office. We believe that the Council needs to
send a similar message.

On the humanitarian situation, the latest crisis
has exacerbated an already difficult situation for the
population of the Central African Republic. Human
rights violations against civilians and population
movements continue. Over 49,000 refugees have
now been registered in neighbouring countries since
December, primarily in the Democratic Republic
of Congo, Chad, Cameroon and the Republic of the
Congo. We should not forget that the population of the
entire Central African Republic is only 4.5 million.
Substantial numbers of refugees continue to arrive in
these countries. In addition to the estimated 173,000
displaced since December, another 33,000 persons had
already been displaced, bringing the total number of
internally displaced persons to over 200,000.

The number of violent attacks dramatically
increased in the first quarter of 2013 as a result of
persisting insecurity in the country. More than 60 per
cent of those attacks are attributed to armed groups.
Since the beginning of 2013, at least one person has
been attacked every day.

According to the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, 60 per cent of rural inhabitants,
who depend upon agriculture for their livelihoods, are
affected by the current crisis. More than 80,000 people,
including 57,000 children under the age of 5, are
estimated to be at risk of severe food insecurity during
the upcoming lean season, from now until September.
Those figures are likely to increase with the rise in food
prices triggered by the crisis. If seeds are not distributed
during the current planting season, coupled with the
increase in prices revealed by recent assessments in
Bangui, there could be a risk of basic food shortages.
That could eventually lead to acute food and nutritional
insecurity in both rural and urban areas. With schools
closed or occupied and teachers absent, at least 656,000
children currently have no access to education.

Difficult humanitarian access due to insecurity
and limited road networks is the number one constraint
for reaching those in need of assistance. Access has
become severely curtailed since December amid the
breakdown of law and order, with many humanitarian
offices and warehouses around the country having
been looted. While all parties have in principle agreed
to facilitate humanitarian access, insecurity is limiting
humanitarian actors' ability to reach those in need of
assistance, including internally displaced persons, host
communities and victims of human rights violations.

Despite those constraints, United Nations agencies
and programmes are organizing joint assessment
missions to the field to identify needs and the
humanitarian impact of the crisis. Missions to some
provinces have revealed that the humanitarian situation
is worsening in the areas ofhealth, water and sanitation,
nutrition and protection, food security and education.
The most urgent needs are in the food-security sector,
where households have altered their diet by changes
to their food sources, as well as the need for garbage
disposal. Further assessments are planned in the
coming weeks.

Additional funding is urgently required to support
the humanitarian response capacity. The annual
humanitarian appeal for the Central African Republic,
totalling $129 million, was 29 per cent funded as of
10 May. It was estimated in March that an additional
$42 million was required to respond to the new needs
triggered by the crisis. That amount is likely to increase
further.

I believe that there is an urgent need to help restore
security and stability in the Central African Republic.
That should be done by deploying a neutral security
force that would contain the current state of anarchy
and force the rebel elements to conform to the security
framework laid down in Libreville. That framework
provides that all security forces be cantonned/
regrouped, disarmed, demobilized and screened for
absorption into a reformed security force. The Security
Council and the entire international community
must act quickly to protect the people of the Central
African Republic from the assault they are under by
armed groups. The situation in Bangui is particularly
pressing, as the city has the largest population
concentration - approximately 1.5 million out of a
total population of 4.5 million in the entire country. But
that effort should not be limited to Bangui.

The presence of such a neutral stabilization force,
together with the close political support of the follow-
up committee established by the region and the just-
established international contact Group to support
the transition, is critical in providing a security and
political blanket that would enable the authorities to
implement the Libreville Agreements and would allow
the Prime Minister to play his role as executive head of
Government. The international effort would also help
to ensure that assistance would not be abused to fuel
impunity and authoritarianism.

We welcome the current initiative by the Economic
Community of Central African States to expand its
force to 2,000, which requires the urgent support of
the international community. It will also be critical for
the regional force to review its strategic objectives and
concept of operations to give the force some teeth. A
meeting is taking place today precisely to look into the
issue. That short-term initiative needs to be quickly
followed up by an expanded regional force, possibly
coordinated by the African Union and with the support
of the international community. However, for the very
immediate term, a bridging arrangement is required to
stop the current carnage.

Through the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,
the Organization has worked closely with the region
in defining the parameters for the transition, based on
solid democratic principles and legality. Experience has
taught us that such principles are not merely words, but
critical foundations for sustainable peace and security.
To establish a credible and enduring political framework
following the transition, the foundations must be
laid down now. Crucial transitional tasks - such as
establishing election-management bodies; defining the
electoral constituency; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; security sector reform;
regionalization; developing rule-of-law and justice
mechanisms; social and economic development and
so on - require a representative body that reflects the
interests of the entire society, otherwise the transition
may result in another round of conflict. That is why we
insist on the Libreville Agreements as the legal basis.

For the United Nations, the role of the Prime
Minister as the juridical face of the transition is critical,
as that position was the product of an agreement to
which everyone had subscribed. We strongly believe
that we should not encourage a system of impunity in a
situation through which a democratic order is overturned
by force of arms, even when confronted with serious
governance challenges. The Libreville Agreements
were designed to address some of the grievances put
forward by the rebels while respecting the democratic
framework. The coup d'etat overturned this transitional
process towards and forcefully imposed a new order. It
is critical that we support the region, ECCAS and the
African Union, and regional actors in re-establishing
the basic principles of Libreville.

