Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for choosing today's topic. I also
welcome the Secretary of State of the United States
and the State Secretary of the Republic of Germany,
and I thank them for being with us today. I furthermore
thank the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General for
her briefing.

The State of Kuwait aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the United Arab
Emirates on behalf of the Group of Arab States.

The Middle East continues to take up a significant
portionofthe SecurityCouncil's agenda-approximately
30 to 40 per cent. The region, which has witnessed
many wars and crises over more than seven decades,
is the cradle of the three monotheistic religions and of
human civilizations and cultures. It has the oldest cities
in the world and has vast natural and human resources.
It is unfortunate, therefore, that it is experiencing such
chronic security and political crises.

I would like to address the topic from three aspects.

First, let me touch on conflicts and means of
prevention. The United Nations in general, and the
Security Council in particular, is dealing with more
than eight issues in the Middle East: one of them has
been on the agenda for more than half a century, namely,
the Palestinian question, and the others for many
years, including Syria, Yemen, the Sudan and Libya.
Currently five Arab countries are bearing witness to
the occupation of parts of their territories.

Our region, which is countering terrorism on five
fronts, is witnessing six internal conflicts. Of the 14
United Nations peacekeeping operations, six are in
Arab countries, and more than one third of refugees and
displaced persons around the world come from the Arab
region. The one common denominator is occupation,
which is the raison d'etre of and justification for the
violent and terrorist ideological movements that
exacerbate those conflicts.

In more than one meeting and forum and on more
than one occasion, we have reiterated that settling the
Palestinian question entails ensuring the rights of the
Palestinians to their land and their State, along with
reaching a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement
through the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions; ending the occupation; and
establishing a Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

The policies of Israel since it joined the
United Nations have had one thing in common:
non-adherence to the Charter of the United Nations,
the non-implementation of resolutions of the Security
Council and international legitimacy, continued
violations and a lack of accountability. The Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory, the Syrian Golan
and Lebanese territory is the root cause of numerous
problems in the Middle East.

The efforts under way for many years to achieve
security and stability in the Middle East have not gone
beyond managing and containing these crises and
conflicts and addressing their implications. We must
move from addressing the root causes of these crises
to prevention. We would recall that the Charter of the
United Nations is our guarantee and primary means of
preventing conflicts. There have been initiatives on the
table now for several years that Israel has rejected, such
as the creation of a Middle East zone free of weapons
of mass destruction.

The State of Kuwait has, since the first years of its
independence, consistently sought to enhance regional
security by creating the Gulf Cooperation Council
in 1981 and providing mediation efforts to resolve
differences in the region. We even helped to open
channels for regional dialogue with the Islamic Republic
of Iran, based on mutual respect; the principles of
good-neighbourliness; non-interference in the internal
affairs of other countries; respect for the sovereignty
of all countries; the adoption of confidence-building
measures; and the avoidance of any unilateral actions or
measures that could exacerbate matters and undermine
security in Gulf waters, which would threaten the
safety of water passages and undermine oil security
in the world while endangering international peace
and security.

Secondly, I turn to the humanitarian aspect.
Yesterday we celebrated World Humanitarian Day, and
today we would recall that our efforts must be focused
on people and based on law. We must seek to provide a
decent life for the peoples of the region and the world
in times of peace and war. We have joined France and
a group of countries to defend civilians and civilian
facilities, including hospitals and schools, against
being targeted in time of war. We suffered from such
acts ourselves during the occupation of Kuwait, when
international humanitarian law was violated countless
times. We therefore took it upon ourselves to guarantee
that everyone upholds respect for international
humanitarian law.

The number of refugees and displaced persons
from Arab countries now exceeds 24 million, out of
the 70 million around the world; that is more than one
third. Those present can only imagine how many lives,
properties and opportunities have been lost and how
many people have had to emigrate from Arab countries
in search of a better life. Political solutions to the
problems of the region therefore remain our priority,
and ending the occupation is one of those solutions. We
hope that the United Nations, particularly the Security
Council, will play a greater role in guaranteeing that
their resolutions are implemented.

Thirdly, on education and culture, conflicts and
wars have displaced many people, and we are now
dealing with the social and humanitarian consequences.
However, we can invest in the future and ensure that
refugees, migrants and displaced persons do not suffer
any further. We can provide them with a decent life by
investing in education above all. That is one ofthe areas
in which Kuwait is providing assistance to our brethren
and friends through official assistance or through our
local sector, with a view to fostering a generation that
builds peace. Investing in the future does not make us
forget the past.

We belong to a region of deep-rooted civilizations
where peoples from different religions and cultures
have coexisted for hundreds of years. No one opinion
can erase others, and no crime involving the destruction
of the cultural heritage of humankind can be justified.
Conflicts have led to trading in monuments of Middle
Eastern civilizations and to the crimes committed by
terrorists such as Da'esh and others when they destroyed
cultural landmarks and monuments. Their wars have
razed neighbourhoods and cities to the ground, seeking
to erase the living memories preserved by our previous
generations. Not do we forget the continued practices
of the occupying Power aimed at obliterating the
cultural identity of East Jerusalem and of Palestinians
throughout occupied Palestine.

In conclusion, we thank once again the Republic
of Poland for having chosen today's topic. We have
tried to address its various dimensions, which can
be summarized as follows: respecting people and
international law.

