Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Let me begin with
a brief word of apology and a brief word of thanks. I
would like to apologize to my colleagues for not
having been here earlier this morning. But like you,
Mr. President, I was called to another room by a
meeting of the Open-ended Working Group on the
Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase
in the Membership of the Security Council and Other
Matters Related to the Security Council. And I would
like to thank my Irish colleague for allowing me to
speak this morning, as I have a flight to catch this
afternoon.

I commend you, Sir, for convening today's
meeting. We welcome Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, and
I take this opportunity to thank him for his warm and
generous hospitality when we were in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I also want to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr.
Guehenno, and my good friend Ambassador Olara
Otunnu for their presentations.

Previous speakers have already mentioned many
of the key points, and we also had an opportunity to
discuss them two weeks ago in a public meeting, when
we discussed the Security Council mission to the Great
Lakes region. Therefore, we wish merely to add three
observations which we hope will be helpful for today's
discussion.

The first observation we want to make is that we
cannot take for granted that the window of opportunity
that has been referred to several times will remain open
forever; this must be stressed. Certainly, as we agreed
at that earlier meeting, the Security Council mission
has given further impetus to the Lusaka Agreement. A
fragile peace is beginning to take root in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. But the positive
momentum generated by the disengagement of forces
and the withdrawal of foreign forces must be
maintained. The problem we have is that there are
many obstacles and dangers. And - perhaps this is not
surprising - we are witnessing signs of backsliding by
some of the parties, particularly by the Movement for
the Liberation of the Congo (MLC), and the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD (Goma)).

As several speakers have noted, one key
challenge we face in this process is the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration or resettlement of the
armed groups in the region. This is obviously a
complex issue, and we probably cannot address it in
great detail here, but I wanted to draw the attention of
members of the Council to a report that has just been
put out by the International Crisis Group, entitled
"Disarmament in the Congo: Investing in Conflict
Prevention". The report tries to discuss this issue at
great length. Of course, we do not agree with all the
conclusions and recommendations of the report. But I
recall that during the Security Council mission, many
of us were sitting in the plane reading reports published
by that organization to get the background on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Burundi. I hope that members of the Council will
refer to the report I have mentioned as well; it points
out that this is a serious problem that the Council has to
address. I hope we will address it.

Another key challenge we face at this stage
concerns responsibility for the protection of civilians. I
realize that this too is a very delicate issue. We have
taken note of the concern expressed in paragraph 93 of
the Secretary-General's report on the problem of
assuring effective civilian administration, including the
safety and security of the civilian population, in areas
to be evacuated by foreign forces. Paragraphs 67 to 69
of the Secretary-General's report highlight the pressing
challenge of ensuring the security of the Congolese
population. But paragraphs 93 to 95 of the report make
it equally clear that the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) cannot be expected to assume that
responsibility. That function and general law and order
duties remain the primary responsibility of the parties
to the Lusaka Agreement.

At the same time, the tragic experiences of
Rwanda and Srebrenica remind us that it is morally
unacceptable for the United Nations to remain inactive
in the face of massive human rights violations. By its
very presence - and even though we would not wish
this to be the case - MONUC will be expected to
provide protection for civilian populations. Although it
has neither the mandate nor the resources to protect
civilians, at the very minimum MONUC can
nevertheless carry out a valuable monitoring function
by alerting the Council to any serious threat to the
security of civilians. When that happens, the Council
will be obliged to consider and devise an appropriate
response. In that regard, we would like to recall the
recommendations contained in the 15 December 1999
report of the Independent Inquiry into the Actions of
the United Nations during the 1994 Genocide in
Rwanda, the Carlsson inquiry, which stated that

"The United Nations - and in particular the
Security Council and troop-contributing
countries - must be prepared to act to prevent
acts of genocide or gross violations of human
rights wherever they may take place. The political
will to act should not be subject to different
standards." (S/1999/125 7, annex, recommendation 3)

Our second observation is on the humanitarian
aspects. Here, like all our colleagues, we were struck
by the sobering figures presented in the Secretary-
General's latest report and, I think, in Ambassador
Otunnu's presentation this morning: more than
2 million people have been displaced, 16 million have
critical food needs, 2million are affected by AIDS,
and, in some areas such as Moba and Kalemie, an
estimated 75 per cent of children born during the
conflict have perished or are expected to die before
they reach the age of two. That random sampling of
grim statistics amounts to what the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Kenzo Oshima,
has called the country's "massive humanitarian deficit"
(S/2001/5 72, para. 62). Clearly, further resources are
required to tackle the problem.

In our view - and this is perhaps an obvious but
nonetheless useful point to make here - one sure way
to create a substantial "humanitarian credit" is for the
parties to the Lusaka Agreement to end the fighting
immediately and to fulfil all their commitments. The
mortality study released by the International Rescue
Committee on 8 May makes it clear that "excess"
civilian deaths will continue to mount as long as all
sides insist on pursuing the military option. In the
meantime, we would urge the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the rebel
groups to agree to the establishment of humanitarian
corridors between Kinshasa and the eastern and
northern provinces. We also look forward to working
with Ambassador Otunnu on his five-point plan of
action to address the grave situation of war-affected
children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Our final observation is on Burundi. The situation
in Burundi presents a conundrum for this Council. We
all agree that we cannot afford to ignore this dimension
of the conflict in the Great Lakes. We all also agree
that failure to contain the crisis in Burundi will have
repercussions for peace in the entire subregion. It will
perpetuate the vicious cycle of ethnic conflagration that
has plagued the region. Indeed, as the Secretary-
General notes in his report,

"there can be no lasting peace in the Democratic

Republic of the Congo without a comprehensive

settlement of the situation in Burundi".

(S/2001/572, para. 10® 
We therefore strongly endorse and echo the Secretary-
General's call to regional heads of State to urge the
armed groups to refrain from violence and to enter into
negotiations immediately. We did the same when we
were part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
mission. The sheer complexity and intractability of the
crisis in Burundi defies any easy solution. But the
formidable challenge it poses requires us to continue to
pay close attention to the unfolding situation. In that
regard, it may be useful at some point for us to reflect
on what role MONUC could usefully play in the border
region with Burundi.

Let me join my colleagues in paying tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kamel Morjane, who is soldiering on despite, I gather,
having fallen ill. We wish him a speedy recovery.

