Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), under the chairship of Ambassador Gary
Quinlan, as well as its Panel of Experts, for their
continued work in supporting the Security Council's
resolutions on Iran.

The E3+3 and Iran have reached a critical point
in the negotiations on a comprehensive agreement on
Iran's nuclear programme. With less than a month to
go before the interim deal is due to expire, on 20 July,
it is crucial that Iran understand that it must address
the concerns of the international community if a deal
is to be possible and if sanctions imposed as a result of
Iran's nuclear programme are to be lifted. The E3+3 is
strongly committed to agreement on a comprehensive
solution before 20 July. Several rounds of talks on the
comprehensive agreement have been held in Vienna,
the latest just last week. We have now entered the
drafting and negotiating phase. While discussions have
been frank and the atmosphere positive, gaps between
the two sides remain.

In parallel to these negotiations on the
comprehensive agreement, the United States and the
European Union have been delivering the sanctions
relief set out in the Geneva interim agreement. We
welcome the latest report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency of 23 May, which notes that Iran has
continued to implement the nuclear measures agreed on
under the Joint Plan of Action. The E3+3 recognizes
the importance of working with the United Nations
once a deal is agreed on, in order to ensure that the
appropriate Security Council framework is in place to
support implementation of the agreement.

However, echoing the point just made by the Chair
of the 1737 Committee, while negotiations continue the
bulk of the sanctions must remain in place, including
all United Nations sanctions. States should be in no
doubt that all of the Security Council resolutions
on Iran remain fully in force. We should continue to
implement and enforce those sanctions robustly. The
economic pressure that sanctions create is a peaceful
incentive and supports the diplomatic efforts to reach a
comprehensive solution.

Turning to the work of the Committee, we are
concerned about breaches and possible breaches by
Iran of its international obligations. The interdicton of a
vessel carrying a cargo of conventional arms in the Red
Sea is deeply worrying. The arms, including rockets,
mortars and ammunition, were allegeldy loaded onto the
vessel in the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas. The Panel of
Experts, after a thorough investigation, concluded that
the shipment was a violation of Iran's obligations under

resolution 1747 (2007). That is yet another example of
an illicit arms transfer in the region involving Iran. We
look forward to the Committee discussing that serious
matter further and to its firm action in response.

The 90-day report also highlights the fact that the
Islamic Republic of Iran has failed to respond to requests
for information relating to a carbon fibre interdiction.
That follows Iran's failure to respond to requests for
information on ballistic missile launches last year
and on an intercepted arms shipment to Yemen. Iran's
ongoing failure to respond is regrettable. We call on
Iran to engage in earnest with the Committee on such
incidents.

The United Kingdom is committed to finding a
peaceful, negotiated resolution ofthe nuclear issue. The
ongoing discussions on the comprehensive agreement
are the best opportunity in recent years for a resolution
of the nuclear issue. We will continue to make every
effort to find a comprehensive settlement, and we look
to Iran to do the same.

