Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Let me assure you, Mr. President, of our
delegation's full support for your leadership of our
work in the Council this month. We would also like to
pay tribute to the efforts to the Russian presidency of
the Council last month.

At the outset, allow me to welcome the presence
among us today of the two Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunals, Judges Patrick
Robinson and Dennis Byron, and Prosecutors Serge
Brammertz and Hassan Bubacar Jallow. We thank them
not only for their comprehensive briefings but also for
the excellent work they have done and continue to
undertake with their teams.

We need not recall resolution 1503 (2003) on the
completion strategies for the two Tribunals, or remind
the Tribunals that they must take all necessary
measures to complete their trials by 2010, nor yet
underscore resolution 1534 (2004), which stresses the
importance of the full implementation of the strategies.

There is no doubt that the briefings we have just
heard attest to the tangible progress in implementing
the provisions of the strategies. That having been said,
we note that circumstances have arisen beyond the
control of the two Tribunals, leading to an
unprecedented increase in the workload of both
Tribunals that has important implications for the
timeframe of the completion strategies and the
resources needed for their full implementation.

Like other delegations, we wish to underscore the
importance of the Tribunals completing their work as
soon as possible without, naturally, undermining the
imperatives of justice. In our view, it is also necessary
to provide them with the financial and human resources
support they require. It is would also be desirable for
us to look favourably on the requests that they have
recently submitted along those lines. Indeed, it is clear
that implementing the completion strategies will
require extending mandates, expanding certain
Chambers and redeploying judges, while ensuring that
qualified administrative and judicial staff are working
in motivating conditions that are also satisfactory at the
contractual level, given the fact that the two Tribunals
are facing serious difficulties in retaining qualified
personnel.

Furthermore, we reiterate the need for ongoing
efforts to transfer or refer cases to national
jurisdictions in the context of the completion
strategies. We are fully aware of the obstacles
confronting the Tribunals' efforts, in particular in the
case of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, as the President of that Tribunal pointed out
in his remarks. Such referrals to national courts would
lighten the Tribunals' caseload and facilitate the
transfer of their archives. The archives could well turn
out to be more important than the judicial proceedings
in framing the history of those events and facilitate
national reconciliation with respect to the events that
took place. In addition, the assumption of these cases
by national jurisdictions would reflect the principles of
the rule of law and fairness.

We are aware that circumstances have changed
since the two Tribunals were established at the end of
the last century. They were set up as ad hoc bodies in
the context of temporary measures aimed at restoring
and safeguarding peace and security in the countries
concerned. Today, those countries, which were the
scenes of crimes and remain the sources of witnesses
and evidence, enjoy peace and security. They have seen
their judicial capacities strengthen and their
legislations develop, allowing them to be seized of
such trials and cases within the framework and
principles of impartial justice that enjoys the support
and assistance of the international community.

In conclusion, implementing the completion
strategies for the Tribunals' work is closely linked to
the need for the Council to decide as soon as possible
on the legacy of the two Tribunals and the remaining
trials following completion through well structured
international mechanisms whose future functions and
resources are clearly defined. The Informal Working
Group on international tribunals is working precisely to
that end under the chairmanship of the Austrian
delegation. We would like to underscore and commend
the excellent work being done by the Working Group
with the support of the Secretariat and, in particular, of
the Office of Legal Affairs.
We also commend the praiseworthy efforts of the
two Tribunals. We greatly hope that those efforts bear
fruit and that we shall reach the best possible solutions
as soon as possible.

