I thank you, Madame President, for this opportunity to state the views and observations of the Government of the Republic of Haiti on document S/2020/537. I take this opportunity, at the outset of my remarks, to extend our sincere best wishes for the success of the French presidency of the Security Council for the month of June 2020. I also take this opportunity to thank all members of the Council for their relevant commentary on, and in solidarity with my country, Haiti, as it pursues its quest for political stability, social progress and long-term development. On behalf of the President of the Republic of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moise, and the Government led by Prime Minister Joseph Jouthe and on my own behalf, I reiterate the solidarity of the Republic of Haiti with all the States members of the Council that have been severely affected by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The pandemic has undeniably shown how interconnected the countries and people of our world are. The untold suffering that the pandemic has inflicted on humankind has highlighted the need for the Member States and all stakeholders of the United Nations, in this pivotal seventy-fifth anniversary year, to pursue strategies and policies for the renewal of the international system with determination, persistence, solidarity and resolve. Against that background, I commend the efforts of the Member States, United Nations entities, multilateral donors, foundations and non-governmental organizations to continue collective action to contain the pandemic as soon as possible and mitigate its socioeconomic and other consequences. Turning to the Secretary-General's second report on the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), let me assure the Council that the Government of Haiti has carefully considered the report. The Secretary-General's observations in paragraphs 49 to 57 will strengthen and advance cooperation between the United Nations team in Haiti and the Haitian authorities. Importantly, BINUH will always be able to count on the collaboration of Haiti to carry out the specific tasks assigned to it under resolution 2476 (2019). I thank Helen La Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti for her presentation of the Secretary-General's report and her overview of the developments in Haiti in recent weeks. I extend my appreciation to Bruno Lemarquis, Deputy Special Representative, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Affairs Coordinator in Haiti, and all the members of the United Nations team who carry out their tasks with respect for the dignity of the Haitian people and in accordance with the strategic vision and priorities defined by the Government of Haiti. It is critical that BINUH continue to work this way in implementing its mandate in strict compliance with the second preambular paragraph of resolution 2476 (2019), in which the Security Council reaffirms "its firm commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity of Haiti". In the same spirit, I welcome the participation in this Council meeting of lawyer and President of the Federation of Haitian Bar Associations, Jacques Letang. The Government attaches particular importance to working together with all stakeholders in the interest of providing lasting solutions to the country's current and emerging problems. Those problems concern all actors in the nation's political, economic and social life; therefore, the spirit of collaboration must prevail among them. Civil society organizations are encouraged to play an increased and disciplined role in the efforts necessary to ensure the independence of the Haitian justice system and in the promotion and respect of fundamental human rights and the rule of law. I have taken due note of the questions raised by Mr. Letang on behalf of the Federation of Haitian Bar Associations and, especially, of the concerns he has expressed. Regarding justice and security, the country faces multifaceted challenges. The covert movement of small arms and light weapons is indeed a real plague. Such weapons are responsible for numerous acts of violence, blatant abuse and deaths in a number of localities across the country. Armed gangs also remain a major challenge and cause for concern. The perpetration of acts of gang violence, as well as violent clashes between rival armed groups, are an undisputed and unacceptable cause of suffering across the layers of the Haitian population. Countering the security challenges requires the continuous strengthening of the Haitian National Police's capacities. In addition, much more must be done to strengthen the justice system, make the Courts more effective at ensuring impartiality and ensure that those responsible for acts of violence are punished. In addition, the Government is paying particular interest to improving the situation of prison staff as well as all detainees. The Government recognizes and fully understands the gravity of the law and order situation in Haiti and will continue to mobilize all actors in the security sector to face and resolve the threat to law and order. We are satisfied that the Secretary- General's Report took note of the progress made in the key reforms designed to enable the Ministry of Justice and Public Security to carry out its critical tasks. The Government remains resolute and resilient in tackling the causes of social inequality, corruption, poverty, food insecurity, economic challenges and lack of access to health care. In the current global environment marked by multifaceted crises, Haiti has identified several elements that are essential to its recovery efforts, namely, political will, ambition, partnership, solidarity and substantial funding. Financial aid and support for Haiti must be consistent with the specific needs of the population, particularly those most vulnerable. It must also be consistent with the critical need to strengthen the main national institutions. At this time, the Government is in urgent need of additional resources, both technical and financial, to address the numerous crises the country is facing all at once. The Government has noted with interest the concerns expressed by the Secretary-General in paragraph 3 of his report relating to the absence of a functional legislature and the lack of details on the timetable for the next elections and for the necessary constitutional and structural reforms. While progress has undeniably been made in Haiti since the consideration of the Secretary-General's first report on the execution of BINUH's mandate (see S/PV.8729), much remains to be done to extricate the country from the rut of instability and current crises. It is a fact that the slowness of progress is due to persistent political divisions, the difficulties in establishing an authentic, transparent dialogue focused on the national interest and, now, the spread of COVID-19 in the country. All sectors of the nation must resolve to make the sacrifices critical to containing the spread of coronavirus disease, to contribute to the establishment of a realistic electoral calendar and to set out together - with determination - on the path towards the great transformations that are needed for the country's stability, recovery and long-term development. In that regard, there is an urgent need for a far-reaching national dialogue. A meaningful national dialogue is not simply a political exercise; it is a necessity imposed on the country by the regrettable unbridled polarization of the nation's stakeholders. It is within such a framework that the multiple links necessary for national restoration and recovery must be rebuilt. Without question, that is the spirit of the various initiatives launched by the President since he came to power. Even today, the Government first calls out to all the nation's political forces, then requests reinforced support from the United Nations system and other international partners in order to relaunch, on solid foundations, the essential dialogue on major issues of national interest. Nothing great and lasting can be accomplished outside the founding values of the Republic of Haiti or the essential principles on which the democratic regime established by the Haitian Constitution is based. There is a real need for constitutional reform that takes into account the facts and reality in the country so as to remove, once and for all, the oft-condemned ambiguities in some of the Constitution's provisions. Constitutional reform and the organization of free and democratic elections for the renewal of the political leadership are critical elements of the proper functioning of national institutions. The Secretary-General's report highlights, in paragraphs 7 and 8, the efforts made by the Haitian authorities, with the support of international partners, to bring about constitutional reform and the organization of the next elections. Unfortunately, it is not easy to move forward at the desired pace during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Government of Haiti welcomes the emphasis of sections VI and VII of the report on the deterioration of Haiti's socioeconomic situation and the new emergencies arising from the COVID-19 pandemic. Today, more than ever, Haiti needs to develop better awareness of the root causes of its people's difficulties and specific needs. Indeed, the country's socioeconomic situation has deteriorated considerably under the combined effect of the prolonged political crisis, the peyi lok strategy and recurrent natural disasters. We must not lose sight of the fact that Haiti has been hit hard over the last 10 years by the devastating earthquake of 12 January 2010, cyclones, drought, floods, the cholera epidemic - which we will never cease to deplore - and the inconsistency of many national and international actors. It is in this challenging context that the coronavirus disease pandemic broke out in Haiti. Its impact is already being severely felt in terms of livelihoods, especially those of young people, women and other vulnerable groups. The national economy is facing multiple simultaneous shocks, including reduced tax revenues, increased spending to respond to the crisis, reduced foreign direct investment and exports and reduced remittances and multifaceted contribution of the valiant and generous Haitian diaspora. The informal sector is already paying a heavy price. The health crisis further weakens the country's capacity to respond to the humanitarian crisis and climate shocks, especially during the cyclone season, from June to November, which is already upon us. The number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 is increasing significantly. As of 16 June, the overall toll stands at 4,688 confirmed cases of infection, including 141 new cases and 82 deaths, and the death rate is 1.7 per cent. The Government has taken an extensive series of measures to combat the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in the country. They include the establishment of technical and administrative structures to manage the pandemic, a vast prevention campaign, capacity-building, the acquisition of medical equipment and supplies and the significant increase in the budget allocated to the Ministry of Public Health and Population. We note with encouragement that the several Member States and United Nations entities cited in paragraphs 35 and 36 of the report, as well as some non- governmental organizations, have expressed support for the new "early warning, early action" approach. The Government has also taken a number of additional measures for young people, the unemployed, professionals, businesses and so on. The management of the coronavirus disease pandemic has demonstrated the relevance of better preparing countries for shocks and of the recovery-development continuum. It also reveals the essential changes, in both the governance of vulnerable countries and the modalities of international aid. Aid to Haiti is now, more than ever, a subject requiring attention and strategic reflection. We must not get lost in the context of the response to COVID-19 and the humanitarian crisis. Let us bear in mind the main lessons learned from the modalities and level of aid provided to the country after the devastating earthquake of 12 January 2010. Let us not persist in making the same errors all over again. I keep in mind the important maxim that to err is human, but to persist in error is diabolical. In the current context, Haitiis inurgent need of adequate, predictable resources to overcome many challenges, namely, the health crisis and its consequences, the humanitarian crisis, the living conditions of the population, the holding of democratic elections, corruption and impunity, the spread of firearms and the proliferation of armed gangs. Finally, I would like to convey here the urgent call for greater solidarity and flexibility made to bilateral and multilateral donors by the President Moise on the occasion of the recent high-level meeting on financing for development, held by video-teleconference. It is requiring determination, solidarity and flexibility in the funding of emergency responses, recovery efforts and sustainable development initiatives that will allow us to win - together - the battle against the COVID-19 pandemic and its socioeconomic consequences and to take other decisive action to overcome the current challenges in Haiti.
