Mr. Melkert: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to inform the Council of the significant
developments that have taken place in Iraq over the
past few months.

The forthcoming January elections will mark the
end of the first full term of a freely elected Parliament
in the country's history. It has been a period of great
challenges and achievements. While the face of daily
life still frequently shows the ugly sides of death and
threat, the souls of the overwhelming majority of Iraqis
vibrate in reaching at the prospect of a safe and fair
society. During that initial period of being a privileged
guest in their country, I have been impressed by the
energy and the optimism of countless Iraqis, inside and
outside the Government, in building a better future.

Success is far from guaranteed as inside and
outside forces continue their efforts to impose an
agenda of division and destruction. Opposed to that
stands the will of the people to participate in the design
of the future and to democratically mandate its leaders.
That is the true significance of the historic elections
ahead, prepared under full Iraqi leadership and
responsibility. And that must motivate the United
Nations to mobilize all possible support for the process
and progress, for Iraqis are receptive and eager to
incorporate the values of the United Nations Charter
into the building of a new State and a new society.

The United Nations is seen and approached as a
trusted partner by many. It remains of the utmost
importance that they can continue to count on the
Council to enable the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to live up to their
expectations. It will have to be a long-term
commitment. There will be no shortcuts. Change needs
to take root. Change is under way in many aspects. For
it to take root, however, these are still early days.

The elections will take place under threat of the
repetition of the atrocious attacks at the heart of the
Government on 19 August and 25 October. The
Security Council's rejection of those horrendous acts
and expression of support for the Government to stand
firm were very welcome signals. Furthermore,
reconciliation within the country and the return of
refugees and the internally displaced are still uphill
tasks ahead. Neighbourhood relations could and should
still greatly improve. The framework of the federal
State needs to be solidified, reducing existing tensions
and disputes. And importantly, the coming period
09-60820
should lay the foundation for Iraq's return to the league
of middle-income countries, in conjunction with the
jump in social development that is within reach if
business initiatives are to thrive and oil revenues spent
wisely.

Those are still big "ifs", and a big responsibility
for a new Government. The upcoming period will also
require UNAMI to shift gear and adjust direction along
the lines of the request of the Government of Iraq, as
well as the mandate set out by the Council in
resolutions 1770 (2007) and recently reconfirmed in
resolution 1883 (2009). The following five areas in
particular will define our agenda of work in the period
ahead.

The first of those areas is elections. The pivotal
event for Iraq in the coming months is, of course, the
January elections for the Council of Representatives.
UNAMI has exercised its mandate in the support and
assistance provided to the Independent High Electoral
Commission in this pre-elections phase.

The Electoral Law was ratified by the Council of
Representatives on Sunday, 8 November. The
Presidency Council now has 10 days to accept or reject
the Law. If a statement is not issued by 19 November,
the Law will be adopted automatically. For now, the
Independent High Electoral Commission, whilst
awaiting adoption of the Law, has based its planning on
the election date of 18 January. While the passage of
the Electoral Law through the Council of
Representatives has been beset by complex
negotiations, the debate has been a clear example of
the capacity of the political leadership to embrace
sovereignty and define the process of people's
representation. The special reference in the Law to the
possible review of voter registry lists in Kirkuk and
other governorates might entail a considerable task for
UNAMI after election day.

In preparation for the elections, the voter registry
update exercise took place from 22 August to
30 September, accompanied by a national voter
education campaign. As a result of these efforts, over
1.5 million Iraqis visited one of 1,082 voter registry
centres to confirm their data or to enrol on the register.
Eighteen million voter information cards have been
distributed nationwide to assist voters in identifying
where they should cast their ballot on election day.

The UNAMI electoral assistance team,
comprising 20 international technical advisors,
09-60820

continues to provide technical support within each
department of the Electoral Commission, enabling
adherence to international standards and the delivery of
a transparent electoral process. The aim of all efforts is
to support an election with an outcome acceptable to
the Iraqi people as a basis for policy and progress in
the next four years. I should point out that the United
Nations cannot guarantee such an outcome. What we
can and will do is to undertake a maximum support
effort, together with the impressive team of often
young Iraqi men and women providing the hands-on
legal, technical and communication services that
modern election management requires.

We have expressed serious concerns about the
very late date of finalizing the Law. It is truly a
Herculean task to ensure that basic standards can be
met. I consider these concerns to be outweighed by the
importance of the primacy of the parliamentary process
and of adherence to the constitutional demands
essential to strengthening overall authority and
stability. On balance, it still is possible and must be
made possible if Iraq is to have credible elections on
18 January. However, in order to arrive at that precious
moment, the call will be "all hands on deck".

The second point is on the disputed internal
boundaries. Soon after election day, it will be time to
engage in the serious task of engagement in relation to
the internal boundaries of the federal State and its
components in terms of competencies and
responsibilities, revenue-sharing, service delivery,
security arrangements and territorial boundaries.
Unless these key issues between the federal
Government in Baghdad and the regional Government
in Erbil are resolved, the new Iraq will be permanently
at risk of being pulled back or dragged into
fundamentally destabilizing conflict. The protracted
discussion in the framework of the Electoral Law on
arrangements for the Kirkuk governorate in particular
was yet another reminder of an unfinished agenda.

In outlining our intentions for the months ahead, I
would like to share some developments that might
point to an improving overall climate for progress.

First, I would like to refer to the High-Level Task
Force that addresses issues in connection with the
disputed internal boundaries around the border of the
Kurdish region and that, over the past few months, has
engaged in a number of confidence-building measures
aimed at bridging core issues. Senior advisors to the
3

Iraqi Prime Minister and the Kurdish region President
meet regularly under UNAMI auspices. We might now
be approaching agreement on measures to expedite
property claims, improve transparent and legal
detention procedures, and guarantee the right of all
Iraqi's to educate their children in their mother tongue.
The importance of such practical steps forward cannot
be underestimated, as it would be a strong signal to
ordinary citizens that at last something will change for
the better for many of them.

A second point of considerable importance has
been the joint efforts of the Iraqi army and the Kurdish
Peshmerga, advised and supported by United States
forces, to agree on collective security arrangements in
relevant conflict areas in the Ninewa, Kirkuk and
Diyala governorates. This is a markedly different
evolution compared to the situation this past summer,
which was marked by a rapid increase of tensions in
various places, with the area around Mosul in
particular becoming an almost daily target of vicious
attacks over the course of many months. It is also
potentially significant for underpinning future political
arrangements addressing the outstanding disputed
boundaries agenda. UNAMI is therefore closely
following, on an information basis, these
developments, which hopefully will soon be officially
ratified by all sides.

A third factor weighing in for the near future
follows from the start of new mandate periods. When I
met last week in Erbil with Prime Minister Barham
Saleh, no doubt was left as to the new Regional
Government's determination to strengthen the basis for
stability, economic growth and social progress.
Meanwhile, the current Iraqi Government is preparing
the transition to a new period in a systematic way, with
the support of bilateral and multilateral partners. This
raises expectations that political leaders will become
more ready to recognize the inextricable linkage
between addressing complex political issues that
cannot be left in a frozen state and promoting an
improved investment climate as part of a solid
economic strategy.

The fourth factor that should be mentioned is the
need to clarify the legal basis and financial impact of
oil extraction now that important new contracts have
been signed or are under consideration. The
transparency and predictability of contract
arrangements and revenue-sharing mechanisms are part
and parcel of a sustainable federal State framework. If

the current lack of clarity were to remain after the start
of a new Government, it would have a detrimental
effect on the authority of the State and its credibility
vis-a-vis citizens who should benefit from sources of
immense richness not seldom located at the doorstep of
inconceivable poverty.

These four developments provide a context in
which UNAMI can consider the next steps in assisting
the clarification of the principles and arrangements
within a federal constitutional framework. As it is
difficult to see how a new Government programme
could be built and agreed upon without strong
reference to the different demarcation issues, it may be
wise to consider the period immediately after the
elections as a window of opportunity to engage key
leaders and stakeholders, establish an agenda and
embark on the road towards understanding and ultimate
agreement, including on article 140 of the Constitution.

My third point is on economic growth and social
progress. The aim of all political development is to
create an environment in which the citizenry can grow;
schools, hospitals, civil administration and private
enterprise are all essential components in this
development. It is encouraging to note that the
Government has put considerable effort into the
formulation of the National Development Plan 2010-
2014. The process has been supported extensively by
different parts of the United Nations family,
particularly through the provision of in-depth advice on
12 sectoral analysis papers.

In alignment with the National Development
Plan, the United Nations country team has agreed on
the first common country assessment for Iraq, focusing
on three key areas, namely, governance, inclusive
economic growth and ensuring quality essential
services. In turn, both the Development Plan and the
common country assessment will inform a United
Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF) 2010-2014 providing a harmonized
approach to sustainable development in the coming
years. As we speak, this process, which is standard
practice in many parts of the world but new for Iraq,
has been launched.

Last week, two important meetings took place,
both marking the end of an era of first recovery and
reconstruction and the start of an era of investment in
economic growth and social progress.
On 7 November, at a meeting co-chaired by the
Minister of Finance, Mr. Al-Jabr, and the Special
Advisor to the Secretary-General on the International
Compact, Mr. Gambari, partners of Iraq took stock of
achievements under the Compact that have, over the
past three years, provided an essential instrument for
intensifying and solidifying relations between Iraq and
the world after decades of devastation and isolation.

At the same time, participants acknowledged the
strong call by Prime Minister al-Maliki that now is the
time for Iraq to take the lead and for the international
community to provide support on the basis of the
strategic directions defined by the Government. This
also changes the role of the United Nations, from
co-chairing to providing secretariat and liaison
functions in support of stronger coordination at the
sides of both the Government and the international
partners.

On 8 November, the Donor Committee of the
International Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq
(IRFFI) held a meeting, near the end of a period in
which humanitarian assistance and development
projects have been approved to a total of $1.25 billion.
As there is still a limited amount, around $135 million,
to be disbursed and programmed, it was agreed to
extend the Facility into next year only for that purpose.
An independent lessons-learned exercise between the
United Nations and the World Bank will take place
between January and June 2010 and will provide a full
assessment of the IRFFI initiative.

The alignment of UNDAF with other bilateral
strategies was also discussed, and it was agreed that
discussions should continue with all stakeholders.
Options were also presented and discussed for a post-
IRFFI funding and coordination mechanism, including
the establishment of a new United Nations multi-donor
trust fund that would build on the achievements of
IRFFI. This may be an important way to respond to the
invitation to develop an international assistance vision,
particularly in support of the National Development
Plan.

Addressing the crucial development of the private
sector within Iraq, Prime Minister al-Maliki has also
called for an extensive programme for foreign direct
investment. It is interesting to note growing global
interest among potential investors weighing their
opportunities in Iraq. Apart from what is an obvious
need with regard to the regulation of oil production, it
will be important for the next Government to provide a
solid legal framework for doing business.

Only with investment and development will the
ills of unemployment and poverty be addressed.
Twenty-three per cent of the population, or nearly
7 million people, live below the poverty line, with
scores of young people unemployed, fuelling
discontent and instability. Food insecurity, exacerbated
by rising food prices and drought, remains a reality for
large sections of the population.

Further, the United Nations has embarked on a
number of activities aimed at strengthening governance
and the rule of law within Iraq. Of particular
significance is the current preparation of the first Iraqi
national anti-corruption strategy, including through the
participation of an Iraqi delegation in the Conference
of State Parties to the United Nations Convention
against Corruption. The strategy has identified several
key areas of engagement, including financing for
political party and elections and a civil service code of
conduct.

My fourth point is on constructive neighbourhood
cooperation. Promoting Iraq's cooperation with and
integration in the wider region is part of UNAMI's
mandate. Of particular priority is the normalization of
regional relations, not least with Kuwait, and the
related exit from Chapter VII provisions that naturally
is strongly desired by Iraq as the demarcation of a new
era after decades of wars and sanctions.

As the report of the Secretary-General on
resolution 1859 (2008) is still pending before the
Council, I see it as a key priority for UNAMI to
facilitate rapprochement and agreement on all
outstanding issues. We will seek the consent of both
parties to define a mutually agreed agenda, the
completion of which should resolve any remaining
issues and normalize Iraq's position within the United
Nations.

Meanwhile, UNAMI has continued to provide
support to the Government of Iraq in relation to the
excavation of mass graves and the identification of
missing persons, in close connection with the valuable
work by Ambassador Tarasov, as reported recently to
the Council. It is the intention to continue ongoing
capacity-building support for a longer period of time.

Further, the Iraq-Kuwait boundary maintenance
project has completed planning for field maintenance.
The Secretariat awaits confirmation from the
Government of Iraq that work can proceed and that
access will be granted to all boundary pillars. Without
such indication, no additional activities can be
undertaken. In that regard, I would urge the
Government to indicate its consent or, should any
outstanding issues exist, to move towards resolution
soon.

In other areas and with different neighbouring
countries, UNAMI continues to work on promoting and
supporting opportunities. It has been a welcome
development to note the increase of the flow of water
into Iraq, following a series of meetings between Iraq
and the Governments of Turkey, Syria and Iran. Yet the
challenge remains to have more predictable and longer-
term understanding and arrangements in place. It has
been agreed with the Government of Iran to have a
small UNAMI sub-office operating in Teheran to
facilitate particular areas of bilateral cooperation with
Iraq.

All in all, the picture of regional cooperation is of
varied colours. On the one hand, we see important
bilateral initiatives and agreements that will no doubt
benefit Iraq's regional and global integration in
economic and other areas. On the other hand, some
bilateral diplomatic relations are under severe
constraints. Their resumption would be of benefit to
the region as a whole.

My fifth point is on the promotion of human
rights. With determination and growing hope that the
completion of the first full term of the elected Council
of Representatives will mark the transition to a new
phase, with more attention devoted to the rebuilding
and revitalization of society, the emphasis on the
promotion and observance of human rights will further
increase. In the most recent period, there has been a
somewhat downward trend of attacks by militias,
insurgents and criminal groups, notwithstanding the
August and October explosions in Baghdad. This trend
makes it all the more important that improvements in
the security situation are accompanied by a consistent
across-the-board enforcement of the rule of law and the
elimination of impunity. Efforts to ensure that
perpetrators of human rights abuses are brought to
justice must be redoubled as security and the rule of
law are inextricably linked. Stability requires both
elements.
Of particular concern remains the position of
women. The number of suicides that are being reported
is symptomatic of fundamental issues of equal rights
and opportunities as a key challenge to a country that
recognizes the value and responsibility of each citizen.

Another cause for concern in the recent past, soon
to be reported in the semi-annual human rights report,
was the ongoing relentless attack on men and women
working for the State as police officers or in related
official functions. This trend is severely undercutting
the capacity of the State to impose law and order and
should be reversed.

Reference should also be made to ongoing issues
with regard to detainees and the situation of prisoners,
in terms both of process and of the physical conditions
under which they are held. The State's upholding of
fundamental principles should also apply in the case of
criminals and suspects.

Allow me to say something about the evolving
mission profile. With Iraq entering a new stage,
UNAMI should make adjustments as well. More than
at any point in time after 2003, our political advice and
facilitation will be autonomously and legitimately
guided and assessed by the Government, and that is
how it should be. Our predominant humanitarian- and
reconstruction-oriented pattern of activities will be
subsumed under a more strategic, development-focused
direction. This is therefore the time to reorganize the
collective effort under the one blue flag.

The mission and the country team are now
working closely together under integrated management
and strategic alignment and following Government
leadership. I was pleased to welcome Christine McNab
as Deputy Special Representative for Humanitarian,
Reconstruction and Development Affairs as well as
Resident Coordinator. She will be part of the integrated
mission and team management lead and will work with
a soon-to-be-appointed political deputy special
representative of the Secretary-General.

We ask for the Council's continued attention and
support during the big transition that the Mission is
anticipating, particularly in terms of logistical and
security support requirements. I appreciate the close
contacts with the Government and the United States
armed forces on their planning for redeployment and
withdrawal, including the consequences for our scope
of action. Taking into account the expectations and
ambitions to increase United Nations representation in
different parts of Iraq if circumstances permit, this will
come at a price that needs to be factored into the
budgets for the years ahead. We look forward to further
interaction with the General Assembly with a View to
planning for the future.

In conclusion, Iraq will continue to face big
challenges and contradictions in the foreseeable future.
More than ever before, its success will depend on the
determination of constructive forces from the inside
and outside to seize new and real opportunities. We
should not lose sight of the thousands of victims of
indiscriminate or targeted violence that occurred in the
recent reporting period. Over the same period,
however, important decisions have been taken to
strengthen key institutions and processes and underpin
a next cycle of legitimized Government.

The coming elections will mark a crucial next
stage for the future of the State and of society in
general. They will set the stage for the way that other
important developments - such as an increase in oil
production, the National Development Plan under
preparation, and, despite setbacks, progress in security
forces and arrangements - will be dealt with. For
many Iraqis, the determination to advance is there. For
the neighbouring and partner countries and for the
Security Council to back this up unambiguously is the
signal those Iraqis need and deserve.

