The President (spoke in French): I wish to
inform members of the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Belgium, Egypt,
Guinea, Morocco, Nigeria and Sierra Leone in which
they request to be invited to participate in the debate on
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. De Ruyt
(Belgium), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Fall
(Guinea), Mr. Bennouna (Morocco), Mr. Mbanefo
(Nigeria) and Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone) took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the agreement reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs.

If there is no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Fall to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the agreement reached in
its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/434, which contains a letter dated 30
April 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council and conveying the
report of the Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa.

Before beginning the debate, I should like to
make a few preliminary comments and to welcome all
of those who are participating in this meeting.

I wish first of all to recall that the Security
Council is considering today for the second time the
report of the Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa,
known as the Fall report. This exercise coincides with
the holding in Dakar of meetings of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), whose
twenty-fifth Summit of Heads of State and Government
will be held on 20 and 21 December. This convergence
gives our meeting today particular significance and
scope.

Today's public debate certainly attests to the
Security Council's commitment to seek - through an
exercise of collective reflection open to all, based on
the operational conclusions of the report - lasting
solutions to the priority needs and problems of West
Africa. The report contains a clear-sighted and
courageous assessment of the situation and practical,
relevant and - in our opinion - feasible
recommendations.

Almost eight months after the issuance of that
report, the time has come to take action. Today's
debate, in this respect, provides a useful opportunity to
respond positively to the recommendations of the Inter-
Agency Mission, which are clearly based on the need
for a comprehensive and integrated approach to West
Africa. This would constitute a message of
encouragement to the leaders of ECOWAS, meeting in
Dakar, and a message of hope to the peoples of West
Africa.

The presidential statement that may be adopted as
a result of this exercise and which would reflect the
views expressed during this debate could contribute
usefully to that end.

I now give the floor to Mr. Ibrahima Fall,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs.


