Mr. Yotov (Bulgaria): At the outset, I would like
to join the previous speakers in congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of May. At the same
time, I would like to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Lavrov, for the exemplary manner in
which he steered the work of the Council during the
month of April.

Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement on the
Middle East made earlier by Spain on behalf of the
European Union. My country is deeply concerned at
the continuing, very serious situation in the Middle
East and reiterates its strong appeal for the immediate
cessation of hostilities and the application of every
possible effort to overcome the crisis and restore the
peace process.

We stress the importance of Security Council
resolutions, which remain the only possible basis for
stability and peace throughout the region. We
commend the diplomatic efforts of the "quartet" to
pursue the immediate implementation of Council
resolutions and to achieve accelerated progress on the
political front.

We welcome the fact that during its last meeting
in Washington, the "quartet" agreed on a number of
very concrete steps that will be undertaken together
with the parties and the international community. We
support the readiness to begin preparations for an
international conference to meet this summer to deal
with security, economic and humanitarian issues.

My delegation is concerned at the fact that at this
very moment the pullback of the Israeli military forces
from the territories of the Palestinian Authority has not
yet been completed, as required by the Security
Council. My delegation deeply regrets the decision of
the Government of Israel not to cooperate with the
Secretary-General's initiative to dispatch a fact-finding
mission to the Jenin refugee camp. It is necessary that
the events that have occurred in the camp be brought to
light.

We highly appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-
General to develop accurate information regarding the
recent events in Jenin. My delegation expresses its
support for any future effort by the Secretary-General
to provide the Council with the relevant information
when it becomes available.

Bulgaria commends the efforts of international
diplomacy, in particular of the United States and the
United Kingdom, that led to the peaceful solution of
the tense situation surrounding Chairman Arafat's
compound in Ramallah. The full freedom of movement
of the Palestinian leader will allow him to contribute
further to the peace efforts. He must make use of his
freedom to exercise the political leadership of the
Palestinian Authority and his people and to do all in his
power to stop the violence and to rebuild the
Palestinian security structures. The Palestinian
administration should commit itself to stopping the
terror, dismantling its infrastructure and putting an end
to incitement to violence.

The destruction of the infrastructure of the
Palestinian Authority during the Israeli military
campaign undermines its capabilities to enforce the
rule of law, control extremist groups and prevent
violence, including through security cooperation. We
share the concern that the security vacuum may lead in
the long term to an even greater risk to Israel's
security. Therefore, there is a need to urgently rebuild
the infrastructure of the Palestinian administration and
to make it operational. In this regard, we welcome the
meeting of donors recently held in Oslo and the strong
commitment of the international community to
continue to provide economic aid for peace-building in
the region.

During the last public meeting, the delegation of
Bulgaria expressed its concern at the alarming
humanitarian situation in the West Bank, particularly in
the Jenin refugee camp. The information from the
region shows that basic food and health care are still
needed. The international community should take
action to provide humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people. Israel must comply fully with
international humanitarian principles and refrain from
the excessive use of force. It must not only guarantee
full and impeded access of humanitarian organizations
to the populations in need; it must also actively
cooperate with them in the field.

We are concerned at the situation regarding the
stand-off at the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem.
We believe that the talks between the Palestinian and
Israeli sides should be resumed as soon as possible to
resolve this issue and to prevent violence and
bloodshed in this holy site.

We are convinced that the international
community should build on every positive element
achieved so far in order to move ahead as soon as
possible with the process of achieving peace and
stability in the Middle East. The role and unity of the
Security Council are essential to contributing to these
efforts. Bulgaria is ready to support any initiative that
can contribute to the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

