Mr. Motoc (Romania): The Romanian authorities
are deeply concerned about what has happened in
Kosovo in recent days. I believe that all the countries
in our region share this serious concern. We are also in
full agreement with the statement on Kosovo issued by
the European Union, with which we have associated
ourselves.

We believe that the gravity of the situation is
clearly evidenced by the presence at this meeting of the
German Vice-Chancellor, Mr. Joschka Fischer, and of
the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and
Montenegro, Mr. Goran Svilanovic. My delegation
appreciates the personal presence at this important
Security Council meeting of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan.

First and foremost, all violence should stop
immediately. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
KFOR have our full support to use their capabilities
and powers to restore calm and protect Kosovars,
regardless of their ethnic identity. We welcome
NATO's decision to send reinforcements to Kosovo,
demonstrating the alliance's will to carry out its
mission in Kosovo and its stability to do so. Any attack
against KFOR troops and UNMIK personnel is
unacceptable to us. The perpetrators of such attacks
and of all of the violent acts that have erupted in
Kosovo must be brought to justice as soon as possible.

Romania is profoundly saddened by the deaths
and injuries that occurred during the events in Kosovo,
including the casualties among KFOR troops and the
UNMIK international civilian police. We extend our
condolences to the families of the victims and our
sympathy and support to the injured.

Romania is also outraged and disappointed by the
massive display of ethnic hatred that was shown in
Kosovo at a time when our hopes were going towards a
committed implementation of the standards laid out by
the international community.

The deplorable and tragic events in Kosovo have
demonstrated beyond doubt that the international
community should remain focused and determined, and
that the highest priority should be given to enforcing
the rule of law, ensuring proper security for all ethnic
minorities and bringing to justice the perpetrators of
criminal acts. Until we have tangible progress in these
issues, we cannot approach successfully other problems
related to Kosovo's future.
At the same time, we should not allow five years
of tremendous efforts in Kosovo to be washed out by
these events. Once normalcy is restored, there will be
important lessons to be taken by all concerned. But the
international community should be undeterred in its
fundamental objective of establishing a stable, multi-
ethnic and democratic Kosovo, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). There should be no turning
back to the past and no giving back to extremists.

The political leaders in Kosovo must exercise
their democratically established authority over the
population in order to unequivocally protect all
minorities and their extremely important religious,
cultural and historical heritage. This is a fundamental
value for Europeans, and we would want to make sure
in the future that it is equally appreciated and observed
by Kosovo society.

As I have mentioned before, Romania continues
to be fully committed, politically and as well as in very
concrete terms, to Kosovo's stabilization. As a token of
this commitment, we are proud that yesterday a
Romanian gendarmes detachment faced up to the
pressure and fulfilled their responsibilities in helping
restore the situation in Mitrovica, along with their
colleagues of the multinational KFOR and UNMIK
troops.

