Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his valuable briefing on the latest developments in
the occupied Palestinian territory, reminding us once
again of the ongoing tragedy there. We commend his
efforts and endeavours to ensure de-escalation and
contain the current tensions. We also welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Retno Marsudi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia, and thank her for participating in
today's meeting.

We would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the State of Palestine on its election by
acclamation to chair the Group of 77 and China. We
wish it every success. We agree with my colleague the
observer of Palestine that this is a positive and hopeful
development that confirms that the international
community continues to support the cause of the
Palestinian people.

The Security Council is once again meeting at
the start of a new year to address the Palestinian
question. The year 2018 was marked by detentions, the
demolition of homes and destruction of property and
the unprecedented expansion of illegal settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem. It was also marked by the forced
displacement and killings of Palestinian civilians and
by a tightening of the blockade that was first imposed
on the Gaza Strip 12 years ago. Those practices have
been factors in the daily lives of the Palestinian people
for the past year. Unfortunately, the Security Council
has not acted to compel the occupying Power to
implement its resolutions, thereby giving Israel a green
light to continue its practices aimed at perpetuating
the occupation and undermining any prospects for a
genuine peace that would grant the Palestinian people
their legitimate and basic human rights, including the
right to independence, sovereignty and a dignified life.

That is the situation of the Palestinian question at
the beginning of its sixth decade. The international
community remains unable to find a solution to it,
not for lack of determination or will but due to the
absolute rejection of any proposed solution by Israel,
the occupying Power. History shows that successive
Israeli Governments have refused to comply with
the relevant Security Council resolutions or with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
and have continued to violate them. I will focus on
the suffering just this past year of the Palestinian
people under occupation, by citing some statistics and
numbers provided by United Nations reports, including
those prepared by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA).

First, regarding settlement activities, in 2018 Israel,
the occupying Power, continued to seize Palestinian
territories by force and evict their original inhabitants.
It began building at least 5,618 settlement units during
the past year, most of them deep into the occupied West
Bank, notably in East Jerusalem and Bethlehem. It has
also recently approved the construction of an additional
2,500 settlement units. The number of settlers living
in the occupied West Bank increased by 3 per cent,
reaching 448,000, not including 200,000 more who live
in occupied East Jerusalem. In that regard, we once
again call for implementing resolution 2334 (2016),
which stresses that Israel's settlement activity is a
flagrant violation of international law and an obstacle
to peace. We call on Israel, the occupying Power, to
fully and immediately cease all its settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.

Secondly, with regard to the demolition of houses
and buildings, in 2018 Israel continued its policy of
demolishing Palestinian houses, dismantling 460
structures in the West Bank, mostly in Jerusalem, and
affecting the lives of around 7,000 Palestinian citizens.
According to OCHA, more than 13,000 demolition
orders were issued, including for 50 schools. All of
those illegal practices show that Israel has continued its
efforts to destroy all prospects for a two-State solution
based on the pre-l967 borders.

Thirdly, with regard to settler violence, in 2018 we
witnessed an increase in violations committed by the
occupying army and settlers against Palestinians and
their property, with a total of 4,318 violations - an
average of 11 per dayf including action at checkpoints,
detentions, the confiscation of funds, vehicles and
properties, and the destruction of agricultural crops.
Acts of aggression by settlers against Palestinians,
which are considered hate crimes, increased by 60 per
cent in 2018 as compared to 2017.

Fourthly, with respect to deaths and injuries,
Israel, the occupying Power, has continued its policies
against Palestinian civilians suffering under the yoke
of the occupation, in contravention of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. In 2018, no fewer than
295 Palestinians were killed and 29,000 injured, the
highest number of casualties since the Israeli war on
the Gaza Strip in 2014. In the Gaza Strip itself, 257
Palestinians have been killed since the start of the
Great March of Return on 30 March 2018, including
181 during demonstrations.

Fifthly, with regard to detentions, in 2018 some
6,000 Palestinian people were detained, including 358
children, 128 women and seven parliamentarians.

The State of Kuwait condemns Israel's systematic
and extensive practices and policies towards the
defenceless Palestinian people, which according to
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law amount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We call on the Security Council to enforce
its resolutions on the protection of Palestinian civilians,
especially resolutions 904 (1994) and 605 (1987),
which confirm the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention to the occupied Palestinian territory. This
is a simple overview of the crimes, illegal policies
and practices of Israel, the occupying Power. We
would need more than these few minutes to accurately
reflect the bitter reality that the Palestinian people are
living through. There can be no question that those
statistics and figures should compel us, as members
of the Security Council, to shoulder our responsibility
to support the rule of law and ensure accountability
while ending the illegal policies that deny a people
their legitimate rights. In that regard, we commend the
efforts of the Secretary-General to address UNRWA'S
financial shortfall, as well as the generous response by
donors, including Kuwait, to ensure that it can continue
to provide its services to Palestinian refugees.

We reiterate our support for the Palestinian people's
struggle to realize all their legitimate political rights
and establish their own independent State on their land,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We fully support
the right of the State of Palestine to become a fully-
fledged Member of the United Nations. Conversely,
as we condemn Israel's policies aimed at changing the
demographics of Jerusalem and its continued violations
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, we call on States to refrain from
establishing their diplomatic missions in Jerusalem,
in line with international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 478 (1980),
which stresses that Jerusalem is a final-status issue.

In conclusion, we call on the international
community to fulfil its commitments and take the
necessary measures to revive the peace process with
the aim of reaching a two-State solution, putting an
end to the Israeli occupation of all Arab territories
occupied since 1967, and ensuring a just and lasting
peace in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map.

