Mr. Mamabolo: It is an honour for me to brief
the Security Council on the situation in Darfur and
the work of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), in line with the
Secretary-General's 90-day report that is already
before the Council (S/20l9/305). I also wish to take this
opportunity to acknowledge the presence of Mr. Niels
Annen, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office
of Germany.

As Council members know, the Secretary-General's
report covers the period up to 3 April. Since then, a lot
has happened in the Sudan in general, and in Darfur,
in particular. Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita
already briefed the Council on 12 April on the removal
of President Omer Al-Bashir. It would be appropriate to
update the Council on key developments since that date.

As Council members know, General Awad Ibn
Auf, former Vice-President and Defence Minister,
who took over as the head of the Transitional Military
Council following the change and resigned a day later
in response to popular demands by protesters who
spearheaded the demands for a change of Government.
He named General Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan as his
successor. Upon assuming the position, General
Al-Burhan announced a number of steps aimed at
stabilizing the situation, including the lifting of the
daily curfew across the country, the release of political
detainees and the imposition of a ceasefire across the
country, among other measures.

The Transitional Military Council has also
indicated that it will carry out reforms of some of
the Government's institutions, including the National
Intelligence and Security Service. Indeed, the Council
is replacing high-ranking Government officials who are
said to be unpopular with the demonstrators, perhaps
in an attempt to gain trust and confidence. Yesterday,
the Chief Justice and the Attorney-General were
replaced. General Al-Burhan announced further that
the transitional military phase would last a maximum
of two years, ending with a handover of power to a
civilian arrangement.

However, protests continue in Khartoum and other
parts of the country, with a sit-in at the headquarters of
the Sudanese Armed Forces demanding the immediate
transfer of power to civilians. It is worth noting that
the Transitional Military Council has since initiated
dialogue with the Declaration of Freedom and Change,
the umbrella body of the protestors, and other elements
of the opposition, on a feasible transitional mechanism
that would be all-inclusive and representative of all
Sudanese interests.

In an important development, on 15 April the
African Union Peace and Security Council (AUPSC)
issued a communique calling on the Transitional
Military Council to install a transitional civilian
authority within 15 days, failing which the Sudan
would be suspended from participation in all African
Union (AU) activities. While there are has been no
reaction so far on the part of national stakeholders, the
Transitional Military Council is likely to consider the
AUPSC statement a setback.

The changes at the federal level have an obvious
impact on Darfur. Since the removal of President
Al-Bashir, internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
other protesters in Darfur have engaged in acts of
violence, including arson on the premises ofthe National
Intelligence and Security Services and the ruling party,
as well as houses of community leaders perceived to
have collaborated with the previous regime. Such
incidents have occurred in many locations, including
E1 Fasher, Nyala, Kass, Zalingei, Golo, Nertiti, Kutum,
Kabkabiyah, Saraf Omra, El Geneina and Mournei. In
Kalma IDP camp, clashes between IDP youth groups
on 13 April led to the reported death of 15 IDPs.
There have been reports of confrontations between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the National Intelligence
and Security Service in Darfur, particularly when the
Armed Forces attempted to protect the protesters.

Let me assure the Council that in the midst of all
these developments, UNAMID has remained vigilant,
maintaining a robust posture, particularly in the
Jebel Marra area of responsibility, which is Where we
have peacekeeping troops. The Mission's day-to-day
operational activities continue. We have intensified our
patrols, particularly in and around IDP camps, and we
continue interacting with partners on the ground. With
regard to the safety and security of United Nations
personnel and assets, I am pleased to report that so far
the United Nations has not been a target and that all our
staff are accounted for.

Allow me to now focus on the Secretary-General's
report before the Council (S/2019/305). With the
adoption of resolution 2429 (2018), on 13 July 2018,
the Mission continued with its reconfiguration and
drawdown. The reduction of the military component
from 8,735 to 4,050 personnel by 30 June is on track.
The strength of UNAMID police has also decreased
from 2,500 to 2,283 personnel. UNAMID police
advisers have been deployed to State liaison functions
and are also co-located with the Sudanese police forces.

UNAMID and the United Nations country team
also continue to implement the transition strategy
in preparation for the Mission's withdrawal. In this
regard, $15 million has been allocated to State liaison
functions in the 2018-2019 UNAMID budget for the
joint implementation of programmatic activities with
10 individual United Nations country team entities
with which UNAMID has signed memorandums of
understanding in the areas of the rule of law, human
rights, resilience and durable solutions for IDPs and
host communities.

UNAMID staff, integrated within the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, have
expanded protection monitoring to return areas and
areas from which UNAMID has withdrawn. Similarly,
the United Nations Development Programme and
UNAMID have adjusted conflict-prevention projects
to improve targeting and increase sustainability after
the Mission's eventual exit. UNAMID staff are also
supporting the United Nations Population Fund in
strengthening prevention and response to gender-based
violence, including community-based mechanisms.
As regards programmatic activities, a shift in focus
from institutional to community-based projects may
be required in the light of the continuation of the
state of emergency and uncertainties surrounding the
transition modalities.

The security situation in Darfur remained calm
in the reporting period. However, clashes between the
Government and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul
Wahid (SLA-Abdul Wahid) in Jebel Marra were more
frequent but contained to a few locations, while the
footprint of the Sudanese Armed Forces was readjusted
in recent weeks to focus on urban areas in the light of
the protests. On 28 January, the Government extended
the unilateral cessation of hostilities indefinitely while
the movements extended the ceasefire for three months
on 8 February. Incidents of intercommunal clashes also
remained low, while some violence continued to occur
between herders and farmers, mainly in North and
West Darfur.

Humanitarian partners continued to provide
assistance in Darfur, with a focus on the provision
of life-saving needs to vulnerable groups through
the delivery of basic social services, particularly for
newly displaced IDPs and those affected by conflict.
However, their activities continue to face challenges in
accessing some areas in Jebel Marra localities in South
and Central Darfur owing to continued restriction of
access by the Sudanese authorities on security grounds.
UNAMID experienced a total of 10 access denials and
two restrictions of movement, compared with seven
in the previous reporting period. Such access denials
prevented UNAMID from verifying reported fighting in
several areas in Darfur. In an unexpected development,
a UNAMID integrated patrol on a humanitarian escort
to Feina village in South Darfur on 26 March was
denied access by an SLA-Abdul Wahid commander.

UNAMID continued to engage the Government to
further strengthen mechanisms for addressing human
rights concerns in Darfur. During the reporting period,
UNAMID documented 59 new cases of human rights
violations and abuses involving 129 victims. UNAMID
also continued to support the re-establishment of
the criminal justice chain in return areas, with the
rehabilitation of a rural court and construction of a
district court, three rural courts, a land registry and
prison dormitories for male and female prisoners alike
in North Darfur. UNAMID, in collaboration with the
Sudanese judiciary, also organized mediation trainings
for 25 rural court judges and provided capacity-building
support through trainings on human rights and prison
duties for 59 newly recruited prison staff.

The implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur continued to face challenges as a result
of capacity and resource constraints. With regard to
the peace process in Darfur and in the context of the
changes that have taken place in recent days, the call by
the Transitional Military Council on the non-signatory
armed movements to engage politically and be a part
of the ongoing dialogue has yet to receive a tangible
response. In a recent statement, signed by Malik
Agar and Minni Minawi, the Sudanese Revolutionary
Front - which includes the Sudan Liberation Army-
Minni Minawi (SLA-MM), the Justice and Equality
Movement-Gibril (J EM/Gibril) and the Sudan People's
Liberation Army/North - distanced themselves from
the ongoing discussions between the Transitional
Military Council and the Declaration of Freedom and
Change forces, saying it was too early to hold a meeting
with the Transitional Military Council.

However, the SLA-MM. and JEM/Gibril have
indicated to the mediation that they still intend to
pursue the Darfur peace process in a manner that
addresses the underlying causes of the conflict. Their
reasoning is that there is risk should the Darfur peace
process be merged into the current dialogue, because
the causes that led to the conflict in the first place may
not be properly and independently addressed. In that
regard, acting in consultation with the Special Envoy of
Qatar and in support of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, UNAMID continues to seek
ways of commencing talks between the movements
and the Sudanese authorities. On his part, the leader of
the Sudan Liberation Army, Abdul Wahid Nour, issued
a statement on 13 April rejecting the Transitional
Military Council, terming it as an attempt to reproduce
the previous regime. The Security Council should call
on him to seize the opportunity and engage politically
with the Sudanese authorities.

At this juncture, I wish to say that, while we
are on track with the mission's drawdown process,
the political situation in the Sudan has drastically
changed and has the potential to affect our mandate
implementation going forward. For instance, we were
scheduled to hand over Sector East headquarters in Ed
Daein on 15 April. We have since delayed the handover
by two weeks pending further clarity as the state's
administration keeps changing. Meanwhile, UNAMID
is in the process of establishing contact and working
relationships with the new administration at both the
federal and state levels.

Darfur is not, and cannot be, immune from what
is happening at the national level. The incidents of
violence in displaced persons' camps in Darfur in
reaction to the events in Khartoum attest to the fragility
of the security situation in Darfur, which had hitherto
been increasingly calm and stable, with the exception
of the Jebel Marra area. It is my hope that the situation
does not deteriorate further or have a negative impact
of UNAMID's envisaged exit.

As much as it might not be desirable, the current
situation provides a chance for the Sudanese to seize the
opportunity to resolve all their conflicts, including the
one in Darfur. The Council should urge the people of
the Sudan to take a holistic and all-inclusive approach
that is representative of all Sudanese.

