Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
having organized this briefing on the general elections
that were held on 11 November in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his clear and useful statement on
developments in the situation in that country.

The population of Bosnia and Herzegovina
participated in the third general elections since the end
of the war five years ago. These elections are all the
more important because they are being conducted in a
climate marked by important events throughout the
region. The democratic developments in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, which was recently admitted
to the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), as well as the
encouraging events in Croatia, are factors promoting
the development of peace and reconciliation in that
country. We are confident that the establishment of
close diplomatic relations between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
will lay the foundation for good-neighbourly relations
and for constructive cooperation that is mutually
beneficial to the two peoples.

We welcome the good conditions in which the
elections took place and the strong voter participation.
Although we do not yet have the final results, we
continue to hope that the moderate parties will make
significant gains and that the final outcome will be in
keeping with the expectations of the international
community regarding the establishment of a multi-
ethnic, tolerant and prosperous Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is now up to the newly elected officials
to redouble their efforts to improve the living
conditions of the citizens and to channel their energies
in order to curb unemployment and create good
prospects for young people.

In conclusion, I am pleased to pay a tribute to the
OSCE for its commendable efforts in supervising the
elections, and to the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which continues to work for the full
implementation ofthe Peace Agreements.

