The President: I would first like to make a
procedural announcement. I would like to inform the
members ofthe Council and others in the Chamber that
I plan to carry on with this morning's meeting until
about 1 p.m. We will suspend the meeting at about 1
p.m. and resume promptly at 3 p.m. to hear the
remaining speakers. I thought it would be useful for
members to know this as they plan the day ahead.

I would now like to inform the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of
Belgium, Burkina Faso, Canada, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Gambia, Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Sweden, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamara
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Adam (Belgium), Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso), Mr. Duval (Canada), Mr. Bouah-Kamon
(Cete d'Ivoire), Mr. Jagne (Gambia), Mr. Camara
(Guinea), Mr. Captan (Liberia) and Mr. Schori
(Sweden) took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation, under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure, to Mr. Anwarul Karim Chowdhury,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997)
concerning Sierra Leone.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Ambassador Chowdhury to take a seat at
the Council table.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation to the
Permanent Observer of Switzerland to the United
Nations to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Staehelin
(Switzerland) took the seat reservedfor him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
note of the President of the Security Council enclosing
a letter dated 19 December 2000 from the Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone
transmitting the report of the Panel of Experts
established by resolution 1306 (2000), document
S/2000/1195.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following documents:
S/2000/1232, note by the President of the Security
Council, enclosing a letter dated 21 December 2000
from the Permanent Observer of Switzerland to the
President of the Security Council; S/2001/8 and
S/2001/74, letters dated 28 December 2000 and 23
January 2001, respectively, from the Gambia to the
President of the Security Council; S/2001/6, letter
dated 3 January 2001 from Liberia to the President of
the Security Council; and S/2001/78, letter dated 24
January 2001 from Liberia to the Secretary-General.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Anwarul Karim
Chowdhury, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132
(1997) concerning Sierra Leone.


