Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Mr. President,
we welcome your initiative in holding a Security
Council debate on Afghanistan. We are grateful for
the participation of Mr. Bob Carr, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Australia, in today's debate, and appreciate
Ambassador Quinlan's leadership of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).

Ambassador Zahir Tanin's statement gave us a
complete perspective on the challenges and opportunities
facing the people of Afghanistan. We thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his informative briefing
today and his strong commitment to addressing the
issues in Afghanistan and the region. The Secretary-
General's latest report on Afghanistan (S/2013/l33) is
both synoptic and exhaustive. It updates us on recent
developments, guides our discussion today, and outlines
how the United Nations should help Afghanistan in
the coming years. We thank the Secretary-General
for his recognition of the concrete support being
given by the Government of Pakistan to Afghan peace
and reconciliation efforts. Our commitment to that
process arises from our strong conviction that peace
and stability in Afghanistan are essential to peace and
stability in Pakistan and the entire region.

Afghanistan is on the cusp of three concurrent
security, political and economic transitions, up to 2014
and in the decade of transformation. If those transitions
are managed responsibly and skilfully, Afghanistan
will see security and stability dawn, and so will the
region. We are glad that this time there will be no
precipitous disengagement of the international forces
from Afghanistan. The drawdown is phased and well
planned, and bilateral and regional mechanisms will be
in place to help with the transition.

In the past 10 years, the people of Afghanistan and
Pakistan, NATO, the United States and other countries
have paid a heavy price in blood and resources.
Pakistan's civilians and military personnel have made
unprecedented sacrifices. All those sacrifices should
not go in vain. The people ofAfghanistan must succeed,
and we must succeed with them.

The tide seems to be turning. We are encouraged
by the recent progress in Afghanistan, despite problems
rooted in more than three decades of conflict and
strife. Pakistan has always supported and facilitated
the work of the United Nations in Afghanistan.
Resolution 2096 (2013), which the Security Council
has adopted today, tasks the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to facilitate
national reconciliation, to support the electoral
process and governance and to promote socioeconomic
development. We urge the continued engagement of
the United Nations in institution-building, the peace
process, counter-narcotics efforts, the return and
rehabilitation of refugees and the coordination of
humanitarian assistance.

The United Nations long-term political role should
be determined by the realities on the ground and,
more important, by the consent and aspirations of the
people of Afghanistan. We agree with the Secretary-
General that our expectations must remain realistic.
If there are temporary setbacks, we must stay the
course. The Council today renewed the mandate
of UNAMA for another 12 months. We take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the Secretary-General's
Special Representative Jan Kubis and his team for their
commendable work in Afghanistan.

As an enabler and capacity-builder, the UNAMA
footprint must be supported by adequate resources.
Donor fatigue and fiscal constraints in the international
economic climate should not squeeze the flow of
assistance and investment to Afghanistan. It is
imperative that all pledges be honoured and translated
into action. We welcome the phased transfer of lead
security responsibility from the International Security
Assistance Force to Afghan security institutions.

Pakistan's bilateral relations with Afghanistan are
driven by a sense of shared destiny. Our cooperation
spans the entire spectrum of political, economic,
educational and cultural relations. To deepen our ties,
we look forward to the early finalization of a strategic
partnership agreement between our two countries,
which is being negotiated.

We are strengthening Pakistan-Afghanistan
military and intelligence cooperation and making the
trilateral mechanism comprising Pakistan, Afghanistan
and the International Security Assistance Force more
effective. The stability and sanctity of our international
border with Afghanistan is a shared responsibility. In
that spirit, Pakistan has proposed setting up a mechanism
at the Interior Minister's level to devise and enforce
a border management regime in order to interdict all
kinds of criminals, including terrorists, drug traffickers
and smugglers. Pakistan has also established more than
1,000 posts along its border with Afghanistan. More
than 140,000 Pakistani troops are deployed on our
side of the border, at huge financial cost. Illegal cross-
border movement will drop dramatically if security is
beefed up on the other side of the border as well.

Pakistan is committed to an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process. We
agree with the Secretary-General that Afghanistan
will be able to achieve stability, growth and prosperity
only if there is peace in that country. Pakistan supports
the efforts of the High Peace Council to promote
reconciliation in Afghanistan. We endorsed the travel-
ban exemptions inserted into resolution 2082 (2012)
last December. We hope that those exemptions will lead
to the desired flexibility for engagement and dialogue.
At the request of the High Peace Council, Pakistan
has released a number of Taliban prisoners in good
faith and after giving prior intermission to the Afghan
authorities. Inclusivity will guarantee the success of
the reconciliation process. All stakeholders must be
on board. Instead of being hamstrung by caveats and
qualifications, all sides would benefit from building
on convergences, however thin they may appear at the
moment. Afghanistan's international partners have an
important role in helping the principal interlocutors
to move towards that direction, but only the people
of Afghanistan can craft a road map for national
reconciliation and determine their political future.

Multiple regional approaches are being pursued to
deal with the complex challenges of peace, security and
economic reconstruction in Afghanistan. We are also
actively participating with regional and international
partners under various trilateral and quadrilateral
formats. Our effort is to keep them concentric,
coordinated and noncompetitive. In that regard, the
summit-level meetings among the United Kingdom,
Afghanistan and Pakistan have been most useful. All
those processes should culminate in economic and
commercial cooperation and help the neighbourhood
root out terrorism, extremism and illicit narcotics. We
must counter terrorists' hideous narratives masqueraded
as ideology and staunch their flawed symbolism. They
do not speak for Islam or for Muslims.

Counter-narcotics should be one of the top
priorities. We appreciate the efforts being made by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and the International Narcotics Control Board to track
and control the production and trafficking of illicit
narcotics. That serious threat demands massive efforts
and resources. We strongly recommend measures to
enhance the capacity of the Afghanistan National
Security Forces in that regard. UNAMA could also play
a supportive role to the UNODC activities in counter-
narcotics. Pakistan's Anti-Narcotics Force is stretched
to its limits in interdicting drug traffickers from
across the borders. We are trying to evolve a regional
approach to tackle the problem. In November 2012,
Pakistan organized the regional ministerial conference
on counter-narcotics, which was attended by high-level
representatives from 13 countries. In follow-up, we
are working to establish a regional contact group on
counter-narcotics.
The spotlight on the security and political
issues often eclipses the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan. Pakistan still hosts more than 3 million
Afghan refugees. More refugees should be repatriated
to Afghanistan and absorbed there. Creating pull
factors in Afghanistan is part of the solution strategy
on Afghan refugees agreed to in Geneva this year. We
count on the international community's support for the
implementation of the strategy.

We wish the valiant people of Afghanistan a bright
and prosperous future. As they move towards that
destination, Pakistan will remain their committed and
steadfast partner. What we need most is faith in each
other and a vision for a common future.

