Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU).

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilisation and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Iceland, member of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Armenia align themselves with this
statement.

First of all, let me thank you, Sir, for convening
this debate. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his remarks earlier today and
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing and
frank assessment of the situation.

The European Union expresses its full support for
the Annapolis process and its commitment to
supporting the parties in their negotiations with a view
to achieving a two-State solution. A just and
sustainable solution to all aspects of the Middle East
peace process can be achieved only through
negotiation. Despite the difficulties that the process has
recently experienced, the EU welcomes the intention of
the parties to resume their negotiations and looks
forward to an early meeting of Quartet principals.

The EU is deeply concerned about the recent
violence in Gaza and southern Israel, especially the
civilian casualties. It condemns in the strongest terms
the terrorist attack on a seminary in Jerusalem on 6
March and the continued rocket attacks. While
recognizing Israel's legitimate right to self-defence, the
EU calls for an immediate end to all acts of violence.

The EU stresses the need for swift and tangible
results on the ground in order to sustain negotiations.
Action from both sides to implement their road map
obligations is vital in order to retain the confidence and
support of the Israeli and Palestinian populations, the
region and the wider international community.

The EU is deeply concerned about the recent
Israeli announcement that it intends to extend the
settlement of Givat Ze'ev. The EU reiterates that
settlement-building anywhere in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, is
illegal under international law. Settlement activity
prejudges the outcome of final status negotiations and
threatens the viability of an agreed two-State solution.
The EU therefore urges Israel to take immediate action,
in particular on settlements and outposts. It calls on the
Palestinian Authority to make further efforts to
implement its obligations with regard to security,
where needed in cooperation with the Israeli
authorities. In that regard, the EU remains ready to
strengthen and extend its Police Mission for the
Palestinian Territories in order to support the
reinforcement and reform of the Palestinian security
forces.

The EU considers that the violent confrontations
in and around Gaza have serious security implications.
The EU is deeply concerned by the unsustainable
humanitarian situation in Gaza and calls for the
controlled and sustained reopening of all crossings in
and out of Gaza for both humanitarian reasons and
commercial flows. While reconfirming in that context
the Council conclusions of January 2008, it extends its
full support to efforts to facilitate a peaceful solution to
the present crisis. That solution should provide for a
lasting period of quiet. The EU reiterates its readiness
to resume its monitoring mission at Rafah, in
accordance with the Agreement on Movement and
Access of November 2005.

The EU recalls its commitment at the
International Donors' Conference for the Palestinian
State last December in Paris to support efforts to build
the future Palestinian State, in accordance with the
Palestinian Reform and Development Plan. It calls for
Israeli cooperation in the Plan's implementation. The
EU expresses its full support for the upcoming
international conferences on investments and economic
revival in Bethlehem and in support of Palestinian civil
police and rule of law in Berlin.

The EU continues to stand by its strong support
for the Government and institutions of Lebanon in
carrying out their missions to preserve Lebanon's
stability, sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. The EU expresses concern about the ongoing
political deadlock in Lebanon and the deterioration of
the security situation.

The EU reiterates its strong support for the plan
unanimously adopted by the Arab foreign ministers in
seeking to broker a resolution to the political crisis and
commends the continued efforts by Arab League
Secretary General Amr Moussa. It urges the parties in
Lebanon to proceed, as a first step, to the immediate
holding of the presidential election. The success of the
plan requires all actors to play a constructive role. The
EU recalls that the EU High Representative has been
designated to spearhead the EU efforts with Arab
countries in that respect.

