Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor for presenting her report. Since this is the
first time that Ms. Bensouda has briefed the Council,
please allow me to congratulate her on the assumption
of the post of Chief Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We are convinced that the
Office of the Prosecutor is in good hands, and we wish
her every success.

We commend Libya on the progress achieved
during the first year of liberation from the Al-Qadhafi
dictatorship. The recent approval of the new Cabinet
of Prime Minister Zeidan in the first elections for
decades is an important step in the transition process.
No one expected this transition to be easy and without
challenges after decades of systematic destruction of
political institutions by the former regime. The Prime
Minister and his Government should therefore receive
all the support they need, and we look forward to
working closely with them.

Let me now turn to the points that were raised by
the Prosecutor. I would like to address four issues.

First, on cooperation, we fully support the
Prosecutor's call on all concernedto fully cooperate with
the ICC and thereby contribute to the implementation
of resolution 1970 (2011). We are mindful that the
resolution explicitly demands full cooperation with the
ICC from the Libyan authorities. We therefore encourage
Libya to meet its obligations without preconditions or
restrictions. In that context, we appreciate the renewal
of the mandate of the Libyan focal point to the ICC on
11 September.

Secondly, with regard to the admissibility
challenge presented by Libya in the case of Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, Germany reiterates its view that
the ultimate decision on the matter is to be made by
the ICC Pre-Trial Chamber. It is in the interest of all
to establish clarity on the issue ofjurisdiction as soon
as possible. We therefore urge the Libyan authorities
to swiftly supply the Pre-Trial Chamber with copies
of the evidence that was presented orally during the
public hearing held on 9 and 10 October. We expect
all concerned to fully accept and implement the
forthcoming decision by the ICC.

Thirdly, on the more general point of how potential
future referrals by the Council should be worded,
Germany regrets that, despite a clear legal obligation to
allow for the full application of the Rome Statute to all
activities undertaken by the ICC and its staff under the
Statute, some staff members of the ICC were detained
in Libya in June. We are therefore of the view that future
referrals should explicitly highlight the privileges and
immunities enjoyed by ICC staff.

Fourthly, Germany remains very concerned about
reports, including by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry, regarding gender-related
crimes that were committed in Libya. We fully share
the view of the Prosecutor that such crimes may well
fall under the Rome Statute and that the ICC therefore
has the full authority to investigate and, if needed, to
prosecute the perpetrators of those heinous crimes.

Finally, I wish to reiterate Germany's readiness to
support ongoing investigations following requests for
cooperation.

