Ms. Lind (Estonia): First of all, I would like
sincerely to thank New Zealand for having convened
this important meeting, for the first time. I would also
like to express my gratitude for all of the presentations
made this morning.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

We are all well aware that natural disasters and
development issues such as the scarce resources,
remoteness, limited administrative capacity and
disadvantaged economies that small island developing
States (SIDS) are facing can pose serious threats to
peace and security not only in those countries but even
in a wider context, both regional and global. These
threats include tensions caused by political, social and
economic instability, humanitarian crises, risks related
to migration and transnational organized crime.

One of the greatest challenges for SIDS, of course,
is climate change, which generates sea-level rise and
increasingly intense natural disasters, as was recently
demonstrated by Cyclone Pam, which recently struck
Vanuatu and Tuvalu. Estonia was one of the first to
contribute to UNICEF in response to the most critical
needs of the children and families affected by the
disaster in both countries. In this context, we also
welcome the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015-2030, which includes reference to the
vulnerabilities of SIDS.

As was also discussed in the recent Arria Formula
meeting, climate change can be a driver for various
types of insecurity and crises, both internally and
globally. It is a matter of utmost importance that a
global, ambitious, single, legally binding agreement on
climate change,

applicable to all, be concluded this year in
Paris. Estonia has always been a strong proponent
of safeguarding international law, and we also think
that the obligations undertaken by the international
community to fulfil the objectives of tackling climate
change must be taken extremely seriously. Estonia
has also decided to contribute €1 million to the Green
Climate Fund in the years 2015-2016.

Last year, Estonia was glad to be present at
the third International Conference on Small Island
Developing States, held in Apia, and to be part of the
adoption of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(Samoa Pathway) and the Programme of Action for the
sustainable development of SIDS. It recognized, as a
core theme, that genuine and durable partnerships and
international cooperation are essential for the mitigation
of the risks of climate change and other challenges of
those island countries. In Apia, nearly 300 partnerships
were announced, and now it is crucial to implement
them.

Estonia has made a long-term commitment to
partnering with SIDS countries. We have contributed
to the project aiming to provide and improve satellite
Internet connectivity in remote and vulnerable areas in
the Pacific small island States. While information and
communication technologies solutions have proved to
be one of the most powerful promoters of development,
especially in remote areas, the other side of the coin
is security. Among other threats, SIDS are also
susceptible to cybercrime and cyberattacks. Therefore,
we have extended our cooperation with SIDS to the
field of cybersecurity, inter alia in cooperation with the
Organization of American States, in several Caribbean
countries such as Dominica, Jamaica and Trinidad and
Tobago.
Finally, we hope that today's debate will not remain
the only one on the subject. The Security Council's
involvement is essential in the maintenance of peace
and sustainable development in the small island
developing States. And vice versa, in order to better
accomplish that aim, a stronger voice of the small
nations in the Council is vital. We therefore hope that
the SIDS countries will be adequately represented in
the Security Council in the near future.

