Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): First of all,
Mr. President, I would like to put on record our
appreciation for your efforts in organizing this briefing
today. I would also like to thank Mr. Muburi-Muita, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office to the African
Union, for his comprehensive briefing.

Just last month, the Council visited Addis Ababa
and had a very fruitful exchange of views with the
members of the African Union (AU) Peace and
Security Council and several other leaders in Africa. As
many as two thirds of the active items on the Council's
agenda concern Africa. About three quarters of the
Council's time is spent on African issues. It would
therefore be no exaggeration to say that the success of
the efforts of the Council in Africa will significantly
determine its overall effectiveness in maintaining
international peace and security.

In this connection, it is important for us to hear
Africa's voice so that the Council's activities are not
only based on Africa's needs, but also complement the
activities that African countries and organizations are
themselves undertaking. Cooperation with Africa will
also enable the Council to act with a better
understanding of the situation and establish Africa's
ownership of solutions and thereby promote lasting
peace and security on the African continent.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
recognizes the importance of regional organizations
and their role in matters relating to peace and security.
The Charter also provides a broad framework for
cooperation between the Council and regional
organizations. We therefore welcome the establishment
of the United Nations Office to the African Union. The
Office will assist the AU in developing a more
effective peace and security partnership with the
Security Council; strengthen coordination and
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations
system; ensure an appropriate level of representation to
enhance the strategic and operational partnership of the
United Nations with the African Union and subregional
organizations; and help the United Nations deliver key
outputs in Africa in an integrated manner.

We believe that the Office will develop a long-
term perspective for its mandate and focus on capacity-
building of the African Peace and Security Architecture
so that the AU becomes a more effective and capable
partner of the United Nations. To implement its
mandate, the Office must be adequately staffed and
resourced so that the constraints on its functioning are
removed.

The Office also needs the active support of the
Council to carry out its liaison work, in particular in
the field of peacekeeping. Simultaneously, the Office
should expeditiously work to establish a formalized
structure of interaction with different AU bodies and
subregional organizations. This would not only ensure
the effective flow of information between the United
Nations and AU, but also help in regular follow-up.

It is our view that progress on the implementation
of the Office's mandate should be periodically reported
to the Security Council. It is essential for
understanding practical difficulties and gaining
perspectives of the Office operating in the field.

For effective and enduring cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU, it is necessary that the
Council not adopt a selective approach to this
cooperation. While the Security Council bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council, as structured at
present, needs to hear the voices of other regions and
countries not represented on a permanent basis.

Alongside the work of reforming the Council, it
would add to the credibility of the Council's action if
serious consideration were given to the views of the
African Union, in particular when the AU can help in
expeditiously and peacefully resolving a crisis. In this
context, we believe that the Council needs to pay heed
to the views of the African Union in resolving the
Libyan crisis.

We hold this view fully mindful of the
demonstrated ability of the African Union to solve
problems in Africa. In cooperation with the Council,
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
for the Sudan has been instrumental in the successful
implementation of important aspects of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). The Panel is
also engaged in resolving outstanding CPA issues and
in the crisis in Darfur. The African Union Mission in
Somalia is a mainstay of international efforts to bring
peace and stability to that country. These are but some
examples of the AU's success in resolving African
problems.

In conclusion, we fully support the Council's
continuing cooperation with the AU and expect that the
Secretary-General's report on the Ten-Year Capacity-
building Programme for the African Union will be fully
implemented and that the United Nations Office to the
African Union will play an instrumental role in that
regard.

