Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for giving me the floor. I
am another humble son of Africa. I can be added to the
list. I was born and raised in the continent, and so I can
be added to the list of the Ambassador of the Bahamas.

The first conclusion I would like to draw from this
meeting is that we have to work harder to utilize the
range of instruments already available. Let me discuss a
few of these specifically.

The first is that the United Nations should work
more closely with regional and subregional organizations.
The United Nations cannot abdicate its duty to maintain
international peace and security by delegating that
responsibility to African regional or subregional
organizations. However, when the United Nations seeks
their assistance and participation - a mechanism that
should be encouraged - it has to be ensured that those
organizations have all the means necessary to carry out
those functions.

Secondly, I want to address the issue of the
insufficient use of preventive diplomacy, such as fact-
finding missions, Security Council missions and other
similar instruments. I must recall the effectiveness of the
Security Council mission to Jakarta last September, which
greatly facilitated our work in East Timor. At the same
time, I cannot forget how difficult it was to establish it.
Thus, I believe that we have to use more of these
instruments and other missions - missions, for instance,
of representatives of the Secretary-General. I must here
remember and pay homage to the mission that Maitre
Blondin Beye was undertaking when he died - a mission
to some African capitals, undertaken in the eleventh hour
in the hope of getting support to persuade Jonas Savimbi
to abide by the Lusaka Protocol.

 

I would also like to discuss the idea of preventive
deployment. Why has the previous success with preventive
deployment in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
for instance, not been replicated elsewhere, and particularly
in Africa?

Another instrument that was referred to by previous
speakers is that of targeted sanctions. This very important,
but the work of the sanctions committees should not be
bureaucratic but businesslike. Committees should regularly
evaluate their own work and become proactive in fulfilling
their mandates. The Council should encourage this trend
and add its political weight whenever necessary. If this does
not happen, arms embargoes, for instance, will continue to
be the farce that they currently are.

In the context of the sanctions committees, I must
praise the work carried out by Ambassador Fowler. This is
a good example that should now be followed.

We know, however, that there are no quick fixes for
solving African problems. That is precisely why we
strongly support urgent and sustained action, as was
requested this morning by the Secretary-General.

Let me stress the importance of an ingredient usually
missing when the Security Council deals with conflicts in
Africa. I refer to what is boldly termed "post-conflict
peace-building". This is a very important idea that was long
refused linkage here in the Security Council and that some
consider to be a General Assembly instrument. I believe
that it can be used in certain situations, particularly now
that we are thinking about deploying a peacekeeping
operation to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I think
this peacekeeping operation should be followed by elements
of peace-building. That is why I recall the idea of
convening an international conference on the Great Lakes
region.

I wish to say one final word to state the obvious.
There should be no competition for allocation of resources
between different regions of the globe. As the Secretary-
General reminded us this morning, this Organization has to
provide the tools, including financial ones, to implement its
own resolutions and decisions.

