Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): We welcome you, Madame, as the President of
today's meeting of the Security Council.

China has always been of the view that the question
of Kosovo is an internal matter of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Proceeding from the principle, recognized by
the whole international community, of respect for and
maintenance of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, we believe that the
question of Kosovo should and can only be solved by the
Yugoslav people themselves in their own way. Ultimately,
it is for the Yugoslav people themselves to come to a
resolution.

We appreciate the position of the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia regarding settling the
Kosovo issue through unconditional dialogue. The
situation in the Kosovo region is now stabilizing. There
is no large-scale armed conflict, still less any escalation
of the conflict. The Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia has also taken a series of positive measures
to encourage the refugees to return home and provide
facilities for humanitarian relief work.

However, at the same time, we are gravely
concerned about the action - pointed out in the
Secretary-General' s report of 4 September - of blocking,
for political purposes, the return of refugees and
prolonging the humanitarian crisis so as to keep the
attention of the international community on this region.

We believe that the international community should
view the current situation in Kosovo as it really is and
evaluate the positive efforts by the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in an objective and just
manner. We do not see the situation in Kosovo as a threat
to international peace and security.

I would like to reiterate here that many countries in
the region are multi-ethnic. If the Security Council
becomes involved in a dispute without being requested to
do so by the countries of the region - or goes even
further and unfairly applies pressure on or threatens
actions against the Government of the country concerned
- it would create a bad precedent and have wider
negative implications.

 

Unfortunately, the draft resolution before us has not
taken into full consideration the situation in Kosovo and the
legitimate rights of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
within its sphere of sovereignty. It has invoked Chapter VII
of the United Nations Charter all too indiscreetly in order
to threaten the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This will
not help bring about the fundamental settlement of the
Kosovo issue. It may, on the contrary, reinforce the
separatist and terrorist forces in the region and increase the
tension there.

In view of the above, the Chinese delegation cannot
support the draft resolution before us and will be compelled
to abstain.

