Mr. Jessen-Petersen: May I begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, and the Council as a whole, for
allowing time for this meeting and for agreeing that I
be accompanied today by the Prime Minister of
Kosovo, Mr. Bajram Kosumi.

Since my last report to the Council, on
24 October last year (see S/PV.5289), there have been
three major issues defining politics in Kosovo. The
first, and most recent, is the tragic loss of President
Ibrahim Rugova and the orderly and dignified
transition to the election of a new President. The
second is the opening of the status process. The third is
the continuing - indeed, revitalized - push for
progress on standards implementation, on
decentralization and on the full inclusion of all
minority communities in the creation of Kosovo's
future.

Last Friday, the Assembly of Kosovo met and, by
a large majority, elected Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu as President
of Kosovo. President Sejdiu has already sent a letter to
you, Mr. President, and I understand that it has been
distributed to members of the Council.

The election of President Sejdiu followed the
tragic death of President Ibrahim Rugova. Throughout
his life, President Rugova maintained a vision of a
free, tolerant and democratic Kosovo, and it is around
that vision that others can unify in order to achieve its
realization. The loss of such a pivotal figure is hard for
any society, and it was hard for Kosovo, but Kosovo's
people and institutions responded with dignity, resolve
and maturity - a maturity that was remarked on by
many, locals and internationals alike, who attended the
memorial service and funeral on 26 January.

I would like to express my appreciation for the
response of the international community in sending
impressive delegations to the memorial ceremony in
Pristina. Not only was it a gesture of respect for the
late President, but it also demonstrated the
international community's continued engagement in
and strong support for Kosovo as it moves towards
resolution of its status.

The arrangements for that sombre event were in
the hands of the local authorities, and they deserve
enormous credit. Theirs was an achievement of which
any society could be justly proud. Today, let me thank
the Kosovo Force and its commander for their support
during the event, as well as over the past month.

Though I am reluctant to single out any one
institution when so many contributed, I do feel bound
to salute the performance of the Kosovo Police Service
(KPS). The KPS was solely responsible for front-line
security and crowd management on the day of
President Rugova's funeral. The 3,500 officers on duty
that day showed professionalism and sensitivity in
coping with masses of mourners numbering into the
hundreds of thousands, as well as a large number of
important visitors from abroad. Those officers came
from all communities in Kosovo. More than 10 per
cent of the KPS strength is made up of Kosovo Serbs,
out of a total minority representation of 16.2 per cent.
At senior levels, the proportion of minorities rises to
approximately 20 per cent - considerably higher than
most estimates of the proportion of minorities in
Kosovo's population as a whole.

Kosovo's political response to the loss of Ibrahim
Rugova has been as mature and dignified as was the
management of his funeral. Just after the mourning
period, the Assembly of Kosovo rapidly scheduled a
session to elect a new president - Mr. Fatmir
Sejdiu- which was secured last Friday with votes
from a very large proportion of the members of the
Assembly of Kosovo.

The very next day, last Saturday, President Fatmir
Sejdiu convened his colleagues on Kosovo's
negotiating team - Assembly President Nexhat Daci,
Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi, Democratic Party of
Kosovo leader Hashim Thaci and ORA leader Veton
Surroi - in order to take forward President Rugova's
positive vision through the status process. At that
meeting, the team approved a negotiating platform on
decentralization in advance of a meeting between
Pristina and Belgrade, to take place in Vienna under
the auspices of the Status Envoy, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari,
on 20 February.

As the Security Council has acknowledged in the
past, the status quo in Kosovo is not sustainable. It
follows that the status process should not become a
continuation of the status quo. The acceleration of the
status process is the best contribution that can be made
now to ensuring political stability in Kosovo and in the
wider region.

But, as has been made clear by the Status Envoy,
Mr. Ahtisaari, and as was reiterated by the foreign
ministers of the Contact Group in London a fortnight
ago, the pace of progress in the status process is largely
up to the institutions and people of Kosovo themselves,
through a greater commitment to the implementation of
standards - notably those that are essential to the
building of a truly multi-ethnic society.

The Secretary-General's recent report and my
own technical assessment of 6 January, covering the
period up to 15 December, have both made it clear that
there was, in the latter part of last year, a noticeable
slow-down in the pace of implementation of standards
in Kosovo. The most worrying of the slow-downs
noted in my technical assessment was in the field of
minority rights. That is an area in which, with the
status process under way and with the stance of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government on its
outcome being well-known, Kosovo's leaders cannot
afford to show anything less than complete
commitment, sincerity and action.

The critical observations made in those reports -
and directly by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
myself to the Kosovo authorities - have had an effect.
As of mid-December, we have noticed fresh initiatives
to push standards implementation forward through
short-term, results-oriented governmental action plans,
the next of which is expected to be adopted at next
week's Government session and to cover the coming
three months.

The pace and commitment demonstrated in the
latest action plan must be maintained, and efforts
redoubled, in the months ahead. Standards, as a
political priority, cannot be subsumed by status.
Symbolic gestures, genuinely important though they
are, are not sufficient. Actions must be substantive and
serious. They must also be sustained. The
incorporation of standards into the latest European
Partnership document has ensured that the policies that
have helped to guide Kosovo into the status process
will continue to guide Kosovo's future even after a
status settlement.

Meanwhile, decentralization remains a key issue
and one with both a current and a future importance,
not least in terms of minority rights. As such, it is a
touchstone of the seriousness of the Kosovo Albanians'
political leadership in demonstrating what kind of
society they wish Kosovo to be. The Vienna meeting
on decentralization convened by the Status Envoy will
present an opportunity to demonstrate that the concerns
expressed by minorities are being met on the Kosovo
Albanian side with understanding on substance and
generosity in spirit. The indications that I have
received make me hopeful that it is an opportunity that
will be seized.

Decentralization is only one of many areas in
which it is vital that we - Kosovo's institutions and
the international community - reach out as much as
possible to the Kosovo Serbs. For Kosovo Albanians,
the status process inspires hope, but for many Kosovo
Serbs it inspires fear. Every possible effort must be
made by every political actor to reconcile the hopes of
the majority and the fears of the Kosovo Serb minority.

The best way of ensuring that the Kosovo Serbs
have a voice and that it is heard would be for them to
engage directly with, and ideally in, Kosovo's
institutions. Belgrade's continuing refusal to
countenance that does nothing to improve conditions
for Serbs in Kosovo and it does everything to worsen
their already acute political isolation. How can we -
how can any of us - reassure the Kosovo Serbs today
about their future in Kosovo if they are discouraged
from participating directly in the design of that future?

The Contact Group has made plain that the
eventual status settlement must include significant
provisions for minority rights. If Kosovo's
representatives in the status process are themselves
proactive in arguing for such verifiable provisions,
they will be doing Kosovo a favour, for justifiable
dispensations willingly offered are clearly a better
foundation for the future than intransigent positions
grudgingly abandoned.

In the meantime, though, there is ample scope for
cooperation between Kosovo's Serbs and the majority
community on a wide range of practical issues,
electricity supply being an example high on everyone's
mind at the moment. Such cooperation would be easier
and more productive if it came with the acceptance and
support of Belgrade. The refusal of such support is
rooted in politics, but its effects are damaging to the
welfare of individual Serbs in Kosovo, and it is they
who have to cope with the consequences.

With the beginning of the status process, the
United Nations mission in Kosovo has entered its most
critical phase. Now, as in the past, our focus must
remain on building in Kosovo a society that is
democratic, multi-ethnic, inclusive and tolerant; a
society which is internally at ease with its own
diversity; a society which is outward-looking and
committed to a future of peace and cooperation
alongside all of its neighbours, in an integrated Europe.

I am convinced, after long service with UNMIK,
that Kosovo - its people and its institutions - is
committed to moving in that direction. Much has been
achieved; much more must and will be done. The next
months offer an opportunity for Kosovo's leaders to
redouble their efforts, to reach out to Kosovo's Serbs
and to the other minorities and to register solid and
substantive progress. But it is, equally, a period when
the Kosovo Serbs must seize the opportunity provided
by the status talks and take an active part in the central
and municipal institutions in Kosovo if they wish to
shape the future of a truly multi-ethnic Kosovo.
Finally, it is a period in which Belgrade must
encourage and support such Kosovo Serb participation
in the institutions.

In the western Balkans, the appalling politics of
the 1990s had human suffering, ethnic cleansing and
forcible displacement as their goal, and not merely as
their consequence. Our goal must now be to make good
the political wrongs of the past, with a focus on the
rights of all people - of individuals and families -
for the future.

The majority in Kosovo, who suffered so much as
a minority themselves in the past, have a right to
expect that their aspirations will be met when Kosovo's
status is decided. The minorities, who have in turn
suffered revenge and isolation, have a right to expect
that their concerns will be just as seriously heard and
addressed. My hope as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo over the past 18 months
is that, with a settlement of the status issue, the people
of Kosovo can finally leave the past behind and set out
as one on the journey towards the Euro-Atlantic family
of nations.

