The Secretary-General: I pay tribute to the
delegation of Greece and to you in particular, Madam
Foreign Minister, for convening this meeting on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The fact that the Security Council has
met twice on this issue in as many years shows the
importance it rightly attaches to it.
3

Last October, in its first resolution on the subject,
resolution 1631 (2005), the Council expressed its
determination to further this cooperation, and asked me
to report on the challenges and opportunities in this
area. My report is now before the Council in document
S/2006/590, and I am pleased to have this chance to
supplement it with some further thoughts.

It is now 14 years since the Council invited my
predecessor to submit recommendations for
strengthening the United Nations in the field of
international peace and security, including our
collaboration with regional organizations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter. Since then, my
predecessor and I have convened six high-level
meetings with the heads of partner organizations. A
seventh, as the Council has heard from the President, is
to be held shortly.

Those meetings are helping to build a common
forum and an agenda of cooperation. The partnership is
stronger today than in the early 1990s; many of the
regional and subregional partners themselves are
stronger; our interaction is more intense, substantial
and meaningful. This year alone, our political and
operational collaboration has included: cooperation
with the African Union's peacekeeping operation in the
Sudan; cooperation with the European Union in
support of the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of Congo; and ongoing partnerships with the
Economic Community Of West African States, the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Afghanistan and
Kosovo, and the Organization of American States in
support of Haiti's electoral process.

We are also engaged in regular consultations with
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
League of Arab States on conflict resolution in the
Middle East, Africa and Asia. Our mediation and other
efforts include partnerships with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in Somalia and Sudan, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations in Cambodia,
Myanmar and Timor-Leste, the International
Organization of La Francophonie in the Central African
Republic, and the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries in Guinea-Bissau.

That is just a sample of the wide-ranging policy
and operational activities that are taking place. Those
diverse experiences span conflict-prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace building.
They are delivering results on the ground, as well as
lessons for the future.

We have a better sense today of our respective
strengths and advantages. The political engagement of
regional actors is improving our knowledge of specific
situations. Their military and peacekeeping capacities
have made it possible to respond more quickly at the
outset of a crisis and at key moments. Their resources
are proving to be a linchpin of post-conflict peace
building. My report contains specific suggestions for
building on this growing knowledge of each other's
strengths.

Much as we have strengthened our capacities
over the years, it is essential that we do even more. The
10-year capacity-building programme for the African
Union is making progress, primarily because it has
brought together, with a great sense of purpose, all
relevant regional and subregional, in-area and out-of-
area actors. With that example in mind, my report sets
out a number of concrete recommendations for
furthering this and other capacity-building efforts.

We sometimes forget how quickly our world
evolves. Not too long ago, the idea of more than
90,000 United Nations peacekeepers in the field, of an
African standby force, or of a European Union police
mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, was
unthinkable. They are reality today.

Likewise, the breadth of our involvement in
mediation efforts, the growing awareness of the
fragility of post-conflict situations and the increased
emphasis on prevention have also been major features
in our work. The reality of the next decade is that the
demand for peacekeeping and these other services will
continue to grow and we must be ready.

That means the time has come for us to take the
regional-global partnership to a new level of clarity,
practicality and seriousness. Chapter VIII exists for
reasons that are as valid today as they were 61 years
ago. Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations offers a framework for doing
this with the requisite flexibility, accountability and
legitimacy. I welcome, therefore, the deepening
engagement of regional organizations in United
Nations efforts for peace and security, and urge us all
to continue to keep thinking of new ways - new ways
to our cooperation and to the creation of a global
collective security mechanism that protects people and
lays the groundwork for lasting peace.

