Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like first to thank
you, Mr. President, for arranging today's open meeting
of the Council on the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).

Ireland fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by Spain later in the debate on behalf of
the European Union.

Resolution 1373 (2001) remains a defining
architectural under-pinning in the fight by the
international community against international
terrorism. The Counter-Terrorism Committee, for its
part, has played an indispensable role in monitoring
and shaping the response of States in implementing the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). As the three
90-day work programmes indicate, it has done this
comprehensively and rigorously, but also, in the view
of our delegation, with sensitivity to the scale of the
tasks involved, with openness to the views and
perspectives of the wider United Nations membership,
and in a spirit of genuine dialogue and transparency.
Ireland appreciates this very much.

I would also wish, in particular, to place on
record, as others have done this morning, our strong
appreciation of the work of the CTC Chairman,
Ambassador Greenstock. I would also like to thank
him, as well as his colleagues in the United Kingdom
Mission and in London for what they have done. The
scale of the task of establishing the CTC and getting it
off to such a strong start was very daunting and
demanding. It required a huge commitment of time and
energy by Ambassador Greenstock. So, I want to
warmly thank him for this. Ireland also appreciates the
dedicated, committed work of the three Vice-Chairmen,
the experts appointed to assist the Committee and, of
course, the Secretariat.

At this stage in our meeting, there is no need to
repeat the many points already made this morning. I
would like, however, to make a few general points of
importance to my delegation.

First it is of great importance that the CTC
continue its present approach of dialogue and of
openness to the concerns of United Nations Members.
For many States, and not because of any lack of
political determination, the legislative and
administrative requirements of implementing resolution
1373 (2001) are complex and daunting. There needs to
be sustained appreciation of this, and concomitant
support from those most capable of providing it.

Secondly, as we progress in the period ahead into
more detailed assessments regarding the
implementation by States of the requirements of
resolution 1373 (2001), we must also be careful, as at
present, not to micro-manage or to prescribe beyond
the requirements actually laid down in 1373 (2001).

My delegation fully takes the point - and
Ambassador Greenstock rightly emphasized this in his
remarks - that reaching a measure of confidence that
States are taking action on all the issues does not
equate to declaring any Member State to be 100-per-
cent compliant. It is also, I think, worth emphasizing as
a related point that resolution 1373 (2001) is clear on
what is required. We must avoid going beyond the
spirit or the letter of its provisions. The fight against
terrorism is now, so to speak, a global public good and
is almost universally regarded as such. That perception
must be strengthened, not diminished, over time. This
means that a realistic sense of the complexity of things,
not any spirit of Manichaeanism, will continue to be
our safest guide towards our agreed goals. We are, in
summary, the guardians of the spirit as well as the
detail of 1373 (2001).

Thirdly, Ireland attaches the utmost importance to
support by the United Nations, and by the international
community generally, for the efforts of developing
countries where this is necessary to implement 1373
(2001). This may involve the provision of expertise and
assistance as appropriate or, in many cases, pointing to
where it is available. It must not mean, of course, a
diminution of development assistance for other goals.
This also means that we need to understand fully that
resolution 1373 (2001) poses particular challenges to
many developing countries and to continue fully to
take this into account in our work.

Fourthly, Ireland strongly welcomes, as others
have this morning, the work of the CTC and its Chair
in encouraging regional organizations to work together
in the fight against terrorism. This is more than
important; it is essential.

Fifthly, on a wider level, we believe that the fight
against terrorism can never be at the expense of human
rights. Here, my delegation is in full agreement with
what the Secretary-General said to the Commission on
Human Rights in Geneva on 12 April:

"Let us, therefore, be careful not to place
whole communities under suspicion, and subject
them to harassment, because of acts committed by
some of their members. Nor must we allow the
struggle against terrorism to become a pretext for
the suppression of legitimate opposition or
dissent." (Press release SG/SM/8196)

Not only are such measures profoundly unjust. They
are also liable to achieve the precise opposite of the
desired effect by driving more members of the targeted
groups to resort to violence. In short, the Secretary-
General went on to say, "any sacrifice of human rights
in the struggle against terror is not only wrong in itself,
but will ultimately be self-defeating".

I should add that Ireland very much appreciates
the report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mrs. Robinson, on human rights and
terrorism as presented to the Commission on Human
Rights earlier this month. This is an excellent example
of the United Nations and its institutions looking,
together, at issues affecting us all.

Finally, Ireland endorses fully the remarks made
by Ambassador Greenstock earlier on the importance
of adequate provision of resources to the CTC. We
understand the problems involved, but this is important
work for an essential objective and, however we
resolve the issue of resources, it must be done.

