Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Our discussion on
transition and exit strategies comes at the right time. It
is true that in the last few years we have focused
mostly on mission start-up and deployment. In the
years to come, I expect that we will turn more of our
attention to consolidating the progress made and to
making a smooth transition as we reduce the size of
our missions. That is a prognosis that I think will come
to pass.

Today's debate is part of a broader discussion on
peacebuilding. The Secretary-General has just recalled
the key links between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The New Horizon document describes the
peacebuilding efforts that the United Nations peace
missions have launched since the beginning of such
operations.

Our missions, as we all know, provide a basic
level of security that is essential for peace in the future.
Such efforts include, in particular, the protection of
civilians, the rule of law, the demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, security sector
reform and anti-mining activity. The missions are also
charged with supporting political processes and peace
agreements, and thus with supporting electoral
processes, constitutional reform and national and local
reconciliation.

Beyond that, peacekeeping operations are
frequently required to support the restoration of
essential government functions such as police, justice
and correctional systems. Those operations present an
integrated framework for all the efforts of the United
Nations. They support other activities essential to
peacebuilding, such as the restoration of basic services
and the revitalization of the economy.

It is crucial that we arrive at a common
understanding, a consensus concerning the link
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. That will
allow clear foundations on which to plan transitions in
a coherent fashion. Based on such clear foundations,
and capitalizing on the comparative advantages and
areas of expertise of the various players, the United
Nations system can join effectively with other actors to
more effectively help countries emerge from conflict.
As the Council knows, the links between peacebuilding
and peacekeeping are important issues and are being
examined by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations.

Once our personnel have achieved initial
stabilization on the ground, we have to make sure that
the collective rebuilding effort continues, so that
peacekeeping operations can hand off the job and
eventually withdraw. The question is, how do we
identify this tipping point? How do we know when the
security or stabilization that a peacekeeping mission
brings is no longer required? Is there a tendency to
overstay?

The long duration of some traditional
peacekeeping missions - such as the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization and the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus - is not
an indication of failure. Those operations show, rather,
that a peacekeeping mission cannot be a substitute for a
political process or for the will of the parties
concerned. They challenge all of us to define a more
creative and constructive political engagement.

Is there a tendency to leave too soon? In his
statement the Secretary-General emphasized the risks
inherent in leaving before peace has been consolidated.
As the Council knows, there was the experience in
Timor-Leste and Haiti, of leaving perhaps too early.
There have also been instances where consent to
United Nations peacekeeping operations has been
abruptly withdrawn, as in the case of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea and the United
Nations Operation in Burundi.

There are, of course, examples such as Sierra
Leone, where the national authorities and the Security
Council have worked together to continually adjust the
United Nations presence according to the evolution of
conditions on the ground. The United Nations thus
concluded a peacekeeping operation and created, first,
an integrated mission and then a peacebuilding office.
Mr. von der Schulenberg will of course provide details.

In every case, progress is never linear.
Peacebuilding inevitably encounters obstacles. And in
every case it is essential, as Ms. Malcorra will tell you,
to align operational and support functions.

(spoke in English)

The debate on staying too late versus leaving too
soon is only one dimension. Getting a mission's
mandate and structure right from the outset is also
critical for a successful transition and eventual exit. We
need the right tools to address the quickly evolving
dynamics and adjust accordingly.

For example, more formed police units, rather
than troops, were needed in Haiti to manage public
order and to address the challenge of gangs and
policing. But when the challenge is the institutional
transformation of national police institutions, formed
police units are not the right tool. Instead, institutional
transformation requires a combination of individual
police officers and civilian capacities that can support
and advise the national police and authorities and assist
in strategic planning.

We need reliable capacities and capabilities in a
range of sectors, including rapidly deployable civilian
capacities accompanied by adequate resources. In this
area, we are seeking to expand the Standing Police
Capacity, complemented by small justice and
corrections expertise. Making sure we have the right
tools from the beginning requires continuous and
constructive dialogue between the Secretariat, the
Council and the troop- and police-contributing
countries.

The early initiation of peacebuilding efforts may
enable an earlier exit for peacekeeping. But we must be
clear that the exit of a peacekeeping operation should
be part of a coherent strategy to support a country

emerging from conflict, and not an end in itself. To use
a medical analogy, we need to be sure it is safe to leave
the emergency room - that is, peacekeeping - before
leaving others to ramp up longer-term recovery. That of
course entails a partnership and shared Vision among
many actors, including regional and bilateral players. It
is a heavy burden on national Governments as well as
on the Special Representatives and their leadership
teams. And it is a challenge for the Security Council
and other Member States bodies.

A durable peace requires progress on many fronts -
a reasonably stable security environment that protects
the rule of law, a legitimate political order that can
mediate differences and avoid renewed Violence,
improved governance and strengthened institution-
building, the resumption of basic services and the start
of socio-economic recovery. A number of those areas
will not be directly mandated tasks of peacekeeping
operations, but they could nonetheless be referenced as
conditions for a safe drawdown and exit.

Ultimately, the defining factor for the drawdown
of a peacekeeping operation is progress in the peace
process and in the capacity of national institutions,
including civil society. However, the strengthening of
national capabilities cannot be enforced or imposed.
States already made fragile by conflict are nonetheless
asked to achieve radical and deep reforms across their
entire governance systems in a matter of a few years.

Expectations must be realistic. Building capacity
is not simply a numbers game. Strengthening civil
society is not about holding a set number of
workshops. Training hundreds of police becomes
meaningless if there is no effective interior ministry to
plan and support their work, or no legal and judicial
structure for them to operate within. The absorption
capacity of national authorities can vary across
different sectors and geographic areas. Timing and
sequencing need to be carefully considered,
particularly with regard to the security sector. The
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, is
challenged by the need to plan for and respond to
different degrees of peace consolidation across a vast
country.

We need to be able to maintain flexibility to
respond to changing circumstances and capacities on
the ground, while providing timely information to the
Security Council and contributors. This allows us to
respond to shifting obstacles and to maximize
opportunities as they arise.

We need to ensure that critical gaps in
peacebuilding are reflected in reports to the Security
Council. But as the Secretary-General noted, there also
needs to be new thinking on how best to measure
actual progress on the ground, given the importance of
subjective aspects such as legitimacy, expectations and
authority. As we know, not everything that counts can
be counted and not everything that can be counted
counts. Capturing the ebbs and flows of a peace
process needs to go beyond benchmarking, and
strategic guidance from the Security Council needs to
be based on as comprehensive a picture as possible.

National authorities must play a pivotal role in
the actual planning for the exit of a peacekeeping
operation. Transitions may be a sign of successful
peace consolidation, but they are also a very sensitive
period. National authorities may have concerns that the
exit of a peacekeeping mission may have unintended
impacts or coincide with a huge drop in political
support or even donor attention. The country may need
a security guarantor, as was the case with Sierra Leone.
We need to listen to and understand the expectations
and perceptions of national authorities and civil society
alike. Of course, the Peacebuilding Commission can
also play a key role in that respect.

Peacebuilding activities also need to be continued
beyond the lifespan of a peacekeeping operation; if
they are not, there is a risk that gains made in peace
consolidation could be lost. One continuing challenge
is the mismatch between the assessed budget and the
voluntary funds available to peacebuilding, which can
limit the capacities of other actors to step in or increase
activities as a peacekeeping mission draws down.

I would like to conclude by setting out some of
the initiatives under way in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations aimed at strengthening
transition strategies. We are working to initiate
transition planning earlier. We are conducting a study
on approaches to transitions in peacekeeping settings
which considers the cases of Liberia and Timor-Leste.
It also examines the experiences of Haiti, as the study
was initiated before the devastating earthquake, which
as the Council knows, one month ago took the lives of
so many of our colleagues and Haitians. As Council
members are aware, considerable progress was made in
Haiti in terms of peace consolidation through the

United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
under the leadership of Mr. Hedi Annabi and Mr. Luiz
Carlos da Costa. Their contributions to the peace and
security agenda were invaluable, and their insights and
wisdom will be sorely missed.

In Haiti, as elsewhere, we are continuing our
work to build stronger partnerships with critical United
Nations actors, Member States and external partners
such as the European Union, the World Bank, the
African Union and others so that we can contribute to
efforts to build coherent strategies in peacebuilding.
We believe that strategic discussions with the World
Bank, as called for in the Secretary-General's reports
on peacebuilding, could be a useful tool for enhancing
transition planning. We are also looking carefully at the
experiences of past and ongoing missions and countries
that have managed transitions so that we can draw on
good practices and better articulate how peacekeeping
can contribute to longer-term peacebuilding.

