Mr. Thanarajasingam (Malaysia): At the outset, let
me congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We welcome the
arrangements you have made to bring about greater
transparency in the work of the Council as well as this
opportunity to debate developments pertaining to the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our deep appreciation
also goes to your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of Rwanda.

Like the preceding speakers, we too wish to welcome
the presence and participation of the Foreign Minister of
Italy.

My delegation has already made known our position
in relation to resolution 943 (1994); we did so in the
Council debate on this issue on 23 September 1994, when
we strongly argued against the adoption of that resolution.
We maintained, and continue to maintain, that its adoption
was premature and that it would merely reward the
aggressors.

The minimum requirements for any reappraisal of the
sanctions regime remain unmet. Those requirements are
recognition by Serbia and Montenegro of the international
borders, sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as of
the Republic of Croatia and of all other States of the
Republic of former Yugoslavia, and the establishment of
an adequate and effective monitoring mechanism for the
interdiction of military supplies across the borders of
Serbia and Montenegro to the Bosnian Serbs. We are not
convinced as yet that the border has been effectively
closed, in the absence of an effective mechanism to fully
verify such action. There are reports, including some from
representatives of the five-nation Contact Group, of
continuing violations of the border of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Given this situation, it would indeed be more
appropriate for the Security Council to reconsider and to
take measures to suspend the implementation of resolution
943 (1994). In our view, any review by the Council on
this issue should be undertaken after due consideration
with all States concerned, including the Contact Group of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), as well
as the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We wish
to reiterate our deep sense of regret at the fact that the
Security Council, despite the appeal made by the OIC to
defer the adoption of resolution 943 (1994) last
September, did not find it possible to do so.

We wish to remind the Council that the sanctions
were imposed against Serbia and Montenegro in the wake
of blatant Serbian aggression against Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the massive violations of human rights
of its people. This aggression is still continuing, as
reflected in developments in the Bihac region.
Accordingly, the international community should resist
any easing of sanctions as long as all conditions stipulated
by the Security Council are not fully met, including the
return of territories occupied by force and "ethnic
cleansing".

My delegation wishes to reiterate the urgent need to
strengthen the monitoring team so that it would be able to
discharge its duties more effectively. Clearly, to have only
200 monitors stationed along the borders is grossly
inadequate. There is the additional need further to
improve the monitoring process in terms both of resources
and of manpower, as well as its methodology. While
appreciating the commitment of members of the
monitoring team, we are concerned that the actual system
of monitoring continues to be confronted by serious
constraints. As such, we seriously question the capability

 

of the monitoring team to carry out its duty given the
constraints, including lack of necessary resources.

My delegation has studied the report of the
Co-Chairmen dated 4 January 1995 (S/1995/6) and we have
found it to be vastly inadequate in terms of the certification
regarding the closure of the border. Specifically, we do not
believe that the Co-Chairrnen could only address in the
report information that could be confirmed only through a
first-hand source. This would certainly hamper the work of
the Co-Chairmen. They should also be allowed to work on
the basis of information received from third sources. We
understand that, under the present arrangement, in order for
the monitor team to undertake an investigation from
information received from third sources, it would need to
seek the permission from the host country before it could
make any investigation. The process of obtaining the
approval would take at least 24 hours, and by that time the
investigation would prove to be too late as incriminating
evidence would have been removed. This procedure needs
to be rectified if the monitoring team is to carry out its
work more effectively. In this regard, we do note that the
present draft resolution seeks to address some of these
concerns that I have just raised.

My delegation wishes to express its concern over
reports that the Border Monitoring Mission has facilitated
fuel shipments through the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina from Serbia and Montenegro to the Croatian
Serbs within the Republic of Croatia. This shipment of fuel
has violated the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and is not consistent
with the terms of paragraph 12 of Security Council
resolution 820 (1993). In our view, the violation of the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina alone should have been a sufficient
basis to terminate this arrangement. Furthermore, the
Croatian Serbs continue to occupy areas within the Bihac
region and have all along coordinated their assault against
the Bihac "safe-area" with the Bosnian Serbs.

Malaysia welcomes the cease-fire and cessation of
hostilities agreement signed on 23 and 31 December 1994,
respectively. However, we are deeply concerned over the
continuation of hostilities in the Bihac area led by the
Croatian Serbs and their cohorts. We strongly condemn the
cross-border aggression by the Croatian Serbs against the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and demand the
withdrawal of the Croatian Serbs from the Republic.

