Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): If you imagine, Mr. President, that I derive
pleasure from the subject of my statement today, or from
speaking at great length, you are wrong. Unfortunately,
however, the situation is such that I have a lot to say
today. And you will have to listen to me.

We thank Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Markram for
their briefings.

The Russian Federation asked that this meeting be
convened under the agenda item "Threats to international
peace and security" because we are deeply alarmed
about the fact that a number of capitals - Washington
first and foremost, with London and Paris blindly
following its lead - are purposely steering a course
designed to supercharge international tensions. The
leadership of the United States, Britain and France, with
no grounds and no thought for the consequences, are
taking a confrontational line on Russia and Syria and
pushing others towards it too. They have a broad range
of weapons in their arsenal - slander, insults, bellicose
rhetoric, blackmail, sanctions and threats of the use of
force against a sovereign State. Their threats against
Russia are brazen, and the tone they take has gone
beyond the limits of the permissible. Even during the
Cold War their predecessors did not express themselves
so crudely about my country. What next?

I remember the rhetorical question that President
Putin of Russia put to our Western partners, and
especially the United States, from the rostrum of the
General Assembly in 2015 (see A/70/PV.13), about their
careless geopolitical experiments in the Middle East,
when he asked them if they at least realized what they
had done. At the time, the question went unanswered.
But there is an answer, and it is that no, they do not
realize what they have done. As they do not realize what
they are doing now. It is not only we who are perplexed
at their lack of any coherent strategy on any issue. It
perplexes most of the people in this Chamber. They
just do not want to ask them about it openly. Wherever
they go, whatever they touch, they leave behind chaos
in their wake in the murky water where they have gone
fishing for some kind of fish. But the only fish they
catch are mutants. I will ask them another rhetorical
question. Do they understand the dangerous place they
are dragging the world to?

One of the areas where the hostility manifests itself
most strongly is Syria. The terrorists and extremists
supported by external sponsors are being defeated. Let
me remind those responsible that these are the terrorists
and extremists whom they equipped, financed and
dumped into the country in order to overthrow the
lawful Government. Now we can see why this is causing
hysteria among those who have invested their political
and material capital in such dark forces.

In the past few weeks, thanks to Russia's efforts to
implement the Security Council's resolutions, a massive
operation has been carried out to unblock eastern
Ghouta, whose residents have been forced to endure the
humiliation of the rebel militias for several years. More
than 150 thousand civilians were evacuated from this
suburb of Damascus, completely voluntarily and under
the necessary security conditions. Tens of thousands
of them have already been able to return to liberated
areas and many have been taken in by relatives.
The changes in their demographic composition that
the defenders of the Syrian opposition have been
screaming about have not happened. That is a lie. Some
extremely complex negotiations were conducted with
the leaders of the armed groups, as a result of which
many left the neighbourhoods they were occupying,
with full guarantees for their security. Incidentally,
there were several attempted acts of terrorism during
these transport operations when militias tried to bring
suicide belts onto the buses and were prevented. Others
preferred to regulate their status with the Syrian
authorities. Thanks to the presidential amnesty, they
will now be able to return to civilian life, and may
even eventually be able to join Syria's security forces.
That represents the implementation of the United
Nations principle of demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration.

However, not everyone is so keen on such
positive dynamics. The outside sponsors - that is, the
leading Western countries - were ready to grasp at
any straw in order to hang on to any centre of terrorist
resistance, however tiny, within striking distance of
the Syrian capital, so that the militias could continue
to terrorize ordinary residents, taking their food and
begging humanitarian aid from the international
community. Incidentally, they were not about to
share medicines with those ordinary civilians, as an
inspection of the strongholds left behind by the fighters
revealed. As happened previously in eastern Aleppo,
the improvised hospital facilities in basements were
full of medicines that thanks to Western sanctions
were not to be had for love or money in Damascus
and other Government-controlled areas. Mass graves
and bodies that showed evidence of torture were also
discovered. The dimensions of the tunnels that the
jihadists used were astonishing. Some of them could
easily accommodate small trucks travelling in both
directions. Those impressive underground facilities
connected the positions of groups that some view as
moderate to the strongholds of Jabhat Al-Nusra.

On 6 April, at their sponsors' instructions, Jaysh
Al-Islam's new ringleaders prevented the fourth group
of militia fighters from evacuating Douma and resumed
rocket and mortar fire on residential areas of Damascus,
targeting Mezzeh, Mezzeh 86, Ish Al-Warwar, Abu
Rummaneh and Umayyad Square. According to official
data, eight civilians were killed and 37 were wounded.
It is regrettable that we seen no statements from
Western capitals condemning the shelling of a historic
part of Damascus.

The next day, 7 April, militias accused the Syrian
authorities of dropping barrel bombs containing a toxic
substance. However, they got their versions mixed up,
referring to it sometimes as chlorine and sometimes
as sarin or a mixture of poison gases. In a familiar
pattern, the rumours were immediately seized on by
non-governmental organizations financed by Western
capitals and White Helmets operating in the guise
of rescue workers. These so-called reports were also
just as quickly disseminated through media outlets. I
should once again point out that many of these dubious
opposition entities have an accurate list of the email
addresses of the representatives of Security Council
members, which leads us to conclude that some of our
colleagues, with a reckless attitude to their position,
have been leaking sensitive information to those they
sponsor. Incidentally, we all should remember the
incident in which the White Helmets accidentally
posted on the Internet a video showing the preparation
stages for filming the next so-called victim of an attack
allegedly perpetrated by the Syrian army. The chemical
"series" that began in 2013 has continued to run, with
each subsequent episode designed to top the impact of
the previous one.

In Washington, London and Paris, conclusions
have immediately been reached as to the guilt of the
Syrian authorities, or regime, as they call it. Has no one
wondered why Damascus needs this? While the Syrian
leadership has received its share of insults, the main
burden of responsibility has been laid at the door of
Russia and Iran, to no one's surprise, I believe. As is
now customary, it has occurred at lightning speed and
without any kind of investigation. On 8 April, Syrian
troops searching the village of Al-Shifuniya, near
Douma, discovered a small, makeshift Jaysh Al-Islam
chemical-munitions factory, along with German-
produced chlorine reagents and specialized equipment.

The Istanbul-based opposition journalist Asaad
Hanna posted a video on his Twitter feed that was
allegedly from the area of the incident. In it, an
unidentified individual in a gas mask, presumably from
the White Helmets, is posing against a backdrop of a
homemade chemical bomb that allegedly landed in a
bedroom in a building in Douma. It is accompanied by
commentary about what it calls another of the regime's
attacks on civilians. There can be no doubt that this
production was staged. The trajectory of the alleged
bomb is entirely unnatural. It fell through the roof and
landed gently on a wooden bed without damaging it in
any way and was clearly placed there before the scene
was shot.

In an interesting coincidence, the chemical act of
provocation in Douma on Saturday, 7 April, occurred
immediately after the United States delegation in the
Security Council was instructed to call for expert
consultations for today, Monday, 9 April, on its draft
resolution on a mechanism for investigating incidents
involving chemical weapons. Today far-reaching
changes were made to the initial text. In such murky
circumstances, of course, we have to determine what
happened. But we have to do it honestly, objectively
and impartially, without sacrificing the principle of
the presumption of innocence and certainly not by
prejudging the process of an investigation.

Despite this provocation, the Russian specialists
have continued their efforts to resolve the situation
in eastern Ghouta. On Sunday afternoon, 8 April,
according to new agreements, the evacuation of Jaysh
Al-Islam combatants was resumed. Following Douma's
liberation from militants, Russian radiological,
chemical and biological protection specialists were
sent there to collect evidence. They took soil samples
that showed no presence of nerve agents or substances
containing chlorine. Local residents and combatants
who were no longer fighting were interviewed. Not
one local confirmed the chemical attack. At the local
hospital, no one with symptoms of sarin or chlorine
poisoning had been admitted. There are no other active
medical facilities in Douma. No bodies of people who
had died from being poisoned were found, and the
medical staff and residents had no information about
where they might have been buried. Any use of sarin
or chlorine in Douma is therefore unconfirmed. By
the way, representatives of the Syrian Red Crescent
refuted statements allegedly made on their behalf about
providing assistance to victims of toxic gases.
I call on those who plan to denounce the regime
when they speak after me to assume that there was no
chemical-weapon attack.

Sweden has drafted a resolution calling for the
incident to be investigated. The Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) does not
need a resolution to investigate it, but we are willing to
consider it. Today we propose to do what is envisaged
in the draft resolution, which is to let the OPCW,
which Mr. Uziimcii, Director-General of its Technical
Secretariat, has announced is ready to deal with the
situation, fly to Damascus immediately, if possible
tomorrow. There the Syrian authorities and the Russian
military will ensure the necessary conditions so that
the OPCW experts can travel to the site of the alleged
incident and familiarize themselves with the situation.
That, by the way, is what President Trump and other
Western leaders have been urging us to do.

The Syrians have repeatedly warned that there
might be chemical provocations. At the Russian Centre
for the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian
Arab Republic they are saying that the equipment
needed to film the next purported chemical attack has
already been brought in. We have also made statements
to that effect in the Security Council. Everyone has
heard those warnings, but has deliberately ignored
them because they do not correspond to the doctrinal
positions espoused by those who dream of seeing the
legitimate Government of yet another Arab country
destroyed.

There has still been no attention given to the
discovery in November and December 2017 of a
significant quantity of chemical munitions on Syrian
territory that had been liberated from militias. In
terrorist warehouses in Az-Zahiriya and Al-Hafiya in
Hama governorate, 20 one-ton containers and more
than 50 pieces of ordnance containing toxic chemicals
were discovered. In Tel Adel in Idlib governorate,
24 tons of toxic chemical, presumed to be chlorine,
were discovered. At a storage site in Moadamiya, 30
kilometres to the north-east of Damascus, 240- and
l60-millimetre-calibre munitions and plastic canisters
of organo-phosphorous compounds were found. In
the area around As-Suwayda in Idlib governorate, an
manufacturing facility for synthesizing various toxic
substances was found, along with 54 pieces of chemical
ordnance and 44 containers of chemicals that could be
used to manufacture toxic substances.

Since the beginning of this year alone, four
instances of militias using toxic chemicals against
Government troop positions have been established in
Suruj and Al-Mushairfeh districts, and more than 100
Syrian troops have been hospitalized. On 3 March,
during the liberation of Khazram and Aftris in eastern
Ghouta, soldiers from a sub-unit of Government troops
discovered an auxiliary workshop for homemade
chemical munitions. This far from exhaustive list is
an indication of the misdeeds of the still unreconciled
opposition. And yet we have seen no eagerness to
send OPCW expert groups there to collect evidence
of these events. We demand that the OPCW verify all
of these areas. They are accessible. We are also seeing
information that American instructors in the Al-Tanf
camp have trained a number of groups of fighters to
carry out provocations using chemical weapons in order
to create a pretext for a rocket strikes and bombings.

It has been clear to us that sooner or later there
would be an attempt to bring the jihadists out of harm's
way and at the same time to punish the regime that some
Western capitals hate. The talking heads on television
have thrown themselves into urging a repeat of last
year's effort at a military attack on Syria. This morning
there were missile strikes on the T-4 airfield in Homs
governorate. We are deeply troubled by such actions.

The provocations in Douma are reminiscent of last
year's incident in Khan Shaykhun, with their shared
element being the planned nature of the attacks. Analysis
of the operations conducted by the United States in April
2017, on the eve of the incident in Khan Shaykhun and
after it, shows that Washington prepared its operation
in advance. From 4 to 7 April of last year - in other
words, from the day that a toxic substance was used
in Khan Shaykhun until the strike on the Al-Shayrat
airbase - the USS Porter and Ross naval destroyers
were already present in the Mediterranean Sea, where
they were engaged in planned operations. They did not
call into any ports where an exchange of munitions
could have been effected as a way to increase their
quantity of cruise missiles.

Specifically, from 4 to 5 April, the USS Porter was
located south-east of Sicily and the Ross was en route
from the Rota naval base to an area south of Sardinia.
Later, on 6 April, both ships were observed moving at
accelerated speed towards the area ofthe firing positions
to the south-west of Cyprus, from where they launched
a massive strike on Al- Shayrat on 7 April. However, the
59 Tomahawk missiles that were launched would have
exceeded the two destroyers' total munitions capacity
if they had actually been engaged in the anti-missile
defence operations that they were assigned to, which
required only 48 units. That means, therefore, that
even before the chemical incident in Khan Shaykhun,
these United States naval vessels undertook a military
operation with a strike capability above the number of
cruise missiles necessary for their anti-missile defence
operations, which could be evidence of advance
planning by Washington of an action against Damascus.

Among other things, Saturday's fake news from
Douma was aimed at diverting the public's attention
from the circus that is the Skripal case, in which London
has become terminally mired, hurling completely
unproven accusations at Russia and accomplishing its
basic purpose of extracting solidarity from its allies in
order to construct an anti-Russian front. Now the British
are shifting away from a transparent investigation and
concrete responses to the questions they have been
asked while simultaneously covering their tracks.

At the Security Council meeting on 5 April on
the Skripal case (see S/PV.8224), we warned the
Council that the attempt to accuse us, without proof, of
involvement in the Salisbury incident was linked to the
Syrian chemical issue. There was an interesting new
development regarding the issue yesterday. As Britain's
Foreign Minister Boris Johnson was continuing his
display of rapier wit "exposing" Russia, another gem
emerged. The Times informed us that Royal Air Force
experts in southern Cyprus had intercepted a message
sent from outside Damascus to Moscow on the day of
the Skripals' poisoning that contained the phrase "the
package has been delivered" and said that two people
had "successfully departed". Apparently this formed
part of the intelligence that London provided to its
allies before expelling our Russian diplomats. Is not it
obvious to everyone that there is an irrefutable Syria-
Russia-Salisbury connection? I will give the British
intelligence services one more huge hint, for free.
Why do they not assume that the Novichok they are so
thrilled about reached Salisbury directly from Syria? In
a package. To cover its tracks. How pathetic.

Ambassador Haley recently stated that Russia will
never be a friend of the United States. To that, I say that
friendship is both reciprocal and voluntary. One cannot
force a friendship and we are not begging the United
States to be friends. What we want from it is very
little - normal, civilized relations, which it arrogantly
refuses, disregarding basic courtesy. However, the
United States is mistaken ifit thinks that it has friends.
Its so-called friends are only those who cannot say no
to it. And that is the only criterion for friendship that
it understands.

Russia has friends. And unlike the United States,
we do not have adversaries. That is not the prism
through which we view the world. It is international
terrorism that is our enemy. However, we continue
to propose cooperating with the United States. That
cooperation should be respectful and mutual, and
aimed at resolving genuine problems, not imaginary
ones, and it should be just as much in the interests of the
United States. Ultimately, as permanent members of
the Security Council, we have a special responsibility
for the maintenance ofinternational peace and security.

Through the relevant channels, we already conveyed
to the United States that military action conducted on
false pretences against Syria, where Russian troops are
deployed at the request of its legitimate Government,
could have extremely serious repercussions. We urge
Western politicians to temper their hawkish rhetoric,
seriously consider the possible repercussions and
cease their feeble, foolhardy efforts, which merely
produce challenges to global security. We can see
very good examples of what becomes of the military
misadventures of the West in Yugoslavia, Iraq and
Libya. No one has invested Western leaders with the
power to take on the roles of the world's policeman and
its investigators, prosecutors, judges and executioners
as well. We urge them to return to the world of legality,
comply with the Charter of the United Nations and work
collectively to address the problems that arise rather
than attempting to realize its own selfish geopolitical
dreams at every step. All our energy should be focused
on supporting the political process in Syria, and for
that, all stakeholders with influence must unite in a
constructive effort. Russia is always ready for that kind
of cooperation.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to request a briefing of the Security Council on the
results of the United Nations assessment mission in
Raqqa and on the situation in the Rukban camp. We can
see how the coalition members are trying to complicate
a resolution of the problems resulting from their actions
in Syria, particularly the carpet-bombing operation
designed to Wipe out Raqqa. No chemical provocations
will distract our attention from that issue.

