Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Jan Kubis for his informative and comprehensive
briefing and thank him and his entire time for their
ongoing work in the context of such a difficult field of
operations such as Iraq.

Uruguay recognizes the arduous work of the
Special Representative and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) carry out in
close collaboration with the Government of Iraq, which
has enabled them to tackle the various emergencies
the country faces. The Security Council's trust in that
process was manifest on Friday when we unanimously
adopted resolution 2367 (2017) - extending the
UNAMI mandate for another year, until July 2018.

After nine months of tough combat and many
Council meetings, we are finally hearing the news of
the liberation of Mosul, after having been under the
control of the terrorist group Da'esh for three years.
Uruguay congratulates the Iraqi Government for its
courage and the great efforts deployed in that campaign,
as well as for this important achievement, which is not
only a victory for the people and the Government of
that country, but also a great step forward in the fight
against international terrorism.

My country trusts that this important milestone
against Da'esh, which must be safeguarded without
letting our guard down, can serve as a decisive step
in the permanent defeat of that group - which has
committed countless abominations and has brutalized
the people under its control since it emerged in 2014. It is
worth noting that the Iraqi and the Syrian peoples have
suffered unimaginable atrocities, including war crimes,
crimes against humanity and even possible genocide,
perpetrated against religious minorities - most notably,
but probably not exclusively against the Yazidi people,
who were subjected to a brutal extermination campaign.

As the entire Council expressed in the press
statement of 13 July (SC/12911), it is now time to
convey our condolences over the hundreds ofthousands
of Iraqis, Syrians and other nationalities that have been
the victims of the crimes of Da'esh - which must not,
under any circumstance, remain unpunished. We must
also note that Da'esh did not arise out of a vacuum, but
was rather a product of a series of unfortunate events,
the first of which was the 2003 invasion of Iraq, which
lacked both multilateral legitimacy and the backing
of the Council. That, in turn, as we are all aware, led
to many years of sectarian civil war that ravaged the
country. Moreover, the situation was exacerbated by the
ideological, financial, military and troop support that
some countries - both from the region and outside of
it - provided to Da'esh. The spirit of fighting terrorism
and the solidarity with the Iraqi people must be a top
priority at this stage. Let us learn from errors of the
past so that we do not repeat them.

The liberation of Mosul has now generated two
enormous tasks that the Government of Iraq, with the
support of the United Nations, must address in the near
future -the gradual rebuilding of the city and the return
of hundreds ofthousands of displaced persons, many of
whom will find that their homes have been destroyed
and that basic services must be restored. Last Thursday,
we bore witness on television to a little girl, Hanan,
in a totally barren paediatric hospital in Mosul, who
died from entirely treatable renal failure. We encourage
the Iraqi Government to prioritize the protection of
civilians, just as we have on other occasions in previous
months during its offensive in Mosul, so that they can
help the millions of people beset by war and terrorism.
Moreover, the United Nations should support the Iraqi
Government's reform campaign to attain long-term
political solutions that will help fight extremism and
ensure the country's stability so as to prevent the
recurrence of a phenomenon like Da'esh.

Political leaders must overcome their historic
divisions and distrust with a view to achieving a broad
national reconciliation agreement that can turn the page
on so many years of suffering of the Iraqi people due
to sectarian and religious divisions. We reiterate that
the war against the scourge of terrorism must be waged
within the framework of international humanitarian
law and human rights and coordinated at the United
Nations in order to prevent atrocities similar to those
committed by those groups.

We are gratified that the renewed UNAMI mandate
calls for the empowerment of women for the immediate
future of the country. In that regard, we call on the
Iraqi Government to promote and defend the rights
of women and girls, and to promote gender equality,
bolster women's political engagement and address the
urgent problem of the use of sexual violence in conflict
as a war tactic and terrorist act.

As of today, Iraq faces a new and transcendent
chapter in its history. Victory against Da'esh will be
insufficient if the Iraqi authorities do not make progress
in the fight against corruption, the political involvement
of civil society and the enjoyment of rights for all Iraqi
citizens. It will be up to the authorities, with the support
of UNAMI and the Council, to consolidate the agreed
reforms so as to bring about a more modern, inclusive
and peaceful Iraq.

