Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We thank the Chinese
presidency for having organized this open debate.

Every time we meet here to discuss the situation in
the Middle East, we are constrained to lament it further.
The spiralling violence, the looming humanitarian
catastrophe, the untold pain and human suffering are
surely not sustainable. And nothing epitomizes this
better than the plight of the Palestinian people, who,
for the past 70 years, have suffered dispossession,
displacement and deprivation at the hands of the
occupation forces.

On the fiftieth anniversary of the illegal occupation
of their homeland, it is unfortunate that the aspirations
of the Palestinians to live a life of freedom and dignity
remain a distant and elusive ideal.

The escalating tensions and violent clashes
that have taken place in and around the Old City of
Jerusalem during the past few days are a reminder of
the fact that we are sitting on a tinderbox. As the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East, Nickolay Mladenov,
has rightly noted, the fallout from events taking place
over a few hundred square metres affects hundreds of
millions of people around the world. These people have
only one demand: that the sanctity of Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the status of Jerusalem be respected.

While the Security Council has taken cognizance
of the gravity of the situation, words must be
complemented by concrete actions. Israel must not only
take immediate steps to defuse the situation, but also
desist from taking any provocative measures in future.

A viable, independent and contiguous State of
Palestine on the basis of the internationally agreed
parameters and the pre-l967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital, is the only sustainable
guarantee of enduring peace in the Middle East. There
is nothing more inimical to this vision than the illegal
Israeli settlements in the occupied territories. Yet there
has been a substantial increase in settlement-related
activities in the occupied lands.

This trend is emblematic of the blatant Israeli
disregard for international law and the collective will of
the international community, including resolution 2334
(2016). It is also a setback for peace and a retreat from
the two-State solution to a one-State illusion.

Meanwhile, in its eleventh year, the suffocating
Israeli blockade of Gaza is not only a humanitarian
tragedy but also a moral outrage. The region can reap
the dividends of peace only if such peace is predicated
on the foundation of justice, an imperative that demands
an end to illegal Israeli occupation and the realization
of the legitimate Palestinian aspiration to statehood. A
just solution for Palestine is not just a matter ofregional
significance; it is a primary precondition for global
peace and security.

We are also concerned that the activities of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) are facing serious
resource constraints, hindering the commendable work
that UNRWA is doing for Palestinian refugees.

The fight against terrorism in the Middle East has
been long-drawn and protracted. Wars and foreign
occupations have compounded these challenges. The
liberation of Mosul is an important milestone in Iraq's
fight against Da'esh and its affiliates and, we are
confident, towards an inclusive Iraqi State, recognizing
and reconciling the interests of the Iraqi people.

The intra-Syrian talks are central to the process
of political reconciliation in that country. Successive
rounds of talks have yet to deliver a major breakthrough,
but the parties, major Powers and the international
community in general must persist, for a military
solution is neither achievable nor sustainable.

Finally, what we need for lasting peace and
stability in the Middle East is firm resolve, concerted
action and, above all, justice and the rule of law. This
can be achieved only when all sides are willing to make
difficult choices. We hope that we are willing to take
that test.

