Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Farid Zarif for his briefing. I welcome the presence of
His Excellency Prime Minister Ivica Dacie of Serbia
at this meeting and thank him for his statement. I also
listened carefully to the statement of Mr. Hashim Thaci.

We respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Serbia and understand the legitimate concerns of that
country on the question of Kosovo. Resolution 1244
(1999) provides the essential legal basis for finding
a solution to the question of Kosovo. China believes
that the best approach in that connection is to find a
mutually acceptable settlement through dialogue and
negotiations on the basis of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and within the
framework of the relevant Council resolutions.

The current security situation in Kosovo is generally
stable. The implementation of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
has made positive progress. Local elections were held at
the end of last year. Agreements were reached between
Serbia and Kosovo on issues such as the integrated
management of crossing points.

China appreciates the efforts of Serbia and of His
Excellency Prime Minister Dacie to seek political
solutions to the Kosovo issue. We encourage Belgrade
and Pristina to continue pragmatic and constructive
dialogue, effectively implement the agreements that
have been signed, effectively protect the legitimate
rights of the various communities and consolidate the
gains made in order to enable the population to benefit
from the dividends of peace and development as soon
as possible, while contributing to peace and stability in
the Balkans and Europe at large.

China commends the work carried out by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif and
supports UNMIK's efforts to continue to discharge
the Security Council's mandate. We hope that the
international presences, such as UNMIK, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force, will strengthen their coordination and work in
synergy so as to play a positive and constructive role in
facilitating a solution to the question of Kosovo.

