Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno and Special Envoy Eliasson for their
briefings on the deployment of the peacekeeping
Operation in Darfur and the latest developments in the
political process.

Last July, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1769 (2007), which crystallized the
achievements of the international community to date in
its efforts to promote the settlement of the question of
Darfur. The Chinese Government pays great attention
to the issue of Darfur. We firmly support the
appropriate track strategy that promotes the political
process and the deployment of the peacekeeping
Operation in a balanced manner and seeks a resolution
of the issue through dialogue and cooperation in a
progressive and prudent manner.

Thanks to the enormous efforts of all parties,
some progress has been made in the deployment of the
peacekeeping Operation. This year, the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) formally took over responsibility for
peacekeeping in Darfur from the African Union (AU)
Mission. Recently, the Secretariat, the African Union
and the Government of the Sudan also held fruitful
talks on some technical issues. China would like to
express its appreciation to the Secretariat, the African
Union and the Government of the Sudan for those
efforts.
Facts prove that, so long as the parties can sit
down to negotiate patiently and in good faith and a
spirit of equal consultation, all issues can be settled. Of
course, the Hybrid Operation has not proceeded as we
expected. The number of troops deployed on the

ground is far short of the target. The security
environment is worsening. Equipment is yet to be fully
delivered. Conditions are harsh. China hopes that all
the parties concerned will demonstrate goodwill, build
up mutual trust and pay particular attention to
improving communications and coordination.

The problems that have occurred should be
addressed through consultations. Recrimination should
be avoided. The tripartite mechanism should be used as
the main channel and should play an effective role in
order to consolidate the progress made and facilitate a
solution to the problems that have arisen.

It has to be pointed out that the implementation
of resolution 1769 (2007) is not the exclusive
responsibility of the Secretariat, the African Union or
the Government of the Sudan. The international
community must share that responsibility by providing
the necessary resources, equipment and personnel, in
particular the badly needed air and transportation
assets. Only the joint efforts of the international
community as a whole can enable the deployment of
the Hybrid force on the ground without hindrance and
its ability to play an effective role.

There is consensus among the entire international
community as regards the need for the prompt
deployment of the hybrid force. Its deployment is also
eagerly awaited by the people of Darfur. All the parties
concerned in Darfur, including the rebel groups, have
an obligation to ensure the safety and security of all the
peacekeepers. Threats of any kind are unacceptable.
The hybrid force should also effectively strengthen
security measures in order to ease the concerns of troop
contributors.

The final outcome of the situation in Darfur will
depend upon the success of the political process. The
political process and the deployment of the
peacekeeping Operation feed into one another. In the
absence of a political peace agreement as a basis, there
will be no peace to keep in Darfur. The peacekeeping
Operation would lose all relevance.

China would like to express its gratitude to
Special Envoys Eliasson and Salim for their efforts to
promote the political process in Darfur. China supports
the talks launched last October in Sirte.

Regrettably, however, the political process in
Darfur lags far behind the deployment of the
peacekeeping Operation. Major rebel groups continue
to be intransigent and are boycotting the negotiating
process. China is deeply worried. We solemnly call
upon those groups to put the overall interests of
national stability and the well-being of the people of
Darfur above everything else, to respond positively to
the just cause of the international community and to
make the right choice at an early date. The Security
Council should also invest more energy in its efforts to
facilitate the political process in Darfur. China also
hopes that the country concerned will be able to exert
greater influence to call upon the rebel groups to
change their positions and take part in the negotiations.

Poverty and backwardness are the root causes of
the issue of Darfur. By its very nature, this is a
question of development. As Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon pointed out just a few days ago when
addressing the General Assembly, disputes over water
resources are a major cause of the conflict in Darfur. In
its efforts to facilitate the resolution of the issue of
Darfur, the international community should address
both symptoms and root causes. It should attach
importance to social and economic development and
provide humanitarian and development assistance. At
the same time, however, only improving people's lives
on the ground will fundamentally remove the cause of
the conflict and improve the security environment.

As a responsible member of the international
community, China has made a series of determined
efforts to find a proper resolution of the question of
Darfur. China will continue to work with the parties
concerned through various channels in order to build
up trust among them and narrow their differences.

In response to the appeal by the Secretariat,
China sent troops to Darfur, and they were among the
earliest to arrive on the ground. Most of the
humanitarian assistance that China has provided to
Darfur, totalling 80 million yuan renminbi, has been
delivered and distributed. The Government of China
has also provided support to the Chinese companies
engaged in building schools, drilling wells and
delivering water projects.

China will continue to join the international
community in contributing to an early settlement of the
Darfur issue and to the achievement of peace, stability
and development in Darfur.

