Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance
with paragraph 18 (h) of the same resolution. The
present report covers the period from 13 September to
17 December 2014, during which time the Committee
held two informal meetings, on 20 October and
8 December, and conducted additional work using the
no-objection procedure envisioned by paragraph 15 of
the guidelines for the conduct of its work.

In view of the recent developments relating to
the Joint Plan of Action, the Committee welcomes
the renewed commitment of all parties to continue
negotiations towards finding a comprehensive
agreement. In that regard, I would like to emphasize
once again that the Security Council measures imposed
under resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008)
and 1929 (2010) remain in full effect as negotiations
between the P5+1 and Iran continue, and States have
an obligation to implement them duly. The Committee
remains fully committed to the implementation of all
the relevant resolutions and stands ready to provide
guidance to Member States that request assistance.
It is my hope that the extension will encourage Iran
to engage constructively with the Council and the
Committee.

In that respect, while no new incidents were
reported to the Committee during the current reporting
period, I would recall that the Committee twice reached
out to Iran earlier this year in relation to incidents
investigated by the Panel of Experts on the Islamic
Republic of Iran. The Committee wrote on 27 March
seeking Iran's comments in relation to a carbon-fibre
interdiction, and on 9 July in relation to an interdiction
in the Red Sea of a cargo of conventional arms. Iran
has not yet provided a response and the Committee
continues to call on Iran to do so.

The Committee continues to assist States and
international organizations in implementing the
relevant Security Council measures. They include
considering requests for guidance on a range ofissues,
including whether proposals for providing technical
assistance to Iran in the fields of energy efficiency and
mine action, as well as other cooperation proposals,
are permitted under the sanctions measures. The
Committee welcomes such engagement on matters of
implementation and compliance and encourages parties
to continue to seek guidance from the Committee on
the application of the Council's measures.

Paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006) and
paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007) allow for
payments owed by a designated entity under a contract
that entered into force prior to its designation to
be made from that entity's frozen funds, subject to
prior notification to the Committee. The Committee
received such a notification from a Member State in
accordance with paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006)
and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007). Similarly, a
Member State notified the Committee of its delivery of
equipment, intended for use in a light-water reactor, to
the Bushehr nuclear power plant, in accordance with
paragraph 5 of resolution 1737 (2006).

During the reportingperiod, the Committee received
a delisting request from an entity that is currently on
the Committee's sanctionsl list through the focal point
for delisting established under resolution 1730 (2006).
As mentioned in my previous briefings to the Council,
the Committee had considered a similar request from
the entity earlier. On 30 September, the Committee
again rejected the delisting request and communicated
to the focal point the reasons for the rejection, which
the focal point has transmitted to the entity. In View
of actions taken by Member States to implement the
relevant Security Council measures, the Committee
encourages States that have not yet submitted reports
to do so as soon as possible, in recognition of the fact
that national implementation reports are an important
means of enhancing the implementation of the sanctions
measures.

In connection with the Panel of Experts, the
Committee considered the Panel's midterm report, which
was submitted to the Security Council on 8 December.
As mandated by resolution 2159 (2014), in advance of
the submission to the Council, the Committee discussed
the Panel's report during its latest informal meeting on
8 December. The midterm report offered a snapshot of
the Panel's range of activities and the ongoing actions of
States in taking environmentforcement action related to
sanctions. That includes the Panel's investigations into
ongoing procurement by Iran, the transfer or alleged
transfer of items alleged to be for Iran's nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes and possible violations of
the travel ban. During the Committee's consideration
of the Panel's midterm report, members welcomed the
report and took note of the Panel's key activities since
the renewal of its mandate in June. The Committee also
continued its consideration ofthe 2014 final report ofthe
Panel of Experts (see S/2014/394), in particular in view
of any follow-up action by the Committee. Taking into
account the report's conclusions, the Committee intends
to continue its deliberations on the recommendations
of the report. On behalf of the Committee, I would
like to recognize the significant efforts of the Panel in
assisting the Committee's work, and wish its members
success and continued close and fruitful collaboration
with the Committee and the incoming Chairmanship.

Lastly, I wish to note that this will be my last
briefing to the Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Committee. I would like to convey my thanks to
the members of the Committee, the Panel and our
colleagues in the Secretariat for their hard work and
assistance in advancing the Committee's work. It has
been a privilege to serve as Committee Chair for the
past two years.

