Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate. I also thank Special Coordinator Robert Serry
for his briefing, and the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for their
statements.

The nine-month deadline for signing a final status
agreement between Israelis and Palestinians expires
today, 29 April. In the absence of any progress, and
despite wide international support of the commendable
efforts of the United States, the realization of a two-
State solution seems increasingly elusive. We are all
losers in this situation. The disappointment of those
who have engaged in the process in good faith is
understandable. Failing to deal with the fundamental
aspects of the question of Palestine in the present will
only create greater challenges for the future.

Brazil notes with disappointment that Israel has
not fulfilled its previous undertaking to release a final
group of Palestinian prisoners. The continuation of the
settlement campaign in the occupied State of Palestine,
including East Jerusalem, is particularly harmful. We
reiterate that settlements are illegal under international
law and detrimental to the peace process. They
undermine the prospects for a negotiated solution to the
conflict and seriously threaten the viability of a two-
State solution. We also strongly condemn the acts of
violence against Israeli civilians and rockets launched
from Gaza into Israel, which are contrary to the cause
of peace, erode confidence and generate more violence
and distrust.

We welcome recent efforts to achieve intra-Palestinian
unity, which is key to consolidating a democratic and
sustainable Palestinian State, and we call on all parties
to fully commit to the obligations assumed by Palestine.
Due to the current state of paralysis in the negotiation
process, no one can blame the State of Palestine for
advancing its legitimate rights in multilateral forums.

At a time when collective responsibility more
necessary than ever, the international community
risks also being rightly accused of omission in the case
of Palestine. No early-warning conflict-prevention
mechanism is needed to notice the Palestinians' appeal
for the Security Council's attention. The Council
should take on a more proactive role and consider
establishing basic parameters for the negotiations that
are consistent with the extensive corpus of United
Nations resolutions. In so doing it would strengthen
respect for international law and exercise its authority
and functions, as laid down in the Charter of the United
Nations. On the occasion of the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, we call on the
interested parties committed to a two-State solution,
particularly civil society, to join their efforts in trying
to influence the leadership on both sides to shoulder
their responsibilities in constructing an environment
conducive to peace in the Middle East.

Turning to Syria, Brazil is deeply troubled by the
scale of the destruction and indifference to human
suffering. It is a grave mistake to assume that in the
absence of a political solution the crisis should be
resolved by using force. During the second Geneva
Conference on Syria in January, Brazil called for an
immediate end to the provision of weapons to all parties
in Syria, among several measures. The continued
militarization of the conflict only brings about more
violence, instability and suffering. Today the number
of internally displaced persons amounts to nearly
one-fourth of Syria's residents. Approximately 15 per
cent of Syria's total population are now refugees, not
to mention the shocking number of fatal victims of the
conflict.

Disputes on other international fronts should
not contaminate the common goal of attaining peace
and promoting a Syrian-led political process. The
immediate and full implementation of the Geneva final
communique of 2012 (S/2012/523, annex) by all parties
remains the most important goal, and we urge them to
demonstrate a strong political will and firm commitment
to that process. Brazil continues to support all efforts to
resume contacts between the parties. National dialogue
and reconciliation are key to ensuring that the elections
in Syria will fully conform with the provisions of the
final communique. Violations of human rights by both
sides, consistently denounced by the Human Rights
Council's Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, should be roundly
condemned.

Also in line with the Commission's reports, we
reiterate our concern about the negative impact of
unilateral sanctions on the living conditions of the
Syrian people. The increasingly radical nature of some
opposition armed groups, and the spillover effects in
neighbouring countries, especially Lebanon, Iraq,
Jordan and Turkey, are also a matter for concern.
Brazil reiterates its call for full, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to all those affected by violence
in Syria, without politicization, as prescribed by
resolution 2139 (2014). The Government of Syria bears
the greatest responsibility in this regard, although the
armed opposition must equally and fully comply with
its humanitarian obligations. Invoking a humanitarian
crisis to justify militarization can only intensify the
suffering of the civilian population, especially its
most vulnerable segments, and increase human rights
violations.

I would like to say a few words on Lebanon,
to which Brazil is united by historical and cultural
ties. Brazil remains extremely concerned about the
increased instability in Lebanon, whose people have
lately been victims of a series of terrorist acts, a
particularly perverse development given Lebanon's
generosity in hosting a million Syrian refugees. We
welcome the formation of a new Government, which,
we are confident, will be able to shield the country
from further instability and strengthen its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. We also call on
the international community to keep up its support
for Lebanon's State institutions, including the army,
and we reaffirm our strong support for Lebanon's
dissociation from the Syrian conflict, as set out in the
Baabda Declaration. We urge all Lebanese political
actors to avoid further escalation and to embrace the
path of understanding. In that regard, Brazil fully
supports the legal conduct of presidential elections,
as enshrined in the Lebanese Constitution, and urges
all parties to cooperate in ensuring the success of the
electoral process.

Finally, Brazil reiterates its support for the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), whose
maritime task force has been led by a Brazilian
commander since February 2011. UNIFIL has been
instrumental in promoting stability in Lebanon and in
preserving security along the border between Lebanon
and Israel.

