Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate. We very
much welcome the presence of African leaders in the
Chamber today. That is a strong statement of the
understandable importance that countries of Africa
give this item. Australia shares that sense of
importance.

The item under consideration today goes to the
heart of how the system of international relations
conceived by the United Nations Charter in 1945 must
remain relevant to the contemporary challenge of
maintaining international peace and security in
circumstances that we all know are so very different
from those when the United Nations was established. It
is for the same contemporary reasons that early
Security Council reform must lead to increased African
representation on the Council.

Australia welcomes the latest report from the
Secretary-General (S/2010/514). Obviously, some real
progress has been made over the past 12 months in
strengthening both the strategic and, more importantly,
the operational partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU).

The annual consultative meeting between the AU
Peace and Security Council and this Council has
become a fixture on the meetings calendar. It embodies
the importance of those two bodies forging the close
and strategic partnership that is needed. Also at the
strategic level, we were particularly pleased to
participate in the inaugural meeting between the AU
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission earlier this year. That
relationship also is one that needs to evolve into a
strong and effective partnership.

We welcome the recent establishment of the
United Nations Office to the African Union in Addis
Ababa. That should create greater synergies and
efficiencies in the United Nations-AU relationship. The
range of other measures set out in the Secretary-
General's report are all practical, sensible and need to
be expanded into the future, including staff exchanges,
annual retreats and ongoing collaboration on country
specific issues. All of that should ensure that the AU,
in developing its own systems, learns from the
experience and best practices of the United Nations.

Australia welcomes the progress that has been
made. It is in the global interest of all of us that the AU
continue to develop as a credible and strong regional
organization that is fully equipped to deal with the
challenges of the African continent, especially in
relation to conflict prevention and response.

The AU and African troop-contributing countries
are carrying a large and difficult - but impressive -
responsibility when it comes to peacekeeping in Africa.
The broader international community needs to
recognize the role those countries are playing in the
direct maintenance of regional and international peace
and security, and take steps to support them.

For our part, we have been pleased to contribute,
in a small way, to strengthening the AU's peace and
security architecture. Australia has given practical
support to the efforts of the African Union Commission
to develop AU guidelines on the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations, as referenced in the
Secretary-General's report, and we will continue to
support the AU in that endeavour.

Australia is supporting the E-learning for African

Peacekeepers - ELAP - programme and has done
so since its inception in 2006. In that time, the
programme - which is a good one - has attracted

over 200,000 enrolments across 20 peacekeeping
operations in distance training courses, at no cost to the
participants. The provision of standardized training to
peacekeepers is a foundation of strengthening the
effectiveness of that peacekeeping.

This past summer we provided training to the
military planning element of the East Africa standby
force, with a focus in the first instance on headquarters
and logistics planning. We will continue that assistance
with that standby force and other standby brigades.

Also this past summer Australia was pleased to
sponsor, with Nigeria, the United Nations Regional
Conference on Deterrence, the Use of Force and
Operational Readiness in Peacekeeping, held at the
Nigerian Army Peacekeeping Centre in Kaduna,
Nigeria. That Conference attracted participants from
around 20 African troop-contributing countries, with a
view to developing comprehensive guidance material
for all military personnel and support staff. We have
also been pleased to contribute to the United Nations
Trust Fund for AMISOM, with a view to strengthening
the AU's capacity to manage peace operations.

We look forward to remaining engaged with the
AU to support its work and strengthen its capacity to
address the challenges in Africa. We have recently
signed a memorandum of understanding with the
African Union Commission, which will strengthen our
cooperation in areas of mutual interest across the broad
remit of the AU agenda, including in the area, above
all, of peace and security - which of course is relevant
to today's discussion. We have also recently opened -
I should say "finally", but it has been done - a
resident embassy in Addis Ababa and appointed a
defence attache and staff who are accredited to the AU.
Those recent developments should provide a solid
foundation for an expanding engagement by Australia
with the AU in this area in the future.

Obviously, the most difficult issue under
consideration today is the question of predictable,
flexible and sustainable financing for the AU's peace
and security capability. We commend the major
contributors to AU peacekeeping missions for
assuming the massive responsibilities that they have
done. The issue of funding that responsibility goes to
the heart of the global community's ability to respond
to threats and to the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
AU.

The question, however, does not arise only when
we consider the question of support for AU
peacekeeping. Just last week in its debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding (see S/PV.6396), the
Council expressed a similar sentiment when it
reaffirmed "the critical importance of timely, flexible
and predictable funding for peacebuilding" (see S/PRST/2010/20). In July, following its consideration
of the use of preventive diplomacy tools (see S/PV.6360), the Council recognized the importance of
enhancing efforts to ensure predictable, coherent and
timely financial support to optimize the use of
preventive diplomacy tools.

Australia will work pragmatically with Member
States to address this issue. It is one in which we all
have an interest, not just the members of the Council.
We need to collectively consider the financing of peace
operations if we are to be serious about assisting
countries emerged from conflict and helping them
establish themselves as stable, prosperous nations, and
if we are to be serious about the responsibilities we
have all assumed as United Nations Members under the
Charter. All United Nations Member States should give
that question priority, and we should give that priority
sooner rather than later.

