Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to say what a great honour it is to participate in this
debate presided over by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Argentina. I should also like to thank Argentina for taking
the initiative to convene a meeting on such an important
subject - the protection of United Nations personnel in
conflict zones - which, unfortunately, is all too topical.
The countries of the European Union have participated
greatly in United Nations operations, whether of a
peacekeeping or humanitarian nature. The countries
members of the European Union have given much, endured
much and, sometimes, suffered greatly. It is therefore right
that on such a serious issue the European Union should
speak through the voice of its President: the representative
of the country that currently holds the Presidency of the
European Union, Portugal, will speak later. I should simply
like to state that France fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of Portugal. For
that reason, I will confine myself to making a few brief
comments in my national capacity.
United Nations personnel who are taking part in
operations, whether peacekeeping or essentially
humanitarian in nature, are involved in a dangerous
occupation. Such staff are often personally prepared to take
the risks involved. But the Security Council must bear the
responsibility for ensuring, as far as possible, the security
of the personnel whom it sends on missions in the
framework of United Nations operations. It is also the
responsibility of the Council - which is to say, those of us
around this table - to ensure the safety of humanitarian
personnel, agency personnel and all those who participate
in or contribute, from near or far, to any operation that the
Security Council decides to undertake. We have that
responsibility.

We have two avenues for action: the mandate of
operations and the provision of the means for such
operations. I shall refer first of all to the mandate.

The lessons learned from past experience have not
been in vain. The Council is paying increasing attention
to the mandate and the rules of engagement of United
Nations operations, and I should like to stress the
importance of that aspect of our procedure: keeping a
close watch over drawing up the rules of engagement. We
must ensure that such mandates and rules of engagement
make it possible to protect effectively the security and
freedom of movement of United Nations and associated
personnel.

I said that there has been some progress. The
provisions included in the resolutions establishing the
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone illustrate
this trend and the progress that has been made. This is a
good development, but it is not enough. I believe that we
must take very serious note of the proposals made this
morning by Ms. Frechette and Ms. Bertini, which deserve
to be borne in mind when we draft mandates for complex
peacekeeping or humanitarian operations. I believe that
the observations of Ms. Frechette and Ms. Bertini will be
a very useful guide for our deliberations. Such are my
views on mandates.

Turning to the means, we must effectively secure
a good fit between the mandate and the means.
Peacekeeping personnel must have available to them not
only the legal means to protect themselves in discharging
their mandate, but also the necessary human and material
resources. Guaranteeing the security of such personnel
means that we must ensure that staffing levels are
adequate, which entails a cost. As Ms. Frechette pointed
out, security has its cost. If we are serious today in
expressing our concern for the security of United Nations
personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel, we must, in each case, draw practical
conclusions in terms of numbers, staffing levels and
financial contributions. We cannot evade that clear
requirement.

Those are my brief comments. I should simply like
to add, in my national capacity, that we are happy to
announce that France is currently completing the process
of ratifying the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel.

 

