Mr. Skoog: I thank you for the invitation to
brief the Security Council this morning on behalf the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Mr. President. I will
focus my remarks on the ongoing security transition
and the Commission's priorities for its engagement
with Liberia in the next few years.

There are many lessons to be learned from previous
transitions. We now have a great opportunity to plan for
a smooth transition that will put Liberia on a robust path
towards further consolidation of peace. There can be no
excuses for a fragmented approach on the part of the
United Nations system or the international community.
We also have a collective responsibility to avoid the
financial cliff that has sometimes characterized the
drawdown of United Nations peacekeeping operations
in the past. Sustained international attention is
imperative, both financially and politically. The PBC
looks forward to playing its part.
I would now like to turn to the PBC's statement of
mutual commitment with the Government of Liberia.
In the light of the several transitions under way, our
configuration has undertaken to review our engagement
to ensure that it is aligned with the Government's
current efforts and is adding real value to them. A
technical level mission, which included representatives
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Peacebuilding Support Office, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Department of Political
Affairs and the Chair of the Liberia configuration,
visited Monrovia at the end of January. They met with a
wide range of Government interlocutors, civil society,
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the
United Nations country team and the donor community
for constructive discussions on peacebuilding needs in
Liberia and the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
going forward. Our mission reported a clear and widely
shared vision of what peacebuilding efforts are needed
and clear views on how and where the Commission can
play an important role.

At the same time, the mission noted some concerns.
The difficult budgetary situation puts a strain on the
Government's ability to roll out the key peacebuilding
programmes it has identified as priorities. In addition,
interlocutors on the ground reported that there was
public apprehension about the drawdown of the UNMIL
presence. Clear communication to the public and the
proper management of perceptions will be important in
that regard, as well as assuring them of the enduring
commitment of the international community, including
the United Nations, to the people of Liberia.

Building on wide consultations, the Peacebuilding
Commission affirmed that our engagement's priority
areas remained valid. I will touch on them briefly,
starting with security sector reform.

First, in the light of the upcoming drawdown of
UNMIL in accordance with resolution 2239 (2015), the
PBC will work to support the Liberian Government's
efforts to strengthen the operational efficiency of
the security agencies in the country by helping the
Government to address structural challenges and the
provision of justice and security to all Liberians. It
will be vital to ensure that priority activities within the
Government of Liberia's plan for UNMIL's transition
are completed on time.

Secondly, on the rule of law, in order to build the
effectiveness and the integrity of legal institutions,
increase equitable access to justice and strenghten the
rule of law, the PBC will support the Government's
efforts to address systematic weaknesses in the criminal
justice system and weak administrative procedures, and
ensure adequate budgetary allocations to capacitate
institutions central to security and the rule of law. The
Commission will also help advance the constitutional
reform process in a timely manner, ensuring robust
civic education and civil society engagement.

Thirdly, on reconciliation, as articulated by
the Government, reconciliation in Liberia is a
multidimensional process of overcoming social,
political and religious cleavages, healing the physical
and psychological wounds from the civil war, and
confronting and addressing historical and structural
wrongs, in particular the root causes of conflict.
The PBC will strengthen its efforts to expedite the
reconciliation process, in close consultation with local
actors in Liberia.

Fourthly, on elections, the PBC will focus its work
on the upcoming 2017 elections, which represents
a significan opportunity for further democratic
consolidation. We will support the efforts of the
Government and the National Elections Commission
to ensure that the elections are successfully conducted
and further contribute to improving governance,
reconciliation and stability. This will depend on efforts
to enable the widest possible public awareness and
participation, as well as deployment of preventive
measures ranging from formal mechanisms for electoral
dispute resolution to regular channels for dialogue
between the security forces and the population.

Last but not least, the PBC has a responsibility to
highlight socioeconomic needs that are fundamental to
building sustainable peace. As Liberia is still recovering
from the economic effects of the Ebola virus disease
and the severe impacts of the drop of commodity prices
on raw materials, there is a need to reinvigorate the
economy by strengthening the private sector, create
jobs and build capacity for domestic revenue generation.
We will work to strengthen our engagement with the
international financial institutions in this regard. The
decentralization process, which is a cross-cutting issue
in our work, will be important not only to strenghtening
State presence and authority outside of Monrovia, but
also to extending the provision of basic social services.
I look forward to highlighting such issues over the
coming 12 months.

Through our statement of mutual commitments,
we seek to align the work of the Commission behind
existing commitments, rather than duplicate efforts by
creating new ones. We will work to draw attention to
and rally international support around commitments
made in strategic frameworks, such as Liberia Rising,
the Liberia Agenda for Transformation, the Strategic
Roadmap for National Healing, Peacebuilding and
Reconciliation and, equally important, around the
constitutional review process, the draft legislation
related to land rights and administration, local
governance, decentralization and civil service reform.
These important pieces of legislation cut to the core
of peace and State-building and have the potential
to transform State and society relations in Liberia,
provided that they move forward.

The Commission commits to undertaking political
advocacy and accompaniment, advocating for generating
necessary resources and fostering coordinated actions
among all relevant stakeholders. The Commission
will continue to promote and integrate a strategic and
coherent approach to peacebuilding and serve as a
forum for dialogue for all relevant actors. In particular,
the configuration will draw and sustain international
attention to and support for the preparations for the
2017 elections and continue to highlight peacebuilding
issues during the ongoing security transition.

Before concluding. let me make a few
recommendations to this body. In light of the upcoming
drawdown of UNMIL, we encourage the United
Nations system, to the widest extent possible, to engage
in joint strategic planning for a well-managed transition
and for meeting long-term peacebuilding needs during
and beyond the transition. In addition, we emphasize
the need to take into account regional dimensions of
peacebuilding and the importance of working together
with the Economic Community of West African States
and the Mano River Union and ofbuilding on successful
regional initiatives.

I would like to make the case for including women
and youth in all peacebuilding efforts as we move
forward. operationalizing resolution 2250 (2015).
Executive Director Mlambo-Ngcuka has just made a
very impressive intervention, which is very compelling
and convincing as to including women as we move
forward. I also think that we need engage the large
youth population, as it constitutes one of the greatest
assets for Liberia's work to consolidate peace and to
move forward with confidence.

In conclusion, the Peacebuilding Commission
remains determined to advance Liberia's peacebuilding
agenda, as outlined by the Government, and is
reinvigorated by the renewed commitment showed by
all actors through the process of revising our strategy
of engagement. We look forward to supporting the
efforts of the Security Council in ensuring a well-
managed drawdown.

