Mr. Tello (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mexico wishes to express its gratification and joy at the
signing last 29 December of the Agreement on a Firm and
Lasting Peace by the Government of Guatemala and the
Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG).
The signing of this Agreement is rightly a source of pride
for the people of Guatemala. This is a time of joy and hope
for millions of Guatemalans: Men and women of all social
classes, ethnic groups and creeds whose shared objective is
a harmonious and peaceful coexistence.

The people and the Government of Mexico cannot fail
to express their greatest satisfaction at this historic moment
for the Guatemalan people. Guatemala and Mexico are
united by a past that gives them a shared frame of
reference. We share history, geography, culture, traditions,
languages and character. More than bordering countries, we
are fraternal countries with converging hopes and
aspirations, as we endeavour to be two modern and
dynamic nations on the threshold of the twenty-first
century.

The Government of Mexico wishes once again to pay
tribute to the Government of Guatemala, led by President
Alvaro Arzu, for its historic conviction that the only course
for its people is that of harmony and peace. We also
commend those who fought to build a society of freedom,
justice and democracy. We sincerely congratulate the
Government and the URNG for their dedication and their
efforts to place above confrontation the objective of using
dialogue and reason as the most valuable means to resolve
disputes.

In the final analysis, this success belongs to
Guatemalan society as a whole, which left behind doubts,
fears and distrust and decided with courage and
determination to set out on the road of solidarity and peace.

I also wish to pay tribute to Mr. Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, who, with the vision of a statesman, tirelessly
promoted the peace process in Guatemala. The Secretary-
General showed a sensitivity characteristic only of the great
internationalists. We also owe a debt of gratitude to those
who have given to this process their dedication and
personal conviction. I refer in particular to Mr. Jean
Arnault, and also to the team of the Guatemala Unit, who
at all times were able to imbue the peace process with
confidence and optimism.

The draft resolution before the Security Council,
contained in document S/1997/18, is not - I repeat, is
not - the solution or the definitive element of peace in
Guatemala. That was provided by a decision already taken
by Guatemalan society. The draft resolution signifies only
the recognition by the international community that the
United Nations has a role to play in building an order -
if not a new one, at least a different one - within the
society of that country.

As is evident, the draft resolution is neither very
ambitious nor very costly. It is a small expression of the
solidarity the Guatemalan people needs in order to launch
from a firm, secure and reliable base this new stage in its
history as a free, independent and democratic nation.

Mexico appeals sincerely and deeply to all Security
Council members to adopt this draft resolution. The
Council would thus once again show its determination to
discharge fully the primary responsibility that we have
conferred upon it for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Peace in Guatemala is not a regional
issue. It is a matter that involves all Members of the
United Nations.

It is in this spirit and this context that the
Government of Mexico hopes that this draft resolution
will be adopted unanimously in order to reflect the firm
support of the international community for the efforts that
ended the last conflict spilling blood on the American
continent.

I cannot conclude without sincerely congratulating
you, Sir, on the recent election of your country as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council, as well as on
your assumption of the presidency during the first month
of your term. I also wish to express our appreciation to
the Permanent Representative of Italy, who discharged the
responsibilities of President with great skill in the month
of December, at a particularly delicate time for our
Organization.

