Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month. We are confident that,
through your wisdom, the Council's deliberations will
be crowned with success. I wish to avail myself of this
opportunity to express my delegation's appreciation to
your predecessor, His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of China, for the excellent manner in
which he presided over the Council's deliberations
throughout the past month.

The crime of assassination carried out by the
Israeli army, which targeted Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, is
an act of terror that falls within the context of
systematic terrorist acts perpetrated by Israel aimed at
assassinating the Palestinian leadership. The Kingdom
of Bahrain strongly denounces and condemns this
heinous crime perpetrated yesterday by the Israeli
occupation forces that led to the assassination of
Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, the leader of the Islamic
resistance movement, and some individuals who were
accompanying him.

The planning and the implementation of this
dastardly crime by Israel proves beyond any doubt
Israel's flagrant violation of all international
resolutions and the principles of international law and
international humanitarian standards. This crime is a
stark example of the State terror systematically
perpetrated by the Israeli Government. It is evidence of
the extent to which Israel has gone unchecked in its
violation of international law and international
humanitarian law.

That action by Israel will further escalate the
violence that has engulfed the occupied Palestinian
territories. It will drag the region towards further
instability and could kill any prospects for peace and
security for the peoples and the countries of the region.
The timing of the operation clearly shows Israel's
rejection of any initiative aimed at realizing a just and
comprehensive peace in the region. Such initiatives
have been endorsed by the Arab States with a view to
putting an end to occupation and to establishing an
independent Palestinian State, with its capital in
Jerusalem.

The Kingdom of Bahrain would like once again
to reaffirm its solidarity with the Palestinian people
and its leadership in their legitimate struggle to recover
their inalienable rights. The Kingdom appeals to the
international community and to the Quartet to shoulder
their responsibility towards the region. The Kingdom
stresses the need for international protection for the
Palestinian people and its leadership so as to shelter
them from the tyranny of Israel and its military
machine.

