Mr. Mekel (Israel): I regret that I am forced to
take the floor again in this debate. We had hoped that
this discussion would not turn into an exchange
regarding the particularities of the situation in the
Middle East. Unfortunately, that has not been the case.

In the course of today's debate, a few speakers -
in particular the Palestinian observer - have used the
issue of children in armed conflict to single out Israel
for criticism and condemnation. Such criticism directed
at one country, and at one country alone, is not
intended to alleviate the situation facing Palestinian
children or, for that matter, the situation facing any
group of children living under the threat of armed
conflict. Rather, it is intended to advance a political
agenda and to isolate my country. For that reason, I am
compelled to make a second intervention.

The situation facing the Palestinian people,
including Palestinian children, is a serious one. Israel
shares the concern of the international community over
their plight and has taken steps to improve the
humanitarian situation of all Palestinians. It must be
stressed, however, that this situation is first and
foremost a product of the decision of the Palestinian
leadership to engage in violence, to pursue
confrontation in place of negotiations and to
encourage, finance and support a deliberate campaign
of terrorism against the people of Israel. While it may
be convenient to place full blame for the plight of the
Palestinian people on Israel's shoulders, the fact
remains that the Palestinian leadership, which chose to
forego a viable political process in favour of a bloody
campaign of terrorism, is primarily responsible for the
difficult situation we are currently facing.

Israel has never, and will never, intentionally
target Palestinian children or any unarmed civilian. We
recognize that, in the course of our battle with
Palestinian terrorists, civilians have suffered. Those
cases are deeply regrettable; but, in contrast to
Palestinian terrorists who have deliberately targeted
school buses, discos and other areas where children are
known to congregate, Israel has gone to great
lengths- and at considerable risk to its own
security- to ensure that its counter-terrorist
operations are conducted so as to reduce the threat to
civilians as much as possible.

Those who are genuinely concerned about the
situation of Palestinian children must scrutinize and
condemn the criminal behaviour of Palestinian
terrorists, who have obscured the fundamental
distinction between civilians and combatants, set up
camps in civilian refugee areas, used Palestinian
civilians, including children, as human shields and
used private homes and schools as bases from which to
launch attacks against Israel, in grave violation of
international humanitarian law and Security Council
resolutions. The international community must loudly
condemn the practices of Palestinian leaders, who have
actively encouraged the participation of Palestinian
children in armed conflict, elevated suicide terrorists to
the status of national heroes and urged children to
follow their examples.

If delegations truly care about Palestinian
children, they must first and foremost address the
shameful practices of Palestinian leaders and terrorists
that have led too many Palestinian children to believe
that murder and death are noble pursuits. However, if
their purpose is simply to exploit another United
Nations discussion to attack and defame Israel, let
those delegations find a more appropriate forum. On an
issue as urgent and critical as protecting children, we
can ill afford to allow our discussions to be tainted by
such naked political hostility.

