Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this timely debate
on the Middle East and North Africa. The future of
the Middle East should remain a major part of our
discussions on the maintenance of peace and security
globally. Events in this region have ramifications
worldwide, and Turkey's own future is bound to this
region not only by the forces of economics and security,
as is the case for several Member States, but also by
geography and a long common history and culture.

Addressing the root causes of the conflict is an
essential ingredient of achieving long-term stability
and prosperity in the Middle East. The countries of
the region consist of multi-ethnic, multi-religious and
multi-sectarian societies. We all must denounce divisive
politics along ethnic, religious and sectarian fault lines
and embrace multiculturalism and inclusivity. We need
to strengthen the culture of peaceful coexistence and to
hear the legitimate aspirations of the young and dynamic
populations of the region. This is our best chance for
the long-term settlement of existing conflicts, at the
heart of which lie the issue of Palestine.

The latest developments in Palestine remind us
once again of the urgency of revitalizing the peace
process. We reiterate once again that the status quo is
not sustainable. A two-State solution remains the only
way towards a just, comprehensive and lasting peace.
The establishment of an independent State of Palestine
within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, is long overdue. Respecting the established
parameters is the only way in which we can ensure
security for both sides. Efforts in the opposite direction
tarnish the credibility of any peace plan or initiative.

The lack of a viable peace process continues
to inflame tensions and to give rise to new cycles of
violence. The international community, in particular
the Council, cannot turn a blind eye to such blatant
disregard of international law. It must take action and
ensure the implementation of its own resolutions.

The situation in Gaza, which is on the brink of
collapse after the decade-long blockade, continues to
be deeply worrying. This tragedy is compounded by
an acute financial-resource gap in the budget of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). It is our collective
moral duty to support the Agency. Turkey announced
an additional $10 million for UNRWA's programme
budget and increased its in-kind donation. I hope that
this afternoon's pledging conference will provide an
avenue to discuss concrete ways to address the Agency's
dramatic financial situation.

While our assistance to alleviate the suffering
of the Palestinians will continue, we should spare
no effort to achieve a just and lasting solution to the
conflict. We are also continuing our efforts to calm
the situation on the ground in Syria and to advance the
political process. Turkey has been actively contributing
to the counter-terrorism and stabilization efforts in
that respect. The operations that we have carried out,
namely, Euphrates Shield and Olive Branch, cleared
more than 4,000 square kilometres of terrorists. So far
more than 160,000 Syrians have voluntarily returned
to their homeland. In the same spirit, we have stepped
up our humanitarian efforts, particularly in Afrin. We
have been providing continuous humanitarian aid and
fundamental health services to the region in order to
prevent civilian suffering.
In Syria, a viable and credible political solution
based on United Nations parameters remains the
only way to eventually build a democratic, pluralist
and non-sectarian country, maintaining its political
unity and territorial integrity. We will continue to do
our utmost towards that end. Despite the significant
military gains achieved in the field against Da'esh,
the socioeconomic destruction across Syria and Iraq
still needs to be addressed. This is crucial to eliminate
fertile ground for new generations of extremists and
their activities.

The international community should increase its
humanitarian assistance in response to the humanitarian
crises in the region, at least until these countries get
back on their feet.

We must acknowledge that a strategy based solely
on the narrow pursuit of national interests has not
succeeded in the Middle East and never will. A strategy
that fails to speak to the broader aspirations of ordinary
people will only feed the suspicion that has festered for
years that the foreign Powers pursue their interests at
the expense of local populations.

The support of the international community
for the reconstruction and development of conflict-
riddled countries remains a tool essential to avoiding
this perception and preventing a relapse into new
conflicts. The safe and sustainable return of refugees
and internally displaced persons, as well as the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of basic infrastructure
in areas liberated from terrorist organizations such as
Da'esh and the Kurdish Workers Party/Partiya Yekitiya
Demokrat-People's Protection Units (PKK/PYD-YPG)
are important priorities in this endeavour. The Turkish
experience in this context is particularly instructive.
Syrians have voluntarily started to return to their
homes in areas that we liberated from Da'esh. Lately,
we are also seeing thousands return to Afrin, which we
cleared from PKK/PYD-YPG through Operation Olive
Branch. Turkey has been exerting every effort to restore
normalcy in these territories by rebuilding essential
infrastructure and providing basic utilities, food and
medicine, as well as security, while at the same time
establishing local governance.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that Turkey
will continue to deploy all efforts towards de-escalation
on the ground and will advance the political processes
to find solutions to the protracted conflicts in the
region and to address the aspirations of the people of
the Middle East for a better future.
