Miss Richards (Jamaica): It is my distinct honour to
register Jamaica's support for the innovative, integrated
and coordinated approach outlined by the Chairmen of
the Security Council's counter-terrorism committees,
which will undoubtedly serve to advance our common
efforts to prevent nonproliferation and to deepen our
fight against terrorism.

Without question, Jamaica and other Member
States from the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
remain committed and resolute in meeting our
obligations, particularly in relation to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), which together
constitute the cornerstone of our continuing global
efforts to prevent non-State and State actors alike from
acquiring and using weapons of mass destruction or
engaging in asymmetric warfare, including terrorism.
We take these obligations seriously and always mindful
of the fact that the maintenance of peace and security
is indeed a shared responsibility and one that must be
fully assumed by all within the international system.

Since 2009, CARICOM. has demonstrated its
full embrace of this reality with the institution of a
region-wide initiative aimed at fully implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). This mechanism, devised and
constituted within the Caribbean Community, has
allowed CARICOM. members to effectively meet their
responsibilities under the resolution and to advance
national and regional non-proliferation activities in
unprecedented ways.

It is important, however, to recognize that the
genesis of this regional implementation initiative was
the result of CARICOM. members' recognition of the
inherent challenges in devising national programmes
and activities that would allow States to meet the
necessary legal and enforcement obligations ensuing
from the resolution, and to appropriate the necessary
human and financial resources that this effort would
require. Member States recognized that a regional
programme to implement resolution 1540 (2004), which
would leverage the considerable security cooperation
that has existed within the region, would constitute
the most logical and efficient way to address these
priorities.

The submission by the Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) fully demonstrates an
appreciation of this innovative thinking, which will
undoubtedly allow States like ours in the Caribbean
Community, with limited resources, to better coordinate
important non-proliferation mandates, such as that of
resolution 1540 (2004), with other Security Council
obligations. The submission also fully takes on board
views recently expressed in the Council by the delegation
of Australia, which has been clear and constant in its
assertion that advancing non-proliferation goals cannot
be piecemeal, but should be practical, coordinated,
coherent and, indeed, appropriately linked to achieving
Security Council aims in relation to terrorism and the
implementation of relevant sanctions.

In this vein, Jamaica would also like to recognize
the Government of Australia for its assistance to
CARICOM. in its efforts to leverage its existing 1540
implementation programme to now include initiatives
that will be also counter-terrorism-focused, even
as it continues to meet core obligations relating to
non-proliferation.

We would further like to register our full
support for the CTC and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate as it fashions
practical approaches and mechanisms to ensure
that States meet their obligations under resolution
1373 (2001) and fully undertake relevant legislative,
regulatory and administrative action to implement
the sanctions regimes, even while meeting important
non-proliferation goals as required by resolution 1540
(2004). It is through that concerted and innovative
joint effort that we will continue to make meaningful
and measurable gains in preventing proliferation and
in providing Member States with the necessary tools
to effectively confront terrorism in a comprehensive,
coordinated and indeed successful way.

