Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the beginning, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative. I
express our gratitude to Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his very comprehensive briefing.

(Spoke in French)

I would also like to take the opportunity to thank
Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati for her contribution, as well
as Abbe Donatien Nshole for his briefing, which was
quite moving. I thank them both.

(Spoke in English)

Poland remains highly concerned by the dramatic

deterioration of the humanitarian and security situation
of the Congolese people. Yet despite the efforts of the
international community, the Government and the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
humanitarian needs have doubled since last year. Poland
expresses high concern over the issue. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is recognized, for the second
consecutive year, as the country worst affected by
conflict-related displacement in the world.

In that context, I would like to underline the
importance of the preventive aspect of assistance
activities, in particular the need to address the root
causes of the conflict and forced displacement.
We believe that the holistic approach to preventive
actions, including the promotion of dialogue between
communities and facilitating community dialogue
about conflict, may significantly contribute to easing
tensions and improving the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Allow me now
to share a few thoughts on humanitarian rights and
international humanitarian law.

Widespread violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, including targeted
attacks against civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian
personnel, constitute a protection crisis. The security
situation hinders humanitarian access to vulnerable
communities. The Congolese authorities have to
shoulder the responsibility for normalizing the situation
in the country by protecting the fundamental freedoms
enshrined in the Constitution and implementing the
measures envisaged in the 31 December New Year
political agreement.

Cooperation with civil society, in particular with
women's representatives, at both national and regional
levels is crucial for women. We applaud the courage
of 20 million women who, despite poverty and the
violence during the registration procedures, queued up
to participate in the upcoming elections. We note with
concern that women are often targeted in the political
process to intimidate female candidates and voters. We
are also concerned about the acts of sexual violence in
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, which increased
by 56 per cent last year. We call on the Government
to strengthen measures to improve security, fight
impunity for the perpetrators of sexual violence and
protect their victims.

The continued conflict and dire humanitarian
situation have also had a disproportionate effect on
children, 2 million of whom are at risk of starvation.
This requires a strong response on the part of the
international community. We note with appreciation
the continuing progress on the implementation of the
action plan to address grave violations against children,
but we still want to stress the importance of putting
an immediate stop to all Violations of children's rights
by State security forces and bringing all perpetrators
of such acts to justice, regardless of their affiliation or
rank. However, we should not forget that demobilizing
children is only a first step. The lack of reintegration
options for children who have been demobilized
increases the risk of their re-recruitment.

With regard to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), we would like to reiterate
that Poland views the protection of civilians as crucial.
That task should therefore remain one of MONUSCO's
highest priorities, since the increase in armed
violence renders rebuilding a viable political strategy
for protecting civilians essential. MONUSCO'S
contribution to securing civilians' security and creating
a space for humanitarian agencies has so far been vital
to preventing the current crisis from escalating further.
It should not be forgotten that many of the tensions and
conflicts at a local level are the result of historically
established reasons. The political stakeholders and
the international community must make real efforts
to address the drivers of these conflicts properly and
assure the local communities that they will not be left
to solve their problems alone.

In conclusion, we were pleased to note the visit
planned by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We hope that it will boost the
confidence of all the parties involved in supporting
that country. We commend the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, the United Arab Emirates
and the European Commission for their readiness to
hold a donor conference on humanitarian assistance
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The recent
cuts to assistance from agencies, owing to the shortage
of funding, are extremely worrying and could result in
the further escalation of one of the world's most serious
humanitarian crises.

