Mrs. Ogata (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees): I, too, would like to start by expressing my
profound sorrow and condolences on the passing of the
late King of Morocco, King Hassan II. We had many
direct and indirect contacts with His Majesty over the
Western Sahara issue. I wanted to start my statement by
expressing my sorrow.

I am grateful, as always, Mr. President, for your
interest and support. On 5 May, when at the peak of the
crisis in the Balkans I last briefed the Council, I spoke of
the plight of refugees from Kosovo. At that time, I was
requested also to provide a briefing on other humanitarian
situations, particularly in Africa. Today, therefore, I will
focus on that continent, and especially on Central and
West Africa, where there have been political and security
developments with important humanitarian implications.

As the head of an office which spends over 40 per
cent of its resources in Africa, and having personally
Visited West Africa in February and Central Africa last
month, I shall provide the Council with a first-hand
perspective on problems of human displacement on the
continent. My impressions of the last summit of the
Organization of African Unity, which I attended in
Algiers two weeks ago, are a good starting point.

I found this year's summit, the seventh such
gathering to which I have been invited as observer,
particularly encouraging. Like Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, I sensed a real spirit of openness and noted
positive signs that existing problems could be solved. In
attendance were the newly, democratically elected
Presidents of South Africa and Nigeria. It was a powerful
symbol that these two key African countries are ready to
provide an essential contribution to peace, democratization
and economic development throughout the continent. This
year's host country for the summit, Algeria, may also be
auspiciously emerging from nine years of internal
instability under the direction of a new president. Another
remarkable feature of the summit was that it took place
at the same time as a ceasefire agreement on the conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and a peace
agreement between the Government and rebel forces in
Sierra Leone were being signed.

 

We should be realistic: there will be delays and
setbacks in the advancement towards peace and prosperity,
but for the first time in years I felt that the election of some
remarkable leaders, their presence at the summit and
developments on the ground marked a hope for progress.
From the perspective of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), these positive
steps towards peace raise hopes that many refugees will
eventually return home.

The challenge before us is to act rapidly to support the
implementation of political agreements. Since the signature
of the initial ceasefire agreement on 24 May, for example,
hostilities have not resumed in Sierra Leone. From
UNHCR's perspective, both agreements may be rare
coincidences of opportunities which, if properly and quickly
seized by the international community, may lead to the
resolution of some of the worst refugee problems in Africa.
There are about 6 million people "of concern" to my Office
on the continent. If you analyse a "map of human
displacement", you will clearly see that people in flight are
invariably an indicator of situations of poverty or conflict
or a combination of both.

The main refugee groups caused by recent crises
continue to be the over half a million Sierra Leoneans in
West Africa, the 260,000 Burundians in Tanzania and the
150,000 people who have fled conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to various countries. As we speak,
people are fleeing the Republic of Congo (Brazzaville) to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to Gabon. There
are older, unresolved conflict situations which produced
refugees many years ago: more than 370,000 Sudanese are
still refugees in Uganda and Ethiopia; 120,000 Saharan
refugees are still in camps in Algeria and other countries;
and there are 150,000 Angolan refugees, mostly in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Tens of thousands of
these are actually newly arrived people fleeing fresh
fighting in their country. In both Sudan and Angola, as well
as in war-torn areas on the border between Ethiopia and
Eritrea, there are also tens of thousands of internally
displaced people. In Liberia, where 280,000 refugees have
returned home and where we hope to finish the repatriation
of the remaining quarter of a million by mid-year 2000,
recent episodes of insecurity betray internal tensions and the
fragility of peace.

In February, when I Visited Guinea, Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Cote d'lvoire, hopes for a settlement in Sierra
Leone were still very fragile. I therefore welcome the recent
Lorne agreement, although the road to peace is undoubtedly
going to be long and difficult. The end of the civil war in
Sierra Leone may bring about a positive solution to the
worst current refugee problem in Africa, the plight of
over half a million people - about 10 per cent of the
entire Sierra Leonean population - who have fled
violence and fighting in various waves in the last few
years. Most of them have taken refuge in Guinea and
Liberia, which, in spite of their very limited resources,
have generously provided asylum to this large refugee
population, a true example to the international
community. Sierra Leonean refugees, as has been
frequently reported to the Council, have suffered
unspeakable Violence during the conflict. I have rarely
seen consequences of physical and psychological violence
as horrifying as those affecting civilians who survived
killings and were lefttraumatized by beatings, amputations
and rape.

My first key message here today is therefore a plea
for all necessary resources to be provided to Sierra Leone
and Governments in the subregion so that the Lome
agreement can be implemented, and implemented very
rapidly. Peace is at hand, but, especially seen from the
vantage point of hundreds of villages, it is still exposed
to Violence, pillaging and retaliation and is very fragile.
From the humanitarian perspective, resources will soon be
needed to support the return and reintegration of refugees
and internally displaced people in their communities of
origin. This is of paramount importance because the
violence of the Sierra Leonean conflict has created deep
divisions and mistrust. As we see in other situations, the
longer people stay away from their communities, the
more difficult and complex reconciliation becomes.
Repatriation will take time, but we must, of course, get
prepared for it as quickly as possible, while continuing to
assist refugees and local communities hosting them in
countries of asylum.

I would also like to take this opportunity to make a
special appeal to help those - thousands,
unfortunately - who have suffered physical amputations.
My visit to a centre for the rehabilitation of amputees
from Sierra Leone, last February in Guinea, was one of
the most shocking experiences of my eight years as High
Commissioner. Their courageous efforts to learn again to
walk, eat and write deserve special attention and sustained
support.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Lusaka agreement, although not yet signed by all parties,
is a welcome development for which Governments in the
region should be commended. It is not only immediately
important as a positive step towards resolving conflict in

 

Central Africa, it is also an encouraging indication that
peace in Africa can be attained when African leaders are
committed to work together towards this goal, in spite of all
differences and difficulties. As with the Lome agreement,
however, it is now imperative that the Lusaka agreement
receive strong, clear, international support, so that all
parties to the conflict adhere to it and so that its rapid
implementation can become a reality. In spite of the
progress made, war has not ended: witness the recent influx
into the Central African Republic of thousands of
Congolese fleeing fresh fighting in the Equateur province,
a very destabilizing situation in this fragile area.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo desperately
needs peace. Visiting the country last month, I was shocked
by the deteriorating living conditions of the Congolese
population at large. The informal economy, once the
backbone of this resilient country, has all but collapsed.
Poverty is rampant, almost 150,000 refugees have fled, and
there are countless internally displaced people. In Algiers,
I met President Kabila and asked him to take the initiative
in granting humanitarian agencies access to all those in
need. I was encouraged by his positive reply. Humanitarian
assistance is needed to bring relief to hundreds of thousands
of suffering people, but it can also contribute to the peace
process and be a first step towards a much needed
stabilization of the country and of the subregion. I therefore
wish to renew my appeal to all parties to the conflict to
allow the delivery of aid to refugees, displaced people and
all civilians in need.

The situation in the entire Central African subregion
has shifted from one of massive refugee movements to one
of multiple, interrelated conflicts and smaller human
displacement crises. However, the potential for larger and
more dramatic displacement exists. Refugees are often
manipulated by States and rebel groups alike. At the present
juncture, it is very difficult to pursue a comprehensive
effort to enforce refugee protection principles with due
consideration for the security concerns of States, as we had
promoted at the Kampala regional meeting on refugee
issues in May 1998. While the Lusaka peace process
continues, UNHCR will therefore concentrate on trying to
address, if not resolve, individual situations of
displacement.

The most pressing issue is to tackle the problem of
Rwandans who have not yet returned after fleeing the
country in the aftermath of genocide, and particularly of the
largest groups, which are in the two Congos. A solution to
this problem has been made easier by improvements in the
security and internal stability of Rwanda. On the other
hand, the presence of armed elements among bona fide
refugees continues to be a serious problem in several
countries, with security implications affecting and slowing
down the peace process. In this respect I am pleased to
report that during my recent trip to the subregion I took
two key decisions. First, from offices in Bukavu and
Goma, UNHCR will resume support for the repatriation
of Rwandans still in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We have received assurances
from rebel authorities controlling these areas that we shall
be granted access to those requesting repatriation, and that
the voluntary character of return will be respected. I
informed President Bizimungu of Rwanda, who
encourages and supports our role in this operation. I also
informed President Kabila, who did not object to
UNHCR's involvement. Secondly, we shall offer
Rwandans in the Republic of Congo (Brazzaville) the
possibility either of repatriating or of settling in areas in
the north of their host country, where they can receive a
one-time assistance package to facilitate local integration.
This scheme is now under discussion with the authorities
in Brazzaville.

Prospects for a solution to the plight of Burundian
refugees in Tanzania, on the other hand, appear less
promising. Peace talks in Arusha between the
Government of Burundi and its opponents continue.
Meanwhile, however, refugee repatriation movements are
now limited to a few individuals per day. I am very
concerned by this situation, which exposes refugees, and
the local population, to a situation of serious tension and
insecurity at the border between Burundi and Tanzania; it
is a situation that can be resolved only when refugees
return home voluntarily. In asking the Council to
encourage an early and positive conclusion of the Arusha
peace process, I would also like to request that refugee
issues be addressed from a humanitarian point of View, in
respect of international norms. On our side, we shall
continue to support Tanzania in ensuring that refugee
camps maintain their civilian character. And we stand
ready to resume voluntary repatriation and to support the
reintegration of Burundian refugees in their country.

Before concluding on Central Africa, I would like to
draw the Council's attention to several other situations of
conflict and displacement which currently offer little or
no hope for early solutions and where UNHCR must
therefore continue to provide care and maintenance
support, and emergency assistance in the case of new
refugee outflows. I am thinking of the situation in
Western Sahara, where UNHCR continues to make
preparations for repatriation in March next year, but

 

where the likelihood of the return of refugees depends
entirely on the progress of political negotiations. I am
referring as well to the Angolan conflict, which is pushing
thousands of people to flee their homes. I visited an
Angolan refugee camp in the Bas-Congo province of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and observed that no
return can be possible under the present circumstances. I
am referring also to the war in southern Sudan, one of the
oldest and most violent conflicts in the world, the effects of
which, in terms both of refugee movements and of general
insecurity, are widely felt in the region.

And finally, I would particularly like to draw the
attention of the Security Council to the Violent, and almost
forgotten, civil war in the Republic of Congo (Brazzaville).
Thousands of inhabitants of Brazzaville and of
neighbouring areas, caught in the fighting between
government and rebel forces, have been compelled to flee
in the past few months, and have been able to return home
only by transiting through the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Among them there are thousands of victims of
frightening acts of violence, including torture and rape. In
the last few days, 30,000 new refugees have arrived in
Gabon. This is a new, worrying development that indicates
how destabilizing this war may become for the entire
region, especially given its proximity to other conflicts.
UNHCR has already dispatched an emergency team to
Libreville and stands ready to provide support to the
authorities to protect and assist refugees. I fully realize the
burden that these refugees place on the country's resources,
but wish to appeal here to the Government of Gabon to
provide asylum to those fleeing the war. It is very urgent,
however, that the international community take a much
stronger stance with respect to the Congolese conflict and
do all that is in its power to put an end to the senseless
Violence of which thousands of civilians are the Victims.

One striking feature of all these conflicts is that they
are closely interlinked. The Lusaka peace process addresses
only one of them, but the central position of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo makes the process crucial to peace
in the entire subregion. Furthermore, the presence of armed
elements, some of them closely related to refugee groups,
and the uncontrolled flow of heavy and light weapons are
both causes and effects of the intertwined wars affecting
Central Africa. Once more, I would like to urge the
Security Council to examine these issues and to take
concrete action to address them.

In both Central and West Africa, UNHCR continues
its work. Let me, however, repeat once more my key
message of today. If refugee problems in these two
subregions are to be resolved in a durable fashion, it is
essential that support be provided to the political
agreements. I would like to draw the Council's attention
in particular to the importance of the actual
implementation of the security provisions of these
agreements, as rapidly as possible and in the most
appropriate form, be it through the direct deployment of
peacekeepers or observers, or through the provision of
logistical support to forces deployed by other countries.
African leaders have taken political initiatives to address
these conflicts. Throughout my recent travels In Africa,
I sensed that there is now a strong expectation for the
United Nations to provide more support and to be more
actively involved in keeping and building peace. Lusaka
and Lome are windows of opportunity. They may not
remain open for long. Let us seize these opportunities
HOW.

We at UNHCR deal every day in the field with
millions of men, women and children who flee from war.
We understand very well the importance of stopping
conflicts, which is what the Lome and Lusaka peace
negotiations aim to do. But we also help refugees return
home after conflicts have ended, often to situations of
very fragile peace, often to communities that war has left
divided and torn. We therefore constantly insist on the
importance of consolidating peace after peace has been
signed, and of avoiding a dangerous gap between the
provision of humanitarian assistance and that of longer-
term development cooperation.

I have repeated this point so many times that I risk
sounding like a broken record. However - and again, I
wish to refer to my recent trips to Africa - such
situations of gap continue to exist. Take the example of
Rwanda. Most refugees have returned: returnees make up
about 25 per cent of the entire population. The phase of
humanitarian assistance - relatively well supported by
donors - has been followed by much more timid inputs
by development agencies and bilateral actors. Resources
are simply not forthcoming substantially enough for peace
to be consolidated. This is dangerous and, in my opinion,
potentially very destabilizing. In the Great Lakes region,
as in most parts of Africa, there is a close link between
poverty, conflict and the forced displacement of people.

I was proud to visit areas in which UNHCR has
done substantial work to support the reintegration of 2
million returnees, including the construction or
rehabilitation of 100,000 houses and of communal
facilities. This is a remarkable result, I believe, but a
humanitarian agency cannot go beyond this type of work

 

on such a scale. Who will sustain these accomplishments?
Who will provide support to the people and the
Government?

I agree with those who say that much remains to be
done in terms of democratization, power-sharing and
reconciliation in Rwanda. Efforts, however, are being made.
I was encouraged by a much greater emphasis on
reconciliation, for example, in addition to the focus on
justice. Attempts to bring people together are now
systematic, widespread and very professional. Such efforts
must be supported. I am concerned that in these and other
situations so - for example, Liberia, which I mentioned
earlier - the fragility of Governments and their weak
implementation capacity discourage the provision of
development resources. While I fully understand that
humanitarian assistance is much freer from political
constraints than development cooperation - and it should
be so - I would nevertheless urge Governments not to
forget people when planning and implementing longer-term
aid programmes. Often, by giving people a chance,
whatever the political and economic context, we can start
processes leading to the democratization of institutions and
ultimately to the peace and stability of countries and
regions.

I do not want to conclude this briefing without at least
a few words on the situation in Kosovo, which continues to
be a major challenge for my Office and for the international
community. When I last briefed the Council, ethnic
Albanian refugees were still pouring out of the province.
Since the end of hostilities and the deployment of
international forces in Kosovo, about 730,000 people have
returned home, including some from countries as far as
Western Europe and the United States, in one of the most
spectacular reverse population movements in contemporary
history. Let me add that I consider this repatriation -
which, in the overwhelming majority of cases, was
organized by refugees themselves - a very, very welcome
development and a success achieved by the international
community. To be reconstructed, Kosovo needs its own
people. The faster they return, the easier it will be to
rebuild the province.

There are, however, elements of serious concern. The
return of ethnic Albanians has, most unfortunately,
coincided with the expulsion, harassment and, in some
cases, the killing of people of non-Albanian ethnicity,
particularly Serbs and Romas. The massacre of 14 Serbs
last week was the latest, and most worrying, such episode.
A large part of the Serbian population has already fled
Kosovo, and about 170,000 Serbs from the province are
displaced in other parts of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, both in Serbia and Montenegro. The
international community, which has rightly provided
support to the cause of persecuted and expelled
Albanians, cannot and must not tolerate that the end of
one refugee crisis overlaps with the beginning of another.
Much as feelings can be understood, retaliation and
revenge must not be allowed to prevail. There is a need
to promote reconciliation programmes, systematically and
professionally, through media, education and social work.
But there is an even more pressing need to rebuild the
law enforcement capacity by completing the deployment
of KFOR, deploying international police forces in
sufficient numbers, training local police forces, restoring
the judicial system, and so on.

Another area of concern is reconstruction. People are
rebuilding their homes, and humanitarian agencies, under
UNHCR's lead responsibility, are giving them help. I am
concerned, however, that if a more systematic
reconstruction programme does not begin in the next few
weeks, the larger rehabilitation work - electricity, water,
roads, commercial areas - will not make any significant
progress before winter. The limited resources of
humanitarian agencies will allow people to rebuild part of
their houses, but this will not be sufficient in the harsh
Balkan winter. Let me add also that reconstruction in
Kosovo cannot be delinked from efforts to support and
revitalize the economy in South-Eastern Europe as a
whole, and especially in countries that have been affected
by large movements of refugees. I hope that the
upcoming meetings in Brussels and Sarajevo will translate
the commitment of Governments into concrete action.

I would like to conclude by referring to a problem
that has received much attention in the last few months.
I am aware that there is a perception of disparity in the
assistance given, for example, to displaced persons from
Kosovo, as opposed to that given to African refugees. I
know that many here have also been concerned by this
complex and difficult problem.

Emergencies, of course, attract more attention than
other programmes, and the Kosovo crisis has been a very
serious and very large refugee emergency. Crises in
Africa at certain times have also received heightened
attention and financial support. Think of the Horn in the
1980s, or the Great Lakes region a few years ago. It is
true, however, that Kosovo has been the focus of
unprecedented political attention and material support by
the international community, and by Western countries in
particular. Undeniably, proximity, strategic interest and

 

extraordinary media focus have played a key role in
determining the quality and level of response. Just as
undeniably, this has not been true - and continues not to
be true - in other situations, including some of those of
which I have spoken today.

But let me go back to the point I made at the
beginning. The positive indications of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) Summit in Algiers may signal - will
signal, I hope - a renewed commitment by African
Governments to take their future, and the future of their
people, more resolutely into their own hands and to address
and resolve their problems, including refugee problems,
through negotiations rather than force. This is a
fundamental precondition for international support. On the
other hand, we who shoulder global and not just regional
responsibilities should do all that is in our power to back
efforts to resolve conflicts, in Africa and in other parts of
the world. And while I can only appeal to the Council, and
to Governments, to be as balanced as possible in supporting
peace endeavours, I can certainly affirm that my Office will
continue to fulfil its own responsibilities towards all those
compelled to flee their homes, and especially those who do
so away from the limelight of international attention.

