Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): With the permission of
the Security Council, I would like to begin my statement
by echoing the many heartfelt condolences expressed
today over the passing of our friend, Ambassador
Vitaly Churkin. His sudden departure is an irreparable
loss not only for his family, to whom we extend our
sympathy and solidarity, but also to the Russian
Federation, which Ambassador Churkin served with
dedication and patriotism, and to the United Nations,
which lost an exceptional figure committed to inclusive
multilateralism, the respect for international law and
the peaceful settlement of disputes. We convey our
affection and admiration to Ambassador Ilichev and
his delegation for the work carried out by Ambassador
Churkin at the United Nations and the mark he left on
us all as a remarkable diplomat, teacher and human
being. We regret that the Council has not been able to
issue a declaration in memory of Ambassador Churkin.
It is a matter of humanity, all the more so given his
distinguished career as a diplomat.

In the interest of facilitating the dynamic
development of sharing opinions during the session,
and after sharing some consideration in my national
capacity, I will proceed to read a summarized version of
the statement of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(NAM).

We thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine, Mr. Pavlo Klimkin, for having convened this
open debate on conflicts in Europe, the first of its kind.
We also welcome the participation of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, the Secretary-General
for the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the Secretary-General of the
European External Action Service.

For the past 70 years, Europe has enjoyed a period
of relative peace and stability that has allowed it to
achieve significant levels of economic development
and promote the integration, establishment and
consolidation of regional multilateral institutions,
which have played a key role in the maintenance of
peace. Despite that progress, the European continent
has endured conflict 4 in the former territories of
Yugoslavia, for example. Today, like other regions of
the world, Europe faces risks and challenges, such as
the threat of terrorism and violent extremism; armed
conflicts still unresolved; and social discrimation
and exclusion, which call for comprehensive regional
responses and the support of the United Nations,
particularly that of the Security Council.

In that context, it is encouraging that Europe is
committed to peace and that it strives to distance itself
from the outdated notions of rampant imperialism,
criminal colonialism, territorial conquest, the pillage
of resources and the imposition of political, economic
and cultural models that would serve their interests,
Regrettably, on some occassions vestiges of those
erroneous concepts have triggered illegal military
interventions that have violated the independence and
territorial integrity of sovereign States, such as Iraq
and Libya, with tragic consequences that include illegal
immigration from the Middle East and North Africa, the
securitization and criminalization of which we reject.
Those are the same consequences of the interventionist
policies of some NATO countries.

Hence, after analysing the situation in Europe,
our country is convinced of the importance of the
peaceful settlement of disputes as the only way to
resolve conflicts and establish international relations
based on dialogue and cooperation, pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations. In that regard, regional
and subregional organizations, like the OSCE, play an
essential role in peacebuilding by promoting consensus
and the recovery, reconstruction and development of
societies emerging from conflict. It is worth noting
that in the quest for lasting peace, regional forums
must enhance synergies with the Security Council, in
keeping with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, and in so doing avoid duplicated action and
effort in the various areas of work. At the same time,
the Security Council, pursuant to its specific mandate,
must implement a responsible, transparent and inclusive
conflict-resolution policy, without double standards nor
geopolitical manipulation, that will best promote the
maintenance of international peace and security.

After a broad review of the current conflicts in
Europe, we wish to share some observations on specific
crises.

With regard to Ukraine, Venezuela recognizes the
diplomatic efforts embodied in the OSCE's various
peace initiatives aimed at resolving that difficult
situation, which has resulted in the unfortunate deaths
of civilians. We reiterate our support for the Minsk
agreements, signed by the Heads of State of Russia,
Ukraine, France and Germany, with the support of
the Security Council through resolution 2202 (2015),
as the only way to reach a peaceful settlement to the
conflict. We once again call on the parties to honour
the ceasefire, not escalate the conflict and allow the
agreements to be duly implemented, thus transcending
extraregional interests. Further, the process requires
that the key players facilitating that process abstain
from applying unilateral coercive measures that would
compromise the negotiations and be counterproductive
to the shared objectives ofpeace and a lasting resolution
to the armed conflict.

Kosovo will continue to play a prominent role
in the agenda for peace in Europe for as long as the
persistence of distrust between the parties and the
exclusion of communities continues to hamper the
potential for dialogue and stability. Nevertheless,
we value the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the European
Union mission, and consider resolution 1244 (1999) to
be the relevant international legal basis for achieving a
lasting peaceful resolution. We also reaffirm our full
commitment to respecting the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Serbia.
As for the situation in Cyprus, one of the longest-
standing conflicts in the history of the United Nations,
we recognize the progress made by the parties through
dialogue and negotiation over reunification initiatives.
That is why we encourage representatives of the Greek
Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities to maintain
the spirit of political will in order to put an end to that
dispute through a mutually beneficially agreement.

On behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, I note that we live a word that is facing
various new, complex and emergent threats to
international peace and security, including genocide
and ethnic cleansing, war and protracted conflicts.
One such protracted conflict is that between Armenia
and Azerbaijan, which, we regret to say, has not yet
been settled, despite the various relevant resolutions
adopted by the Security Council. At the seventeenth
NAM. summit on Margarita Island, Venezuela, held in
September 2016, the Heads of State and Government
of the Movement encouraged the parties to continue
to seek a negotiated solution to the conflict, while
respecting the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
the internationally recognized borders of the Republic
of Azerbaijan.

In conclusion, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, in line with its foundational principles,
reaffirms its commitment to promoting the peaceful
settlement of disputes, in keeping with of Article 33 of
Chapter VI of the Charter and relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and international law, as a whole, with a
View to contributing to the consolidation of international
peace and security and saving future generations from
the scourges of war and armed conflict.

