Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein is
grateful for this open debate and appreciates the presence
of the Secretary- General among the briefers for today's
discussion, which underlines the importance of the role
regional organizations can play in the maintenance
of peace and security. It also serves as a reminder
that effective conflict prevention and resolution can
substantially benefit from the mechanisms enshrined
in Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. A recommitment to those tools and their better
operationalization is therefore in the interests of us all.

In our region - Europe - the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has played
an invaluable role to ensure stability. It is therefore
with great concern that we have been witnessing the
constant violation of its fundamental principles.

After the Second World War, which originated in
Europe, our region has undergone successful political
and economic integration. The European Union (EU)
in particular has been an important element of stability
and an actor for peace to the benefit of all European
partners, including those that are not EU members, such
as ourselves. Unfortunately, since the 19905, we have
also witnessed a proliferation of conflicts, and today
we face growing tensions and an overall deterioration
of the security situation in Europe.

With the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
Treaty, Europe risks losing a vital element of its
security architecture. Liechtenstein supports the
painstaking efforts in the framework of the OSCE
to resolve European conflicts, including those in
and around Ukraine and in Georgia, as well as the
Transnistrian and the Nagorno Karabakh conflicts. Its
important work continues to take place, while we seem
to continue drifting further away from a consensus on
the fundamental principles of our common European
security. That is both a reflection of the practical value
of the OSCE and an urgent task for Europe to underpin
the OSCE's work with a renewed consensus on a set
of strong and values-based principles on security and
cooperation, as reflected in the Helsinki Final Act
and the Charter of the United Nations. Liechtenstein
is strongly convinced that the OSCE continues to have
an important role to play as a platform for dialogue in
that regard.

The recent dangerous increase of tensions in the
Azov Sea and the Kerch Strait is of high concern to
us. It has once again demonstrated that the conflict
in and around Ukraine is driven by continued serious
violations of international law. Against the backdrop
of increasing militarization in the area, Liechtenstein
joins the calls for the utmost restraint and an immediate
de-escalation, as well as a return to a rules-based
order in accordance with applicable international
law. Liechtenstein reiterates its full support for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders,
including Crimea.

The concept note for this meeting (see S/2018/1064, annex) rightfully points to the fact that many
contemporary conflicts are internal crises, which are
perpetuated or repeated in the absence of political
processes to end them. That is the new reality of
conflict that the United Nations needs to fully embrace
if it is to play its role as the primary guardian of
international peace and security, with the help of
regional organizations. In addressing such crises, it
appears that we often fall short of penetrating their root
causes. Upgrading our toolbox in dealing with internal
crises to strengthen the ability of the United Nations
to prevent conflict is a key aspect of the prevention
agenda outlined by the Secretary-General, which we
fully support. As a member of the Group of Friends on
Mediation, Liechtenstein also welcomes the Secretary-
General's commitment to inclusive mediation and to
increasing the capacity of the United Nations in terms
of prevention and early action.

Liechtenstein is a long-standing supporter of the
right to self-determination as a means of preventing
and resolving internal conflicts when applied in
conformity with international law, including the
principle of territorial integrity. Many of today's
intra-State conflicts are rooted in a community's desire
for a greater measure of self-governance and resistance
to their claim by the State. States should be encouraged
to engage peacefully with communities with a view to
finding an appropriate measure of self-governance in
order to prevent and mitigate conflict. We will continue
our work in partnership with others to develop tools and
strategies for mediators to identify and properly address
intra-State conflicts that are driven by grievances
related to self-governance. We look forward to sharing
the results of this work with all interested delegations.

