Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
The Permanent Representative of Luxembourg will
shortly make a statement on behalf of the Presidency of
the European Union and I associate myself with that
statement in advance.

At the outset, Mr. Minister, I would like to
welcome your presence in the Chair at this important
meeting. I thank Mr. Nebojsa Covic, President of the
Coordination Centre of Serbia and Montenegro and of
the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo, for his presence
and for his statement. I also thank Mr. Soren Jessen-
Petersen for his briefing and for the work that he and
the personnel of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) are doing
on the ground.

We have before us an excellent report
(S/2005/335) of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Kosovo. France fully shares its observations on
meaningful progress made by the people of Kosovo. I
particularly welcome the fact that security today has
been restored throughout Kosovo thanks to the efforts
of everyone, in particular the Kosovo Force (KFOR),
which is doing an excellent job. Considerable effort is
still necessary in many areas, as correctly underscored
by the Secretary-General, but we are aware that
implementation of standards for Kosovo will be a long-
term effort. The key is to have undertaken this effort
and to support it.

France also appreciates the value of the
encouraging signs coming from Belgrade, and it
welcomes them. We know how difficult it is, after
arduous years, to make conciliatory gestures, but such
gestures are necessary if we want to hasten the solution
of the last conflict in the heart of Europe. We are also
encouraged by President Tadic's offer to meet soon
with President Rugova and by the planned meeting
between the Prime Ministers of Serbia and of Kosovo.
Pristina and Belgrade need to step up their contacts at
all political and technical levels.

I should also like to reaffirm our desire for Serbia
and Montenegro to be fully associated with the
emerging negotiation process. In exchange, the
Belgrade authorities need to put an end to their tactic
of obstruction, which prevents Kosovo Serbs from
participating in the public institutions of Kosovo. The
"vacant chair policy" entails major risks that the
history of Kosovo will be written without the Kosovo
Serbs. We appeal to reason at this critical time, when
the destiny of the territory is at stake.

France supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to launch a comprehensive
evaluation of the situation and to appoint a Special
Envoy for that purpose. Indeed, in December 2003 the
Council undertook a comprehensive strategy aimed at
ending, in full accordance with resolution 1244 (1999),
the unacceptable status quo. One of the key elements
of that strategy was to carry out a comprehensive
review of the implementation of standards at mid-2005.
The time has come to carry out that review objectively
and calmly. This is a question of consistency for the
Council and for the international community.

I would like to underscore here that the outcome
of the comprehensive review is not a foregone
conclusion. That is no mere formulaic statement: we
need to give the Special Envoy the necessary time to
carry out this work without being locked into an
artificial timetable. We need to then consider how to
follow up the recommendations. No one should
prejudge them. It is progress that will determine the
timetable.

My country also supports the conditions that the
Secretary-General has established with respect to
continuing the process. First, progress needs to be
intensified, especially in the priority areas related to
the rights of the Kosovo Serbs. Clearly, we need to
know whether and how the Kosovo Serbs will be able
to continue to live in Kosovo or to return under
conditions that are consistent with law, equity and the
standards that prevail in Europe today. Major efforts
are still needed to give full effect to the rights of the
Kosovo Serbs in such areas as freedom of movement;
basic conditions conducive to the return of refugees
and displaced persons, including the question of
ownership rights and the economy; and the protection
of Serb religious sites and memorials.

We also expect concrete, decisive progress in the
area of decentralization. But let us not mislead
ourselves: this is a challenge for all of Kosovo, and not
only for a minority. It would be regrettable if ethnic
confrontations or partisan politicking delayed the
implementation of this key goal with respect to the
modernization of Kosovo's public institutions.

I would like to underscore that we will remain
vigilant on these issues, particularly through the
quarterly reports that the Secretary-General will
continue to provide to the Security Council. It is my
hope that we will be able to continue to move forward
towards a settlement of this conflict to the benefit to all
those living in Kosovo and throughout the region.

