Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: After 15 months of
absence of direct talks, I am pleased to report that
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators started meeting on
3 January in Amman under the auspices of King
Abdullah and Minister for Foreign Affairs Judeh of
Jordan and in the presence of Quartet envoys and
Quartet representative Blair. Since that first meeting, a
series of direct preparatory talks have been held under
Jordanian auspices. The parties began discussing
important issues related to territory and security, in
accordance with the Quartet statement of 23 September
2011. They are also discussing ways to build
confidence and create a positive environment for those
talks to succeed.

The Secretary-General commended the
Palestinian and Israeli leaders on those important first
steps and expressed his appreciation to His Majesty
King Abdullah of Jordan for his initiative to facilitate
talks and give new impetus to the Middle East peace
process. The Secretary-General, who was in Lebanon
10 days ago, will soon visit the region again to support
the search for peace.

We remain hopeful that the preparatory meetings
between Israeli and Palestinian negotiators will
continue and ultimately lead to serious negotiations
based on comprehensive proposals on territory and
security, and reaching an agreement for a two-State
solution by the end of this year, as envisaged by the
Quartet. In the short term, it is essential that
provocations stop, as called for by the Quartet, and that
early progress be made to build confidence among the
parties and sustain these nascent talks.

Neither the international community nor the
parties can afford to let this opportunity pass by. The
Secretary-General continues to call on the Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to show vision, courage and
determination to reach a historical peace agreement
that would meet the legitimate aspirations of the people
on both sides.

Unfortunately, actions on the ground continue to
contribute to tensions. Settlement activity in the West
Bank, including in East Jerusalem, continued during
12-21354
the reporting period, and Under-Secretary-General
Amos briefed this Council last week on the current
situation. Violence between Israeli settlers and
Palestinians also remains troubling. On 25 December,
an Israeli woman was injured by stones thrown at her
car near Hebron. On 9 January, seven Palestinians were
arrested by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) near
Ramallah for throwing stones and Molotov cocktails at
vehicles travelling on road 443 through the occupied
territory. Settlers injured 12 Palestinians, including
four children. Three Palestinian children were hit and
injured by Israeli vehicles in Hebron and Nablus
between 10 and 12 January. On 11 January, a mosque
near the Palestinian town of Salfit was desecrated with
Hebrew graffiti referencing "price tag" in connection
with the dismantlement of an outpost. Settler attacks on
Palestinian orchards also resulted in injuries and more
than 100 Palestinian trees being uprooted.

During the reporting period, Israeli authorities
demolished structures related to a number of
unauthorized outposts. The demolition of outposts is an
Israeli commitment under the Road Map. However, in
parallel, new initiatives to retroactively legalize some
outposts were advanced by the Government and in the
Knesset. Israeli authorities also demolished 88
Palestinian structures in different locations of the West
Bank during the reporting period, including seven in
East Jerusalem, citing lack of building permits.
Demolitions included 21 residences and 25 water-
related structures.

Citing security, the Israel Defense Forces
conducted 336 operations in the occupied West Bank,
during which 74 Palestinians, including three children,
were injured and 273 arrested. Two IDF soldiers were
also injured. The IDF arrested nine Palestinians
allegedly in possession of illegal weapons and
ammunition. On 4 January, the IDF shot and injured a
Palestinian at a checkpoint near Bethlehem. On
22 January, a Palestinian man reportedly carrying a
metal object was shot and injured by IDF soldiers at
the Qalandia checkpoint.

In another concerning development, several
members of the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC)
have been arrested by Israeli security forces. On
19 January, two Hamas members of the Palestinian
Legislative Council, including Speaker Aziz Dweik,
were arrested. On 23 January, Israeli security forces
entered the compound of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Jerusalem and detained the
12-21354
two remaining Palestinian Legislative Council
members who had sought refuge there since July 2010.
Last night, another Hamas PLC member was arrested
from his home in Ramallah. Two other PLC members
were previously arrested at the ICRC building and
transferred to Ramallah in 2011. The Palestinian
negotiator subsequently delivered a letter to his Israeli
counterpart complaining about the detention of the
PLC Speaker, referencing Palestinian prisoners in
Israeli custody in general and calling for their release.
We are troubled by reports that the Israeli authorities
have subjected Mr. Dweik and possibly others to
administrative detention.

Palestinian security forces continued to maintain
law and order in the parts of the West Bank under the
control of the Palestinian Authority. On 29 December,
Palestinian security forces seized and defused an
improvised explosive device, and on 6 January they
arrested eight Palestinians on criminal charges in
Hebron. On 14 January, Palestinian firefighters put out
a blaze on an Israeli bus travelling south of Hebron and
evacuated Israeli passengers. We also would like to
remind the parties of their Road Map commitments to
end incitement. In this regard, we have noted with
concern the statement of the Palestinian Authority
Mufti on 9 January.

The Palestinian Authority continues to build its
institutions, which in April 2011 had already achieved
a level sufficient for a functioning Government of a
State. However, in a meeting with Special Coordinator
Serry on 16 January, Prime Minister Fayyad expressed
his grave concern about the financial situation of the
Palestinian Authority. In 2011, direct budget support
amounted to only $742 million out of the $1 billion
that had been expected. Continued shortfalls could
challenge the impressive progress realized through the
State-building agenda. The United Nations encourages
donors to deliver their contributions for 2012 as early
as possible in the year.

The pace of economic growth slowed in the third
quarter of 2011, increasing by only 0.5 per cent over
the previous quarter. This, however, was still a 12 per
cent increase over the third quarter of 2010. During the
third quarter of 2011, the West Bank actually saw its
real economy shrink by 0.3 per cent, whereas the Gaza
Strip experienced an economic expansion of 2.6 per
cent in real terms. The structure of gross domestic
product in both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
reveals a continued concentration of economic activity
3
in non-tradable sectors, including certain services,
public administration and construction. Sustained
growth will require an expansion of this productive
base and the tradable goods sector. Increased measures
to enable this and to reduce access impediments will be
essential for continued growth, such as in
manufacturing, mining and agriculture.

Weekly demonstrations continued in the West
Bank against the barrier, which deviates from the
Green Line in contravention of the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice of 2004. Clashes with
the Israel Defense Forces left 28 Palestinians injured;
one Israeli soldier was injured by rock-throwing.

Turning now to the situation in Gaza, a total of 29
rockets and 12 mortar shells fired from Gaza hit Israel
without resulting in injuries or damage. The Israel
Defense Forces conducted six incursions and 10
airstrikes into Gala, resulting in four Palestinian
militants being killed and seven injured, and 15
Palestinian civilians injured. We condemn in the
strongest terms any indiscriminate firing towards
civilian areas and call on Israel to show maximum
restraint. Obligations under international humanitarian
law must be respected for the protection of civilians. It
is essential to strengthen the calm in order to improve
the conditions of the population in Gaza.

We continue to call for the lifting of the closure
in the framework of resolution 1860 (2009). In the
short term, we believe that the full opening for the
import of construction materials would bolster the
legitimate Gazan economy and enable much needed
reconstruction activities. It is important that exports be
allowed to resume at scale, including transfers to the
West Bank and Israel. These changes could be applied
with due consideration for Israel's legitimate security
concerns and could make a significant difference in the
lives of many Gazans. We will continue to work with
the Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority
in this regard.

At present, the United Nations has received
approvals for a total of approximately $270 million of
works requiring construction materials that are still
classified as dual use. However, three key housing
projects of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
totalling over $60 million, have yet to be approved.
Efforts between the factions to advance Palestinian
reconciliation are continuing. Fatah and Hamas
representatives met again in Cairo on 21 December to
that end. On 14 January, the Palestinian Central
Election Commission obtained permission to reopen its
offices in Gaza.

We continue to support Palestinian unity within
the framework of the commitments of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization (PLO), the positions of the
Quartet, and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Allow me to turn to the situation in Lebanon.
From 13 to 15 January, the Secretary-General visited
Lebanon and held talks with President Sleiman, Prime
Minister Mikati and Speaker Berri, as well as a number
of representatives of Lebanese parties. The Secretary-
General also paid a visit to the headquarters of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in
Naqoura, in support of the mission and efforts of
UNIFIL peacekeepers, who play a crucial role in
preserving the calm along the Blue Line.

In his discussions with Lebanese interlocutors,
the Secretary-General reiterated the United Nations
unwavering commitment to Lebanon's stability and
security, as well as the need for Lebanon to meet all its
international obligations, including those under the
relevant Security Council resolutions. He strongly
encouraged President Sleiman's effort to reconvene the
national dialogue, including the effort to enable
progress on the development of a national defence
strategy that would address the question of arms
outside the control of the State.

A number of security incidents that illustrate the
continued fragility and vulnerability of conditions in
UNIFIL areas of operation took place during the
reporting period. On 19 December, four rockets were
found, and subsequently removed, by the Lebanese
armed forces near Wadi Khancha. A UNIFIL
investigation is ongoing. On 28 December, an
explosion 4 the third since mid-November - took
place in Tyre in front of a restaurant, causing minor
damage. The Lebanese authorities are conducting
investigations into the explosions. All these incidents
are violations of resolution 1701 (2006) as they
manifest the presence of unauthorized weapons and
related material in the UNIFIL area of operations.

The investigations into the rocket launchings
towards Israel on 29 November and 11 December and
the attack against UNIFIL personnel on 9 December in
the vicinity of Tyre are still ongoing. UNIFIL, in
cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces,
12-21354
intensified its operational activities and maintains a
high level of vigilance in order to prevent any hostile
activities.

In an ongoing violation of resolution 1701
(2006), almost daily Israeli violations of Lebanese
airspace continued during the reporting period.

The situation along the Lebanese-Syrian border
remains of concern. On 27 December, three Lebanese
nationals were killed and one injured in the area of
Wadi Khaled by gunfire from the Syrian side of the
border. President Sleiman condemned the killing and
called for an investigation of the incident. On
21 January, a 16-year-old Lebanese fisherman was
killed at sea off the coast of Arida at the Lebanese-
Syrian border. Two other fishermen were detained by
Syrian security forces and subsequently released.

The United Nations continues to monitor the
influx of Syrian refugees into Lebanon. As of
13 January, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the
Government had registered over 5,660 Syrian refugees
in Lebanon. The significant increase in number is due
largely to intensified registration with UNHCR and the
Government. The United Nations continues to
coordinate closely with the Government of Lebanon on
the provision of assistance to the displaced.

While in Lebanon, the Secretary-General also
attended a conference on reform and transitions to
democracy in the Arab world, organized by the United
Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western
Asia. In his keynote address to the meeting, the
Secretary-General outlined the United Nations firm
commitment to helping Arab countries through the
transitions that they have embarked upon. The
Secretary-General also reiterated his clear call on
President Al-Assad to stop the violence and the killing
of people.

For over 10 months now, Syria has continued to
be engulfed in a violent political crisis, with a rising
death toll on a daily basis. The foreign ministers of the
League of Arab States met in Cairo on 22 January and
adopted a resolution that proposes a political plan, with
a specific timeline, for resolving the crisis in Syria.
The plan calls for all violence and acts of killing to
stop. It reminds the Syrian authorities of their
obligations to withdraw all military forces from cities
and population centres, release all prisoners, and
ensure the freedom of peaceful demonstration and full
12-21354

and unhindered access to the Arab League
organizations and Arab and international media
throughout the country.

The plan also calls on the Syrian authorities and
the opposition to engage in a serious dialogue under
the auspices of the Arab League with the objective of
forming a transitional national unity Government to
oversee a peaceful transition to a democratic and
pluralistic political system. The Arab League resolution
envisages that the Secretary-General of the Arab
League and the Chairman of the Arab League
Committee on Syria inform this Council and seek its
support. The Arab League ministers also decided to
extend the Arab observer mission by one month, and
requested Mr. Elaraby to continue his cooperation with
the United Nations Secretary-General in providing
assistance to the Arab League observer mission. The
Syrian authorities rejected the resolution, which they
described as a flagrant interference in Syria's internal
affairs with the aim of drawing foreign interference.

Time is pressing for the violence and human
rights violations to stop and for a credible, inclusive
and Syrian-led political process to start in Syria, with
the aim of effectively addressing the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and ensuring the full
exercise of their fundamental freedoms. We hope that
the international community will act in a concerted and
coherent manner in support of ongoing efforts to
achieve a peaceful resolution of the crisis.

Turning back to the Middle East peace process,
let me conclude by reiterating our determination to
contribute to the ongoing talks, help the parties build
mutual confidence, and develop concrete proposals on
territory and security. Leadership is needed to ensure
that the process moves forward with the support of
regional and international partners. As the Secretary-
General recalled in Beirut, a two-State solution is long
overdue. The status quo offers only the guarantee of
future conflict. We must all do our part to secure a
lasting peace that will end the occupation and the
conflict and realize the legitimate rights of all.

The parties should now redouble their efforts to
resolve all permanent status issues, end the conflict and
establish an independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace
with a secure Israel, in accordance with relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Road Map and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
5
