Ms. Chen Peijie (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Allow me to begin by thanking President Pocar,
Prosecutor Brammertz, President Byron and Prosecutor
Jallow for their respective briefings on the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). We welcome them to
New York. In particular, we welcome Mr. Brammertz,
who is participating in a Council meeting for the first
time in his capacity as Prosecutor of the ICTY.

We have taken note of the continuing progress in
the work of the two Tribunals, and we recognize their
efforts towards implementing the completion
strategies. As the completion strategy deadlines are
drawing near, we expect the Tribunals to make a
greater effort to intensify their work all areas. In that
connection, I wish to elaborate on the following points.

First, since the introduction of the completion
strategies, the Tribunals have been working hard to
improve their methods of work and corresponding
working procedures in order to speed up progress. We
are already fully cognizant of that, and we hope that
they will build on that foundation and continue to
explore the possibility and feasibility of improving
their working methods and making full use of the
available time, space and human resources with a view
to conducting highly efficient trials and avoiding, as
best they can, any kind of delay, so as to bring the
cases to closure on schedule.

Secondly, in recent years, the Tribunals have been
treating the referral of cases to countries in their
respective regions as one of the core elements of the
completion strategy. We hope that they will continue to
give the relevant regional countries greater confidence
and more opportunities, step up cooperation with their
judicial organs and try their best to expand cooperation
in that area. They should encourage and support new
approaches to referrals and to the transfer of fugitives.
We appeal to all countries concerned make efforts to
facilitate the maximum number possible of referrals of
cases from the Tribunals in a systematic and
expeditious manner.

Thirdly, a study of the Tribunal's legacy and
residual responsibilities is becoming an increasingly
pressing issue. Since the Tribunals' submission of their
September 2007 reports, they have, in the first half of
this year, at the request of the Council's informal
working group on the Tribunals, furnished opinions on
these relevant questions on many occasions. We
recognize their active participation in the study of
these issues.

Meanwhile, we also believe that the question of
legacy and residual responsibilities should be studied
and addressed, using an objective and realistic
approach. In that process, it would be inappropriate to
avoid addressing existing problems and the degree of
difficulty in the work of the Tribunals, or on the other
hand to exaggerate the difficulty of the problems
related to their work in terms of workload. At the same
time, it would also be inappropriate to prejudge any
possible solution. It is therefore imperative to observe
the timetables for the completion strategy and
prudently seek feasible, economical, appropriate and
sound solutions.

We have consistently believed that the principles
and timetables defined by the Security Council should
be observed in earnest. The two Tribunals should
continue to work to that end. In the second half of this
year, we expect the Tribunals to take bigger steps
towards implementing their completion strategies and
to share with us the relevant information in their year-
end reports. We also appeal to the countries concerned
to continue to intensify their cooperation with the
Tribunals and, through joint efforts, thus realize our
common goals.

