Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to join you,
Madam President, and others before me in expressing
my deep condolences to the family of the victim and to
the Government of France for their loss.

We are pleased to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Foreign Minister of Mali, to the
Council. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix for his informative briefing and to
welcome him to his new post. This is an important and
challenging time for United Nations peacekeeping, and
we look forward to working closely with him. I would
like to assure him of our full support.

As the current mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA)enters its final months, the Council
must correctly assess the severity of the situation we
face in Mali. The picture is not good. More than a year
ago, the Council visited Mali and reiterated its call
for concrete progress in implementing the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Unfortunately,
most of the key observations that we made during our
mission are still valid now - the slow implementation
of the agreement; the lack of inclusiveness, especially
of women and young people; the concerns about the
lack of decentralization and the state of the interim
authorities in the North; and the minimal progress
in security sector reform and the extension of State
authority. Since then, the security situation has
worsened and become more complex, with continuous
attacks by violent extremist and terrorist groups and
intercommunal clashes erupting in central Mali.

As we consider MINUSMA's future mandate, we
should ask ourselves how the United Nations can better
support the overriding goal of implementing the peace
agreement. It has 20 chapters, with annexes, and its
mutually reinforcing elements must be implemented
in a balanced manner. We would like to emphasize the

need for further progress in security-sector reform;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
cantonment; and the redeployment of the Malian
defence and security forces. That is crucial to building
confidence in the northern and central regions. Japan
appreciates the initiative of the Group of Five for the
Sahel to establish a new joint force, which represents
African States' ownership of the effort to counter
terrorism in the region. The Council should study
its proposal closely to see how it would interact
with MINUSMA.

MINUSMA's mandate is multidimensional, and
its strategic priority is supporting the signatory parties
in implementing the agreement, particularly the
provisions related to the restoration and extension of
State authority. Political and institutional reforms are
desperately needed, and all five interim authorities in
the north must be effective in providing the people with
tangible benefits. The time is right for the Council to
seriously discuss howMINUSMA canbestbe positioned
to support both the political and institution-building
needs arising from the peace process. Japan looks
forward to contributing actively to this difficult but
necessary discussion.

