Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her briefing and efforts to promote accountability
for atrocity crimes in Libya.

As we have heard, since the Prosecutor last
briefed the Security Council on Libya in November
(see S/PV.7306), the conflict has persisted, despite the
ongoing United Nations-facilitated political dialogue,
and has contributed to a disintegration of the rule of
law, thus paralyzing the current Government's efforts
to tackle human rights problems.

As the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
recently stated, armed groups across political, tribal,
regional and ideological divides have shown disregard
for civilian life. The Prosecutor confirmed that the
absence of stability and the rule of law has significant
consequences for the work of the ICC. Many of the
individuals and institutions with the most critical
roles to play in exposing and preventing violence
against civilians, including journalists, human rights
defenders, judges and prosecutors, female activists
and the country's human rights commission, have
been singled out for intimidation and brutal violence
for simply attempting to provide key services to the
Libyan people. Other murders, such as the killing of
prominent human rights defender Salwa Bugaighis,
last June on the day of national elections, have a Clear
political purpose, even as it has been impossible to
identify those responsible. The ongoing conflict has
ravaged Libya's domestic justice institutions, which
are essential to protect civilians and which play a key
role in advancing respect for human rights. Escalating
violence between Libyan political rivals make Libya,
its citizens and its resources vulnerable to exploitation
by violent extremists. Sexual violence also remains an
issue of serious concern, as survivors struggle to access
critical services and as those who work to deliver them
face intimidation. All of those abuses highlight the
stakes of the conflict and the urgent need to develop
the strong institutions that Libya needs to protect its
people.

The critical first step towards resolving the current
crisis and restoring the rule of law and the protection
of human rights, is the formation of a national unity
Government through the United Nations-facilitated
political dialogue. There can be no military solution.
All parties should cease hostilities and work to create
an environment conductive to inclusive dialogue.

We fully supportthe efforts of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bernardino Leon, who will
convene the next round of talks shortly. We urge the
parties to seize this opportunity to finalize agreements
on the formation of a national unity Government and
arrangements for a comprehensive ceasefire before the
holy month of Ramadan begins.

We call on all Libyan actors to take steps to ensure
due process for detainees. That includes not only
releasing any individuals held in unlawful detention,
but also planning for the means to transfer detainees to
State custody and rebuilding the judiciary's capacity to
bring cases to trial.

We welcome the decision by the Human Rights
Council at its March session to request that the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights dispatch a fact-finding mission to investigate
violations and abuses committed in Libya since the
beginning of 2014. We welcome the Prosecutor's
continuing calls on the parties to refrain from
unlawfully targeting civilians, or, more generally, from
committing atrocity crimes.

With respect to the finding of non-cooperation that
the ICC transmitted to the Council, we welcome the
continuing cooperation between the Libyan authorities
and the Prosecutor's Office to further implement the
memorandum of understanding concluded between
Libya and the ICC in November 2013, on burden-
sharing regarding the investigation and prosecution of
former officials of the Al-Qadhafi regime.

At the same time, we reiterate our support of
the Council's recent call for Libyan authorities to
fulfil their obligation to cooperate with the ICC. We
encourage the Libyan authorities to engage with
the Court and the Council as appropriate to work to
overcome implementation obstacles. We look forward
to continuing to work with the other members of the
Council, the organs of the ICC and all others that have a
contribution to make in bringing this conflict to an end
and restoring the rights of the Libyan people.

