Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): It is a great honour to
have you, Mr. Foreign Minister, preside over our open
debate today on the prevention of armed conflict,
which is a subject of highest concern to all of us in the
United Nations. We thank Ambassador Anwarul
Chowdhury for holding this open discussion on this
important subject today. We also thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for providing us with a very
comprehensive and highly imaginative report on the
subject. The report not only addresses the subject in a
very analytical way, but more importantly, makes a
number of recommendations which merit serious
consideration by both the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

The Secretary-General has made the following
extremely important assertions at the very outset of his
report. First of all, there is a need to move the United
Nations from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention. Secondly, we must now move from the
rhetoric of prevention to the full implementation stage.
My delegation concurs fully with these assertions. The
nature and characteristics of conflicts have changed
over the years since the United Nations was founded
over half a century ago. Conflicts in our times are
largely within States rather than between States, and
these have to be dealt with differently from the ways in
which conflicts between States are addressed under the
United Nations Charter.

We were privileged to take part in the recent
Security Council missions to the Congo and the Great
Lakes region, as well as the mission to Kosovo last
week under the leadership of Ambassador Chowdhury.
We had the opportunity to have a closer look at the
conflicts which afflict these areas, and we have come
back convinced, more than ever before, that these
conflicts would have been avoidable through timely
action at the national level, with the support of the
international community. We believe that the same is
true in respect of most civil conflicts. We share the
view of the Secretary-General that the primary
responsibility for conflict prevention rests with
national Governments.

Let us see what the root causes of civil conflicts
are. In our View, the seeds of civil strife can invariably
be found in places where Governments lack legitimacy,
where governance is weak or unrepresentative, where
irrational values such as fundamentalism, racism,
tribalism, ethnic discrimination, social injustice, and
violation of human rights are practised officially or
unofficially. These are matters which concern the
national Governments themselves, and the international
community can reasonably expect responsible
Governments to address such issues internally in a
manner that has the general support of the people.

The seeds of conflict also lie in poverty,
underdevelopment and conditions of economic and
social inequality. These problems are normally difficult
to deal with at the national level alone. International
and United Nations support are crucial in terms of the
resources and know-how needed for the development
of economic and social infrastructures that help
alleviate the problem of unemployment as well. We
must not forget that underdevelopment tends to become
the breeding ground for social frustration, which
culminates in armed struggles and uncontrolled
violence.

I shall now make some observations on the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on the
prevention of conflict.

With regard to early warning systems, the
Secretary-General has referred on a number of
occasions in his report to the various possibilities of
obtaining early warning information from United
Nations agencies. While the collection of such
information is no doubt helpful, it is equally important
that proper strategies be developed within the United
Nations system with a view to addressing the issue at
its embryonic stage so as to avoid the occurrence of
indiscriminate violence prior to any action being taken
by the United Nations.

In connection with preventive deployment
operations, we welcome the proposal of the Secretary-
General in favour of a United Nations preventive
deployment operation as a symbol of the international
community's interest and as a source of leverage to
promote peace and stability. Such deployment as the
Secretary-General suggests may make a crucial
contribution, as opposed to the traditional
peacekeeping mission, which is not present when the
conflict erupts and cannot therefore save lives and
promote stability in the initial stages of an armed
conflict. It is only through comprehensive and coherent
conflict prevention strategies that the greatest potential
for promoting peace can be achieved and a suitable
environment for sustainable development can be
created.

As part of the Secretary-General's strategy to
prevent armed conflicts, my delegation fully subscribes
to the idea of fielding fact-finding missions, such as the
inter-agency mission that visited several countries in
West Africa recently. The report of the mission
provides an integrated approach to the political,
economic, social and humanitarian problems existing
in the countries visited. It is encouraging to note that
the mission has come up with concrete
recommendations to address the problems faced by
countries of the region in a comprehensive manner.
Such missions should be encouraged to visit regions
affected by underdevelopment, where the potential for
armed conflicts to occur might remain high.

As to the role of the Economic and Social
Council in conflict prevention, as an integrated
approach aimed at achieving sustainable peace and
preventing armed conflicts, we fully concur with the
Secretary-General that a future high-level segment of
the Economic and Social Council's annual meeting be
devoted to the question of addressing the root causes of
conflict and the role of development in promoting
long-term conflict prevention. A greater involvement
of the Economic and Social Council in areas related to
the elimination of the root causes of conflict should be
encouraged. The assessment mission of the Economic
and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti,
of which I had the privilege to be a member, provided
first-hand information on the efforts undertaken to
address the core issues that could assist in establishing
lasting peace in Haiti.

The importance of the role of regional
organizations in conflict prevention has been reiterated
on several occasions in this Chamber. We commend the
positive role played by regional and subregional
organizations, such as the Organization of African
Unity, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Southern African
Development Community, in their efforts to prevent
armed conflicts. The early warning stations established
by ECOWAS in West Africa provide an excellent
example of the determination of the subregional
organization to address the issue of armed conflict at
the earliest stage of its occurrence. More resources,
technical and material alike, should be made available
to regional organizations in their endeavours to prevent
armed conflict. The moratorium on arms imposed by
ECOWAS serves as another example of the efforts to
curb armed conflicts in Africa.

It is undeniable that the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons has, over the past decade, been
a major cause of concern in various conflict-prone
regions. Measures to prevent the misuse and illicit
transfer of small arms will inevitably contribute to the
prevention of conflicts. Disarmament should be an
ongoing process, particularly in conflict-prone
societies. We look forward to the adoption of a
comprehensive programme of action to curb the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons during the
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects next
month. My delegation also fully supports programmes,
such as "weapons for development", which are aimed
at the retrieval and collection of illegal weapons in
exchange for community-based development
incentives. These programmes have been successful in
some regions and should be encouraged on a wider
scale.

As regards the role of the Security Council in the
prevention of armed conflicts, the Secretary-General
reminds the Council that, according to Chapter VI of
the United Nations Charter:

"The Security Council may investigate any
dispute, or any situation which might lead to
international friction or give rise to a dispute".

The Secretary-General also draws attention to the fact
that the Security Council normally becomes involved
only when violence has already occurred on a large
scale. It is time that the Security Council pay attention
to the comments of the Secretary-General and dedicate
itself to playing a more constructive role in the
prevention of armed conflicts. In this regard, we
welcome the initiative of the Secretary-General to
submit periodic regional or subregional reports to the
Security Council on threats to international peace and
security.

My delegation commends the Secretary-General
for the important role he plays through quiet diplomacy
and the use of his good offices in the prevention of
armed conflicts. There is no doubt that he has achieved
very positive results. My delegation encourages him in
his efforts and supports his actions for the prevention
and resolution of armed conflicts wherever they occur.

Finally, my delegation fully supports the 10
principles laid down in the Secretary-General's report,
which are aimed at intensifying the efforts of the
United Nations to move from a culture of reaction to a
culture of prevention. My delegation, however, wishes
to highlight the following principle:

"Conflict prevention and sustainable and
equitable development are mutually reinforcing
activities. An investment in national and
international efforts for conflict prevention must
be seen as a simultaneous investment in
sustainable development since the latter can best
take place in an environment of sustainable
peace." (S/2001/574, para. 169)

This principle, according to my delegation, remains at
the core of our efforts in the prevention of conflicts.

