The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

The Security Council has today consecutively
adopted two separate draft resolutions, one on Croatia and
now one on Bosnia and Herzegovina. The adoption of
these resolutions serves as a reminder of the fact that the
conflicts in the two countries are closely interlinked.
Further, we view the adoption of the two resolutions as
symbolizing the international community's renewed
determination to arrest the cycle of violence and the logic
of war which for far too long have dominated the mind-
set of those directly involved.

The Indonesian delegation is firmly committed to the
demands contained in the resolution that has just been
adopted. We condemn the Bosnian Serbs' seizure of the
safe areas of Srebrenica and Zepa, and their violations of
humanitarian law in those areas. We are appalled by

 

reports, confirmed today, of atrocities, mass murder and
other violations of humanitarian law committed by the
Bosnian Serbs against Bosnian men and boys in Srebrenica.
These reported atrocities underline the need for prompt
action by the international community to ensure Bosnian
Serb compliance with the demands contained in the
resolution. In this regard, we would like in particular to
echo the demand for safe access for representatives of
United Nations and other international agencies to persons
in need of humanitarian assistance. The fulfilment of this
demand is crucial for the safety and security of those

members of the civilian population of Srebrenica and

Zepa who are still unaccounted for. The international

community should continue to work towards their

unconditional and immediate release.

Finally, my delegation would like to express our
appreciation to the sponsors of the draft resolution, and to
extend our appreciation to the women and men of the
United Nations Protection Force and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, who have done their utmost
to alleviate the suffering of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in their hour of need.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers on the list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 6.30 pm.
