The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
C6te d'Ivoire.

My delegation welcomes the holding of this
meeting on the theme "Peace and security in Africa:
drug trafficking in West Africa as a threat to stability".
My delegation commends Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), on his excellent briefing.

Drug trafficking today represents a public health
and national security emergency, and even a source of
subregional instability, as it deeply affects the social
fabric and undermines States' ability to govern at the
political, economic and social levels. It is fuelled by
structural vulnerabilities and weaknesses in the social
and criminal justice system, as well as by increasing
levels of poverty, which drug trafficking networks and
terrorist groups exploit. Once considered a transit area
for certain types of narcotics, West Africa today has
become a production hub, a consumer market and a
destination point for every type of drug. In their fight
against the scourge of drug trafficking, the countries
of West Africa - already faced by difficulties
resulting from vulnerabilities in their border control
systems - must confront evolving security threats
owing to alliances between terrorist groups and drug
traffickers' networks.

The drug phenomenon appears to be one of the
main causes leading to students' failure in schools
and generates new forms of urban Violence affecting
the safety and well-being of populations. Moreover,
the phenomenon fosters the burgeoning of criminal
economies, which, through money laundering,
insidiously infiltrate the economic fabric of States,
particularly in the areas of transportation, the
hospitality industry and real estate. In Cote d'Ivoire,
the Interministerial Committee to Fight against
Drugs estimates that approximately 12 per cent of
the population between the ages of 15 and 64 use
drugs, and puts the amount of drugs seized between
2017 and the first half of 2018 at 286 tons. In an
environment characterized by the weakening of central
State authority and the armed assertion of tribal and
regional irredentism, the resources derived from drug
trafficking are both a high stake and an important lever
in influencing local and national political dynamics.
In replacing central State authority, elite members of
the local population and armed groups involved in
drug trafficking increase their influence on intra- and
inter-community relations, as well as on local political
dynamics.

Faced with the threat posed by drug trafficking to
stability in West Africa, the States of the region must
shoulder the primary responsibility of responding in
accordance with national and subregional strategies.
In Cote d'Ivoire, the fight against drug trafficking,
production and consumption is carried out by both the
Interministerial Committee to Fight against Drugs and
civil society organizations through an approach based
on prevention, care and suppression. With regard to
prevention, the Government is stepping up activities
involving raising awareness on the harm caused by
drug use in synergy with civil society. Care involves
health and social responses provided by specialized
institutions such as the Regional Law Enforcement
Training Centre. In terms of suppression, the national
strategy is aimed at tracking down drug traffickers
and combating money laundering through the National
Unit for the Processing of Financial Information.

The effectiveness of national strategies to
combat drug trafficking depends on their coherence
with subregional initiatives with the support of
key partners, such as UNODC. To that end, Cote
d'Ivoire welcomed the establishment of the Regional
Programme for West Africa 2016-2020 to support the
regional action plan to address illicit drug trafficking,
organized crime and drug abuse in West Africa of the
Economic Community of West African States. Such
programmes reflect the commitment of the States of
West Africa to strengthen regional cooperation in the
areas of information exchange, judicial cooperation,
combating financial flows related to drug trafficking
and preventing the diversion of resources used to
manufacture drugs. Likewise, my country commends
UNODC for its continued support for these regional
plans, which has included the establishment of joint
port control services and an airport communication
project that extends beyond West Africa.

In conclusion, my country would like to recall that
the collective commitment of the States of the region
to pool their resources greatly depends on the success
of the fight against drug trafficking in West Africa,
which is a guarantee of the preservation of peace and
stability in the region.

I new resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.

The meeting rose at 4.30pm.
