Mr. Akahori (Japan): I would like to thank
President Agius, President Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their reports (see S/2017/436 and S/2017/434) and briefings. Japan is deeply committed
to the rule of law and fully supports the activities of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. We commend their role in the fight
against impunity.

We welcome the ICTY's steady progress on the
closure ofthe Tribunal at the end ofthis year, especially
regarding the Mladic' and Prlic' et al cases. We appreciate
the Tribunal's strong commitment to maintaining the
projected timeline on these cases despite serious staff
attrition. Japan hopes to see the judgments issued this
November and appreciates the strong leadership of
President Agius.

In order for the Tribunal to function effectively
and to perform its mandated tasks, full cooperation
by Member States is needed. We are concerned by
continued instances of non-cooperation and reiterate
that the relevant States must meet their obligations.

Let me now turn to the Mechanism. We are very
pleased by the Mechanism's efforts to provide a
more detailed projected timeline for its cases, while
recognizing that concrete dates are difficult to project
at this early stage. Effective and efficient delivery of
judgments must be balanced with due process. We
appreciate the coordination between the Mechanism
and the ICTY's Prosecutor offices to share expertise
and experience under the one-office approach.

Arresting the eight remaining fugitives is a priority
for the Mechanism. We note the Prosecutor's suggestion
on transferring these responsibilities to national
authorities in future if the situation does not improve,
but we hope that task forces within the Prosecutor's
office will lead to arrests as soon as possible.

As with the ICTY, Member States' full cooperation
with the Mechanism is required to deliver justice.
We welcome the cooperation of a number of States,
especially in the area of the enforcement of sentences,
and hope to see the transfer completed soon. We take
note of the situation with regard to Judge Akay. We
hope that it will be resolved as soon as possible.

Before concluding, let me reiterate Japan's support
and appreciation for the activities of both the ICTY
and the Mechanism. We strongly hope that the work of
both organs will bolster the rule of law and help victims
see justice.

