The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

I welcome Valentin Inzko back to the Council
and thank him for his briefing and report (S/2015/84l, annex). I join others in reaffirming our full and
continuing support for his role as High Representative
for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2247 (2015), renewing
the mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea. The deterrence and security it
provides are fundamental during this period of reform
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The political and security
situation on the ground remains worrying. Stability is
not yet entrenched and, sadly, divisive ethnic rhetoric
persists. That is why we welcome the Council's
unanimity on this mandate renewal. We have sent a
clear message today that the whole Security Council is
committed to the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement and the delivery of the reform
agenda of the European Union (EU).

To be clear, the United Kingdom is committed to
Bosnia and Herzegovina's future membership of the
European Union and NATO, and we are fully committed
to helping it undertake the reforms necessary to achieve
its goal of Euro-Atlantic integration. In that regard, I
am pleased that the European Union was able to bring
into force the Stabilization and Association Agreement
earlier this year. We welcome the commitment made
by Bosnia and Herzegovina's political parties to a
substantive reform agenda that will stabilize the
economy and improve the functionality of the State. We
also welcome the progress made on the issue of defence
property, which is needed for the entry into force of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's membership action plan, a
prerequisite for membership of NATO. We hope we
will see continued progress in the coming months.
However, serious challenges continue to threaten
Bosnia and Herzegovina's stability and security. Last
month, the EU's Foreign Affairs Council strongly
condemned the threat of a referendum in the Republika
Srpska that questions the State-level judiciary and
the powers of the High Representative. Threats of a
referendum are divisive, anti-constitutional and contrary
to the Dayton Agreement. There is a need to improve the
justice system at all levels, and we welcome the recent
steps taken by the European Commission to re-energize
the structured dialogue on justice. That is the right way
to address legitimate concerns, not through divisive
threats. We are fully committed to the continuation
of the Office of the High Representative until the
completion of the five objectives and two conditions for
its closure. The United Kingdom offers its full support
to the High Representative as the final authority on the
interpretation of civilian implementation of the Peace
Agreement, and we support use of the bond powers if
the situation requires.

I would like to close with a final reflection.
Twenty years ago, and four months after the genocide
of Srebrenica, the Dayton Agreement brought peace
and the prospect of a prosperous, stable future. As we
look back and remember how far the country has come,
let us also look to the future and see how much more
progress is needed before all the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina can benefit from the lasting prosperity
and stability they deserve. That will be achieved only
when all political leaders look beyond shortsighted,
self-interested actions. Today those leaders should
be struck, as I am, by the strength of concern in this
meeting of the Security Council about any rhetoric or
action that undermines Dayton. Significant work lies
ahead, requiring strong and courageous leadership.
I am pleased that today the United Kingdom and the

Council have committed to supporting the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in making that a reality.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

