Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): At the outset, allow me
to start by expressing appreciation for the Lithuanian
presidency of the Council for organizing this debate and
thanking Mr. Eliasson, the Deputy Secretary-General,
and other speakers for their statements.

In the context of continuing armed conflict,
journalism has earned itself a reputation as one of the
most dangerous professions. While civilians run away
from armed conflicts, journalists expose themselves
to potential hostilities to inform the international
community of the status of events, including
humanitarian issues and the suffering of civilian
populations.

It is obvious from the current world conflicts
that, despite all efforts exerted by the United Nations,
including the Security Council, media professionals
are more and more at risk of being directly targeted, in
violation of international humanitarian law. Despite the
existing obligations under the Geneva Conventions, their
Protocol I and the adoption of resolution 1738 (2006)
and the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, challenges to
the implementation of those frameworks remain. Egypt
strongly condemns all acts of intimidation and violence
againstjournalists in armed conflicts and would like to
make the following observations in this regard.

First, in accordance with international law,
the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians, including journalists, rests with States. That
responsibility also falls to non-State actors, such as
terrorist groups and criminal organizations. All parties
to the conflict have an international obligation under
the Geneva Conventions to protect journalists.

Secondly, commendable efforts have been already
undertaken by the Security Council, UNESCO, the
Human Rights Council, other agencies and regional
organizations to preserve the legitimate rights and
interests of journalists. We stress the importance of
their joint coordination and cooperation in achieving
positive synergy and avoiding duplication to overcome
challenges and ensure the full protection of journalists
in armed conflicts.

Thirdly, priority should be given to compliance with
the relevant standards of international humanitarian
law and to having States not yet party to existing
international legal instruments accede to them. Special
attention is also needed to raise international awareness
regarding the existing provisions of international
humanitarian law while highlighting the consequences
of their violation.

Fourthly, particular consideration is needed with
regard to the targeting of journalists by terrorist
groups, so as to devise measures to avert incidents of
kidnapping and hostage taking and to secure the safe
release ofjournalists held hostage.

Fifthly, where mandated and provided with the
necessary human, technical and legal capacities,
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
can positively contribute to the protection of j ournalists.

Let me conclude by reiterating Egypt's firm belief
in the importance of the protection of all civilians in
conflict situations, including journalists, establishing
accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and putting an end to impunity.

