The President: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 4299th meeting, I invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Georgia, His Excellency Mr. Irakli
Menagarishvili, to take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Menagarishvili (Georgia) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
successful holding of the third meeting on
confidence-building measures between the
Georgian and Abkhaz sides in Yalta on 15 and 16
March 2001 and the resumption of dialogue
between them, and notes the documents signed
there (S/2001/242). It hopes that action flowing
from the Yalta meeting will lead to a narrowing
of the positions of the two sides and stimulate
further constructive dialogue aimed at achieving a
comprehensive political settlement of the conflict,
including a settlement of the political status of
Abkhazia within the State of Georgia and other
key issues. The Council underlines the
contribution that confidence-building measures
can bring to the peace process and commends the
efforts by the Government of Ukraine in ensuring
the success of the Yalta Meeting.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the efforts by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to enhance contacts at all
levels between the Georgian and Abkhaz sides, in
close cooperation with the Russian Federation, in
its capacity as facilitator, the Group of Friends of
the Secretary-General and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.

"The Security Council encourages the two
sides to engage with renewed commitment in the
peace process. The Council notes the stated
willingness of the two sides to ensure favourable
conditions for the continuation of the peace
process, their stated commitment to the non-use
of force and their stated determination to
intensify efforts in order to create the necessary
climate for the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons and refugees in secure and
dignified conditions. The Council also notes the
important contribution that the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia and the Collective
Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States continue to make in
stabilizing the situation in the zone of conflict.

"The Security Council underlines the
unacceptability of the holding of self-styled local
elections in Abkhazia, Georgia, on 10 March
2001, which it deems illegitimate and unhelpful.
The organization of these elections represents an
additional obstacle to the attempts to reach a
comprehensive settlement of the conflict based on
international law.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of negotiations on the core political
questions of the conflict. In this regard, it looks
forward to the briefing to be provided by the
Secretary-General on the progress of the political
settlement, including on the status of the draft
paper his Special Representative intends to
submit to the two sides, as referred to in
paragraph 16 of its resolution 1339 (2001) of 31
January 2001.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter and reaffirms its commitment
to advancing the peace process."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/200l/9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.25 pm.

