Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): My
country, Rwanda, would like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your leadership and that of your country
as you guide the work of the Security Council during
this month of June. Rwanda would like to assure you
and all of the members of the Council of its full
cooperation.

Rwanda welcomes the fact that you have
convened a public meeting today to explain, analyse
and extend the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC).

The very worst thing that the late President
Mobutu did vis-a-vis our neighbours in the Congo was
to ally himself strongly with those who planned and
committed the genocide in Rwanda. Need we recall
here that Mobutu's Congolese army fought side by side
with the former Rwandan armed forces (ex-FAR) in
Rwanda in 1990 against Rwandan citizens who were
fighting for their right to a homeland after a forced
exile of more than 30 years?

The reunion of those two friendly armies on the
territory of the Congo has, since July 1994, led to
serious problems for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Frankly, it can only be deplored, especially
since it has caused us tremendous border security
problems with the Congo, our neighbour.

Today, intensive fighting is taking place in two
provinces of Rwanda that border the Congo, namely
the province of Gisenyi and the province of Ruhengeri.
This fighting is taking place between, on the one hand,
those who planned and implemented the genocide in
Rwanda and who found a welcome refuge in the Congo
since 1994, and the Rwandan Patriotic Army on the
other.

It is no secret to anyone that, from Mobutu's day
to the post-Mobutu period, the Interahamwe militias
and the former Rwandan Army Forces (ex-FAR),
which perpetrated the genocide in Rwanda in 1994,
have been the spearhead of Mobutu's army. If the
strategy of the signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement today is to wage war in the rear by sending
us the Interahamwe militias and ex-Far armed to the
teeth, rather than to send them disarmed and
disengaged pursuant to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, that in itself is, in a way, a violation of the
Agreement. Rwanda vigorously denounces that
approach, which jeopardizes the entire Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement on which we found all our hopes.

It is said that history is perpetually repeating
itself. In 1996 and 1997, the United Nations
Development Programme, other United Nations
agencies and Western embassies in Kigali drew maps
of Rwanda, with the provinces bordering on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo coloured red to
indicate the threat of insecurity, ambushes and murder
perpetrated by the ex-FAR and Interahamwe militias
that had infiltrated the country from Congolese
territory. That was the situation in 1996 that prompted
the Rwandese Government to decide to fight them and
to chase them into the territory of the Congo, where
they received shelter and assistance. The same or a
similar scenario is being played out again today. Two
Rwandese border provinces have been designated in
red as dangerous regions where no United Nations
agency, no embassy and no non-governmental
organization can venture, just as it was in 1996-1997.

We believe that the Security Council is duty-
bound to assist Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the entire region, so that the
Interahamwe militias and ex-Far responsible for the
genocide in Rwanda can be disarmed and disengaged
in accordance with the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

Various reports and even some statements have
highlighted what has commonly been called the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Rwanda once again reaffirms
loud and clear that it went into the Congo for security
reasons, threatened by the genocidal forces of the
Interahamwe militias and ex-FAR operating from
Congolese territory, and not in search of any natural
resources of that neighbouring country. Proof of this
can be found in the fighting taking place today, as we
speak, along the Rwanda-Congo border, which attests
to the fact that we went into the Congo for no other
reason than the security of our country.

Rwanda therefore believes that we cannot come
to the conclusion, on the basis of information
howsoever troubling, that there has been any illegal
exploitation, as yet unproved, of the natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Panel of
Experts has been asked to continue its investigation
and to seek tangible proof of the allegations it made in
its first report. Why not await the issuance of the next
report before we reaffirm anything and proclaim our
intentions?

I cannot conclude my statement without briefly
addressing the eighth report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As members of the
Council are aware, we received the Security Council
mission to the region. The mission met with members
of the Political Committee in Lusaka under the
chairmanship of Rwanda. The outcome of the meeting
was set out in a joint communique annexed to the
report before us today. It is also known that, in an
effort fully to implement the provisions of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, Rwanda has taken the initiative
to withdraw 200 kilometres from Pweto and to meet all
the deadlines for withdrawal, in conjunction with the
other components of the Agreement, taking into due
account the requirements of our country's security. Our
head of State had occasion to refer to this in his
meeting at Kigali with the Security Council mission
and on his recent travels in the region, including to
Zimbabwe, where he met with his counterpart,
President Mugabe, and elsewhere on the continent.

We are very pleased that the Secretary-General
has spared no effort in support of the activities of the
Security Council in the region with a View to assisting
our people to re-establish peace, which everyone needs,
especially those children to whom Mr. Otunnu referred
this morning with such emotion and compassion.

We spoke earlier of the chagrin of Congolese and
Rwandese alike at having to live to this day with the
unfortunate legacies of Mobutu in the Congo and
Habyarimana in Rwanda. Following their massacres of
hundreds of thousands in Rwanda in 1994,
Habyarimana's Interahamwe militias and the ex-FAR
crossed the Rwanda-Congo border with their war
machines and their spirit and philosophy of genocide,
which, unfortunately for us all, they have exported to
the peaceful people of the Congo. It is not my
neighbours to my left at this table who created the
Interahamwe and the ex-FAR, nor is it I myself who am
responsible; they are the legacy of poor leaders on both
sides.

The philosophy of genocide - the exclusion and
extermination of others - that has been entrenched in
the region was invoked by Rwandese civil society in
Kigali during the Security Council's recent mission to
the Great Lakes region. This spirit and philosophy of
genocide have been propagated throughout the region
by their advocates, the Interahamwe militias and the
ex-FAR, who move freely throughout the region. The
Security Council was unable to make an appropriate,
adequate or precise response in Kigali, but it promised
to continue to reflect on the genocidal spirit that
continues to reign in the Great Lakes region. Why not
undertake a joint action, all of us together - Rwanda,
the Security Council, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - to neutralize those elements, which are
sowing the seeds of the genocidal philosophy in the
Great Lakes region?

In conclusion, I reaffirm the willingness of the
Government of Rwanda to pursue its close cooperation
with the Security Council, with MONUC on the ground
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and with any
other agency that is working for the implementation of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement in its entirety.

