Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2393 (2017), which
extends for a year the mandate of the cross-border relief
system for Syria. We thank the co-penholders in that
regard. In spite of differences in approach, the members
of the Security Council were able to move forward
given the humanitarian imperative. This renewal is in
fact vital in every sense of the word, for the provision
of cross-border assistance is a matter oflife or death for

millions of Syrians. This one-year renewal is crucial so
that humanitarian actors can enjoy a minimum degree of
predictability in their work. Continuing the functioning
of the mechanism, which to date has shown its value
on the ground, was also necessary. Lastly, the changes
made to the text - which, to tell the truth, not everyone
found appropriate - did not change the structure of the
text. In that way, the resolution makes it possible for the
United Nations and its partners to continue to work as
they have done up until now in order to respond to the
crisis and the humanitarian situation.

Of course, we would have preferred that this
assistance would no longer be necessary and that the
situation would have sufficiently improved so that
cross-line humanitarian aid would have been sufficient
to respond to the emergency. However, one must
necessarily acknowledge that the situation on the ground
continues to be catastrophic. Today more than ever
before, more than 13 million people need humanitarian
assistance - as compared with 10 million at the time of
the previous extension of the mandate.

In that context, I should like to underscore the
seriousness of the situation in eastern Ghouta, which
is stomach-churning even if, in many respects, it is
below the radar of the media. But let us be clear: a
tragedy on the scale of that in Aleppo is taking shape
in eastern Ghouta. Four hundred thousand people
are under siege, practically without access to food
or medical assistance. Approximately 500 people,
including 137 children, still await emergency medical
evacuation, as requested by the United Nations weeks
and weeks ago but never authorized. The regime is
starving the population to cause the collapse of all
remaining opposition, which is unacceptable. That is
a grave violation of international law, in addition to
being a moral violation. It is essential that all those with
influence over the Syrian regime should pressure it to
put an end to that totally unacceptable situation. That
scenario makes it all the more crucial to keep in place
the United Nations mechanism for providing cross-
border assistance. Today's resolution also makes clear
reference to the situation in eastern Ghouta and calls
for the lifting of all sieges.

We all know that the only way to put an end to
the humanitarian crisis in the long term is through a
return to stability, which requires a political solution.
As President Macron said yesterday, we must develop
a political solution that leads to lasting peace and
ensures that all minorities will be protected. It is
just such an inclusive political solution that we want
promote together, as it is the only one that can put an
end to the Syrian tragedy once and for all. There is no
other legitimate framework to achieve that than the
intra-Syrian talks being held under the auspices of the
United Nations at Geneva. In that regard, we reiterate
our full and unrestricted support for Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura, to whom we shall listen with great
interest later this morning (see S/PV.8142).

