Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling today's important meeting
of the Security Council. Let me begin also by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Abou
Moussa for his briefing and for the valuable contribution
that he makes to peace and security in the Central
African region. I also wish to thank the Special Envoy
of the Chairperson ofthe African Union Commission on
Lord's Resistance Army Issues, Ambassador Madeira,
for his very helpful briefing this morning. His presence
here today is a demonstration of the strong coordination
between the United Nations and the African Union on
that important topic. The United Kingdom encourages
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) to continue to coordinate the work of the
United Nations, the African Union and the States
affected by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) to
counter the LRA threat.

As Mr. Moussa and Ambassador Madeira have
just reminded us, the LRA remains an unprincipled
and violent threat to civilians across Central Africa.
The atrocities it commits have serious humanitarian
and human rights consequences. Council members and
Special Representative Abou Moussa heard graphic
accounts of those atrocities in an Arria-formula
meeting last week with some of those directly involved
in working with the victims.

The United Kingdom condemns in the strongest
terms the LRA's continued Violations of international
law and human rights law. The LRA's campaign has the
potential to cause further instability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Republic of South Sudan
and the Central African Republic, and to hamper the
efforts of those countries to progress towards peace and
security. Removing the threat of the LRA is important
in terms of creating and consolidating a secure and
stable environment in the affected countries.

The release of the United Nations regional
strategy on the Lord's Resistance Army is a welcome
step towards achieving that aim. The international
community must now ensure that there is an appropriate
and coordinated international response to the problem.
We need a unified response from the LRA-affected
countries, the African Union and the United Nations
political, development, humanitarian and peacekeeping
missions in those countries.

In that regard, the United Kingdom welcomes the
work that the African Union has undertaken towards
the implementation of its regional task force, about
which we have just heard from Ambassador Madeira.
The United Kingdom urges the full deployment of
troops across the region as soon as possible.

The United Nations regional strategy must now be
implemented fully and quickly. I encourage UNOCA to
develop a costed implementation plan for the strategy,
outlining priority actions and articulating the results
that will be achieved. It is important as soon as possible
to identify and explain to the broader donor community
the resource gaps.

The United Kingdom also commends the important
work of the United Nations peacekeeping missions
in protecting civilians. Continued and improved
coordination and information-sharing between these
missions and with other stakeholders will further
enhance these efforts. This is why the United Kingdom
has supported an increase in the capacity of the
information cell in northern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which will improve information exchange
between the missions.

I am pleased to see that important work such as the
successful demobilization, disarmament, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration programme is being
expanded across the entire LRA-affected region. I urge
the United Nations to deliver consistent levels of support
for this programme across the region and to assess and
respond to recent changes in amnesty laws in the region
as far as they affect the programme.

I now turn to UNOCA's wider role in other security
issues across Central Africa. The United Kingdom
remains concerned about the increased levels of
instability in the region. I welcome the enhanced
regional collaboration to counter these threats, and
would encourage expansion and intensification of
this cooperation. UNOCA will have an important role
to play in supporting upstream conflict prevention
by pre-empting tensions in the region and mediating
between parties.

The United Kingdom also recognizes the leadership
that the United Nations is showing on maritime security
and the positive role played by Central African States.
A coordinated regional response is important in this
area too. In this regard, we welcome the Economic
Community of Central African States and Economic
Community of West African States maritime security
memorandum of understanding. Regional dialogue
should cover issues beyond just piracy and include
illegal fishing, illegal oil bunkering, weapons, people
and narcotics trafficking.

Lastly, I thank Council members for their support
for the draft presidential statement that the United
Kingdom delegation has prepared and that you, Sir, will
shortly issue on the Council's behalf.

