Mr. Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): The
Uruguayan delegation, speaking on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Haiti, thanks Japan for its initiative to
organize this debate on the situation in Haiti and for
taking time to noting the progress carried out in the
area through the efforts of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The Group of Friends of Haiti welcomes the
presence of the Prime Minister of Haiti, Jean-Max
Bellerive, and reiterates the commitment of States
members of the Group to the reconstruction and
stabilization of the country. This debate highlights the
continued strong commitment of the Security Council
and the wider international community to the
stabilization process of Haiti.

The Group of Friends of Haiti wishes to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Edmond Mulet, for his leadership and
outstanding work, as well as for his comprehensive
briefing on MINUSTAH's activities.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/200)
enables us to better understand the impact of the
devastating earthquake of 12 January, and underlines
the extraordinary efforts deployed by MINUSTAH and
the United Nations in Haiti. The Group of Friends of
Haiti recognizes that MINUSTAH will play a critical
role in creating the necessary conditions to provide
humanitarian assistance, stability and the infrastructure
needed for the total reconstruction of the country.
The Group of Friends of Haiti shares the
Secretary-General's assessment of the impact of the
12 January earthquake on the progress made in
previous years in the process of economic and political
stabilization. The earthquake not only destroyed the
infrastructure that had been built, but also generated
new obstacles to overcome. The Group recognizes that
the devastation has also presented opportunities in the
form of the support offered by the international
community and of the Government's vision for a
decentralized and strengthened State, with improved
institutions and regional development.

The Group of Friends of Haiti welcomes the
Secretary-General's report, which highlights the
ongoing contribution of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the stabilization and
peacebuilding in the country.

Finally, the Group wishes to reiterate its
commitment to the future of Haiti and to its
Government and people as they embark on the path of
reconstruction, peacebuilding, stabilization, recovery
and sustainable development.

