Mr. Amrani (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, my delegation would like to welcome President
Faure Essozimna Gnassingbe, who has enhanced the
Council by his participation in this important meeting.
At the same time, on behalf of the Kingdom of
Morocco, I would like to thank the Togolese Republic
for its initiative in organizing a discussion on an issue
of major importance to West Africa and the Sahel
region and the entire African continent.

We also thank your country, Mr. President, for
organizing a public debate on 27 February to discuss
the report of the assessment mission (S/2012/42) that
visited countries in the Gulf of Guinea, as well as your
country's determined commitment to defend African
interests in the Security Council. Together with today's
discussions and those of last month on the Sahel
region, the upcoming debate will make it possible to
clarify an overall perspective on the situation in West
Africa, a region that is dear to us and with which we
share centuries-old ties.

I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for their presence and
contributions to the discussion.

Transnational organized crime is a real challenge
to stability in West Africa and the Sahel region. It
threatens the sovereignty of States and all efforts aimed
at building peace and development in the region. Today
those regions find themselves facing increasingly
complex challenges that have resulted, for most part,
from drug-trafficking and a newly emerging generation
of transnational organized crime activities
characterized by major robberies, piracy at sea and
terrorism, activities heretofore unknown in our region.
Those criminal networks are increasingly linked and
replenish each other while growing internationally,
thus strengthening their destructive ability and
destabilizing effects.

Furthermore, the increasingly clear
interconnections among transnational organized crime,
armed groups and separatist movements and small
terrorist groups are, in our region, a source of concern,
to which the international community should devote
greater attention.

In West Africa, laudable major initiatives have
been launched at national, regional and subregional
levels, in particular the adoption of the Praia Plan of
Action against drug-trafficking; the ECOWAS
Regional Action Plan and the West Africa Coast
Initiative. Today, a new approach is being developed
by ECOWAS, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Commission of the Gulf of
Guinea in order to respond to emerging challenges in
the context of the Gulf of Guinea, among other things.

Because of its geographic position and in response
to various challenges generated by trans-Atlantic drug-
trafficking and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, Morocco
has already taken the initiative of bringing together, in
August 2009, 22 African countries issuing from the
Strait of Gibraltar to the Cape of Good Hope. Today,
three of them are by happy coincidence members of the
Security Council. The Moroccan initiative led to the
establishment of the ministerial conference of African
Atlantic coastal States. Both the initiative and its
resulting conference were established as a platform to
bring together the affected coastal countries in order to
deal with the challenges coming from the Atlantic
Ocean through a flexible cooperation and coordination
mechanism free from institutional constraints and that,
above all, complements existing initiatives.

In that context, I note that the first meeting of the
ministers for security participating in the conference
will take place shortly. Its main objective is to assess
the measures to implement the security pillar of the
action plan adopted in Rabat in November 2010 which
aims to strengthen more flexible cooperation among
security, police and legal authorities as well as
exchanges of information and intelligence information
within the ministerial conference based on the main
objective of combating transnational organized crime.
(spoke in English)

Transnational organized crime cannot be dealt
with by a State or a region alone. Increased solidarity

and enhanced concerted action are crucial between the
States of West Africa and the Sahel in order to
sustainably tackle the multiple challenges posed by that
crime. A global approach is therefore required to
address such challenges through the innovative and
overarching mechanism of cooperation and
coordination, particularly between the western and
northern subregions of Africa.

With regard to the fight against the transatlantic
trafficking of drugs, namely, cocaine, broader
cooperation based on the principle of shared
responsibility is essential in order to find long-term
responses to the disturbing scourge that is
progressively taking root, day by day, in the regions of
West Africa and the Sahel. In that regard, it is
important to support and strengthen existing
subregional and transregional African mechanisms and
to ensure that their implementation is urgently
undertaken. In that context, the international
community is called upon to assist the countries of
West Africa and the Sahel.

The sharing of expertise, intelligence and know-
how is an effective way to help countries develop
capacities in the fight against that crime. Among the
African Atlantic States, many countries have already
expressed their willingness and readiness to share
experience, expertise and know-how with other
members of the African transatlantic initiative - all,
of course, in the spirit of African solidarity and South-
South cooperation. The same spirit should also prevail
between countries of the North and the South, as well
as within triangular cooperation.

It goes without saying that any action undertaken
to fight transnational organized crime requires a
concerted approach in dealing with the root causes that
allow for the development of that threat, which are
weak rule of law, a lack of judicial and police
cooperation among neighbouring countries and across
borders and a lack of capacity, as well as the many
socio-economic challenges facing some of the
countries of the region.

We therefore welcome the valuable role played
by the United Nations, particularly UNODC, and
international partners, namely, the European Union, in
assisting States in the region in many of those fields.
Such cooperation should be further strengthened in a
coherent, coordinated and concerted manner,
addressing jointly and in a balanced way both the
security and the development aspects.

With regard to the last point, one cannot overstate
the crucial importance of development in all its
socio-economic and human dimensions as a force for
stability, security and prosperity. His Majesty King
Mohammed VI has always advocated the need to
address development in all its aspects, namely, through
South-South cooperation and regional integration.
Morocco firmly believes in, and is firmly committed
to, pursuing that goal in cooperation with other African
countries.

Finally, the prompt response and shared
responsibility of States in the West Africa region and
the Sahel are important and imperative to provide
sustainable responses to the threat. For its part, the
international community, through the United Nations,
must also establish an early-warning mechanism,
allowing them to assist, if necessary and at short
notice, relevant countries of the region. Their
development should be the key response to the issue.

