The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Russian Federation.

We support the considerations raised in the briefing
made by Ms. Sellassie regarding the situation in the
Sahelo-Saharan region. The Russian Federation position
regarding the problems facing the region is consistent
and unchanged - they require a comprehensive
solution and the sustained attention of the international
community.

We can see in the region the clear link between the
need to establish a sound system of State governance,
the search for appropriate responses to security-
related challenges, and the provision of sustainable
development, in parallel with overcoming significant
humanitarian problems. In that respect, in our view,
the load-bearing architecture of the integrated strategy,
composed ofthree key pillars, has been well crafted, but
more time will be needed to fine-tune this mechanism
so that it can operate at full speed.

Significant steps have already been taken towards
institutionalizing the formation of the implementation
mechanism for the strategy and filling it with concrete
content. We would refer first and foremost to the
creation of the coordination platform for the Sahel at
the ministerial level, whose role will be to become one
of the strategy's pivotal components. We welcome the
work of the Group of Five for the Sahel.

Those measures are important in bringing the States
of the region together around a single platform and the
elaboration of a common vision on how to eliminate
the root causes of instability. However, positive
administrative steps should in no case act as a substitute
for real work. Regional initiatives should be backed
by a broad spectrum of measures to be taken by the
international community. The United Nations, unique
in terms of its scope, is indispensable. We are pleased
with the interest shown by the representatives of widely
differing States and regions, including, of course,
Russia. Global and regional financial institutions will
be needed, too. There is no question, however, that the
leading role in implementing the strategy should fall to
the States of the Sahel themselves.

I should like to underscore one further essential
issue. We must prevent any fragmentation of our efforts
and the resulting dilution of resources. Coordination at
all levels will be an important factor in the strategy's
success. In that respect, I would be remiss not to recall
the particular role played by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Office for
West Africa.

We are seriously alarmed by the growing threat that
the region may become a bridgehead for well-organized
terrorism and criminal structures. In a vast, virtually
lawless area where illicit weapons and drugs abound,
one cannot but be concerned by the radical views
taking root among the young. In such circumstances, it
is especially important to agree on common approaches
to combating transnational crime and to creating an
appropriate legal framework.

It is quite clear that a powerful impetus to the
growth of terrorist-related threats in the Sahel was
provided by the turbulent and chaotic processes of
the so-called Arab Spring. To be frank, on the basis
of our observations at least, that term is being used
increasingly infrequently. To put it mildly, its outcome
is assuredly ambiguous. The chaos in Libya continues
to spread well beyond its borders, and the conditions
for a positive turning point have, unfortunately, been
lacking to date.

The crisis in Mali was a serious challenge to the
States of the region. We cannot speak of any sustained
positive trends in that country. The whole broad
perimeter of the Sahel is turbulent as well. However,
and in conclusion, I wish to voice the hope that a
constructive pooling of efforts at all levels under the
aegis of the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel will contribute to improving the situation and the Tthccurily Council haslhus concludcdlhcprcscnt
quality oflife of the people ofthe region. stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

1 new resume my functions as President of the The meeiing rose at noon.
Council.
