Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I welcome the High
Representative, Lord Ashdown, and I commend his
dynamic contribution to the implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also
welcome Special Representative Klein and thank him
particularly, and all those in the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), which
will soon be withdrawing with its mandate completed,
for their achievements in restructuring and reforming
the law enforcement agencies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The presence of Lord Ashdown and Ambassador
Klein in the Council today and the ongoing determined
action of UNMIBH in the field bear testament to the
importance to all of us of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I have five short points to make. First, the fact
that the 5 October elections were organized and
secured by the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
themselves and took place in a calm and peaceful
environment indeed proves that much has been
achieved. I heard Lord Ashdown's and Mr. Klein's
comments on the low turnout, and I agree with them.
We certainly believe that the disappointingly low
turnout reflects the failure of the outgoing
Governments to engage in serious reform. We agree
with the High Representative that we should assess the
reform credentials and the concrete actions of the
elected parties. What is important is that the new
Governments commit themselves to clean politics and
to serious, verifiable reform.

Secondly, my delegation welcomes the strategic
approach adopted by the High Representative and the
interlinked priorities that he has outlined to achieve it.
We believe that the rule of law and the fight against
corruption are preconditions for economic development
and long-term prosperity and stability. The new
Governments in Bosnia and Herzegovina should work
to create a properly functioning market economy by
improving administrative procedures, the judicial
system and the legal environment, and by intensifying
the fight against organized crime and corruption. Of
course, a functioning State administration and judiciary
are prerequisites for a country based on the rule of law.
In that regard, we welcome the High Representative's
recent call to the authorities to implement the six
priority tasks of the "Justice and Jobs" programme.

Thirdly, my Government is heartened by the
smooth transfer of responsibilities from the
International Police Task Force (IPTF) to the European
Union Police Mission (EUPM). We attach great
importance to the EUPM, which underlines the
European Union's (EU) commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina and provides further evidence of the links
between the EU and the United Nations in conflict
prevention and crisis management.

Fourthly, the high level of minority returns to
Bosnia and Herzegovina this year is welcome indeed.
However, a key element in enabling returns is to ensure
that returnees can become economically active. While
there is a need for continued international and regional
funding, there is also a fundamental need for the State
to tackle corruption and raise much-needed State
revenues. Of course, the successful reintegration of
returnees is also dependent on a commitment to law
and order and to the protection of all citizens,
irrespective of religion or ethnicity.

Fifthly, it is the firm View of my Government that
the authorities in both entities and all other
Governments in the region must fulfil their
responsibilities and must cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). I have noted Lord Ashdown's
telling comment in that particular regard. That includes
the active prosecution and transfer of all those indicted,
as well as granting the ICTY access to documentation
and archives.

In conclusion, they are many challenges ahead
that will require the determination of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. They include tackling
organized crime and corruption, addressing the rule of
law, strengthening the economy and facilitating refugee
returns. My delegation would like to express its
appreciation for the progress already achieved by the
High Representative and by UNMIBH in those areas. I
take this opportunity to reaffirm Ireland's strong
support for their efforts to achieve a Bosnia and
Herzegovina that is based on the rule of law,
democracy and prosperity for all its citizens, a Bosnia
and Herzegovina firmly set on the road to European
integration.

