Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank
Jordan for having convened today's meeting and thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for his briefing.

New Zealand is deeply concerned at the recent
violence in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories, of which the attempted arson at Joseph's
Tomb is the latest example. In the short term, all sides
need to cease the violence, refrain from provocative
actions and rhetoric, and uphold unchanged the historic
status quo at Jerusalem's holy sites. It is critically
important to stop the violence and lower tensions.

We recognize that every State needs to protect
its citizens. However, we agree with the Assistant
Secretary-General that heavy-handed security
measures will not resolve this growing crisis. Unless
the parties and the international community address the
root causes of the violence, we will see it happen again
and again. For each side to heap blame and allegations
on the other while ignoring or minimizing its own
responsibilities will only make things worse.

In New Zealand's view, there is an urgent need
for progress towards securing a viable solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and towards the economic
and social stability that such a solution promises. That
is the only way to put an end to the violence. As my
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister said in New
York two weeks ago (see A/70/PV.23), this is a matter
of urgency and a critical issue on which the Security
Council must lead.

We believe that the Security Council has a role
to play to generate conditions on the ground that are
conducive to negotiations towards a two-State solution.
We believe that the Council also has a role to play: to tell
the parties clearly and firmly to get ready to negotiate
and to provide them with a time frame for commencing
negotiations.

We look forward to discussing our ideas and those
of others at the open debate next week, which we think
should focus on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. That
debate should also be used by Council members and
others as an opportunity to advance the conversation on
what the international community can to do bring the
two sides together. The conflict has continued for far
too long and resulted in far too many innocent people

being killed.

We are supportive ofthe idea ofa Council statement,
as the representative of France has just suggested, and
we look forward to engaging on the text. A statement
alone, however, does not obviate the need for Council
action through a resolution or another product to move
the peace process forward. New Zealand remains
convinced that the Council must address this bigger
picture, and recent events have demonstrated the
urgency of doing so.

