I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his usual comprehensive briefing. We join with others in expressing condolences to the families of the victims of yesterday's attack in Afrin. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates the Special Envoy's call for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire throughout Syria. While the 5 March agreement has led to a significant cessation of hostilities in the north-west, the appeal for a nationwide ceasefire is now more pertinent than ever to enable the country to effectively combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. A decade of war has crippled the country's public services, including its health system. Many Syrians are living in camps and other informal settlements that lack the means to implement the necessary protective measures. Hostilities will serve only to further the destruction of indispensable infrastructure and prevent humanitarian actors from carrying out their life-saving work. We acknowledge Syria's efforts to suppress the virus, including the implementation of travel restrictions and curfews. However, a balance must be struck between maintaining these necessary measures and scaling up and preserving the vital humanitarian response. Timely, safe, sustained and unimpeded access throughout the country remains essential. We urge all parties to continue to engage in dialogue in this regard. We reiterate the appeal for the lifting of unilateral coercive economic measures. It is our obligation to ensure that every country is able to have an effective and robust response to COVID-19. Every successful fight against this virus is a victory for the entire international community. It is in our collective interest to ensure that we all have the proper tools to address it. We take note of the Secretary-General's summary of the report of the United Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry. We await the appointment of the senior independent adviser to address the Board of Inquiry's recommendations. It is critical that these types of incidents do not recur and that the deconfliction mechanism is improved. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines maintains that all parties must respect the fundamental principles of armed conflict. The targeting of civilian and humanitarian infrastructure is a reprehensible violation of international law. Impunity for these acts should not be tolerated. The humanitarian situation in Syria requires urgent action, and the country's overall recovery needs the support of the entire international community. We have a responsibility to assist Syria through positive action so that it can emerge from this conflict to enjoy the peace and prosperity that it justly deserves.
