Mr. Licharz (Germany): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special
Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings.
Like the briefers, I would also like to address the overall
political situation before discussing the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and the
current situation in Abyei.
Germany welcomes the political developments in
Khartoum and Juba and between them both, and we
congratulate those who have contributed constructively
to those developments, including the African Union
and, especially, the peoples ofboth countries, who have
expressed their desire for democratic change and an
end to this cycle of conflict.

The overall political developments have yet to
translate into progress in reaching a final political
solution for Abyei. Despite the two meetings of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
that Under-Secretary-General Lacroix discussed, a
political solution and the implementation of resolution
2046 (2018) are still lacking. We therefore call on
both the Sudan and South Sudan to actively engage in
finding a solution, which must be carried out by the
countries themselves. The international community
can and will support them, but it cannot be a substitute
for that solution.

In the absence of a political solution, UNISFA
continues to play a crucial role in stabilizing the Abyei
area. In that regard, I would like to reiterate the gratitude
that other colleagues have expressed to Ethiopia for
contributing high-quality peacekeepers. We agree with
the Secretary-General's recommendation (S/2019/817)
that the mandate of UNISFA, including its support for
the Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, should
be extended by six months. However, as we have said
before, the Mission should be calibrated in order to
enable it to respond effectively to the changing realities
on the ground. It is essential to ensure that it has the
capacity to address the rising crime rate, support
community-level peace efforts, mediation and dialogue
and advance support for the African Union Commission,
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
and the two parties concerned. In order to address the
rising crime rate and the overall security situation, I
would like to underline the urgent need to strengthen
the police component.

We note with concern that the recommended
adaptations of the mandate established by the Council
in November 2018 and in May this year have not
yet been implemented. We strongly urge the new
Government of the Sudan to issue visas without further
delay, especially to enable the mandated increase in
UNISFA's police personnel, and to begin work on the
191 applications that are still outstanding, including
for a civilian Deputy Head of Mission. We also see a
continued need to strengthen the Mission's civilian
component in order to support the efforts of the Abyei
communities to achieve reconciliation and create
enduring peaceful relations, particularly by supporting
initiatives for the full and effective participation
of women at all stages of the peace process. As the
Secretary-General recommended, it will be essential
to deploy political affairs officers to the Mission
headquarters as well as its liaison offices in Khartoum,
Juba and Addis Ababa, which will enable the Mission
to support the political process more effectively and
improve UNISFA's communication and awareness-
raising capabilities. The Mission mandate should
ensure continued effective human rights monitoring,
including of any sexual and gender-based violence and
violations and abuses of human rights, including those
committed against women and children.

In summary, Germany welcomes the overall
progress that has been made in the political process.
We urge and encourage the parties to work towards a
political solution for their border region. We continue
to support UNISFA and its mandate, and we call for
implementing its adaptation in order to address the
current challenges.

