Mr. Agam (Malaysia): I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, and extend my delegation's most sincere

 

appreciation to you for this timely and important initiative.
The question of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
is indeed one of which the Council should be seized on a
continuing basis. Today's open briefing provides the
opportunity for not only members of the Council but also
the general membership of the United Nations to get further
insights into this question. I thank Mr. Sommaruga, Ms.
Bellamy and Mr. Otunnu for their comprehensive, indeed
passionate, and most enlightening presentations.

The current situation is indeed alarming, as confirmed
by the three speakers. Their statements speak volumes on
the condemnable acts and practices carried out by parties in
armed conflicts who make civilians the victims and
casualties. Wherever there is an armed conflict civilians are
being increasingly affected, suffering casualties directly or
indirectly. Even the use of highly sophisticated and super-
accurate weapons in some conflict situations has caused the
loss of innocent civilian lives and damage to civilian
property. Even when civilians are not the intended targets
they very often become part of the so-called "collateral
damage".

The major question then is how do we afford adequate
protection for civilians in armed conflict? What can the
Council, other organs of the United Nations, Governments
and others do to ameliorate the situation? We will not get
all the answers today. But this briefing should provide the
basis for a more serious and comprehensive consideration
of this important question.
Modern armed conflicts have obviously changed in
character. Increasingly, more sophisticated weapons are
being used with devastating effects on the civilian
population. In the First World War civilians accounted for
only 5 per cent of casualties. In the Second World War
civilian casualties rose to 48 per cent. Today, up to 90 per
cent of conflict casualties around the world are civilians. A
large and increasing number of these are vulnerable groups
such as women, children and the elderly.

They have increasingly become direct targets through
deliberate and indiscriminate actions by armed combatants.
The millions of refugees and internally displaced persons
the world over speak for themselves. Every day, thousands
of civilians are being raped, physically and psychologically
tortured, maimed and incarcerated. We see the most
heinous and barbaric acts being committed, including
outright genocide and massacres of unarmed civilians. This
is indeed a sad commentary on the state of human
civilization on the eve of the new millennium.

My delegation condemns in the strongest terms these
acts of Violence against civilians. The deliberate attacks
and acts of violence perpetrated by combatants against
innocent civilian populations deserve not only
condemnation but also a strong and resolute response by
the international community. These heinous acts clearly
and blatantly violate the principles of international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights
laws. Indeed, they are also in direct violation of the 1949
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, and other international legal
instruments. The perpetrators must account for their
crimes, with the appropriate punishments being meted out
against them. This is the only effective way to stop the
culture of impunity that has increasingly prevailed in most
conflict situations around the world.

It is obvious that states have the primary
responsibility in prosecuting the perpetrators through the
national justice system, or whenever and wherever
appropriate, the relevant international criminal tribunals.
My delegation reiterates its strong support for the idea of
holding combating parties and their leaders financially
liable to their victims under international law in cases
where civilians are made deliberate targets of armed
aggression. An appropriate legal machinery will, of
course, have to be established for this purpose.

It is imperative that United Nations Member States
and all parties concerned comply strictly with their
obligations under international law to assist and protect
civilians affected by armed conflict. There is an urgent
need for the international community to take collective
action in this regard. The approach should cover the
political, security, economic, social, legal and
humanitarian dimensions. In supporting a comprehensive
approach to address this problem we look forward to the
Secretary-General's report, as requested for in the draft
Presidential Statement which we will shortly adopt,
containing concrete recommendations to the Council. The
report would be useful not only to the Council but also to
the other relevant organs of the United Nations in
addressing the same question acting within their areas of
competence and responsibility.

Another important issue of concern to my delegation
has been emphasized by virtually all speakers at this
meeting, and that is access by civilian populations to
international protection and humanitarian assistance. We
fully recognize that humanitarian assistance should be
undertaken with the consent and cooperation of the parties
concerned. However, there is a clear obligation under

 

international law that those in need should receive
protection and assistance.

While humanitarian assistance is vital in alleviating the
hardship of civilians caught in armed conflicts, its use as a
tool to prolong conflicts by the warring parties should be
prevented. The argument has been made that relief aid
either directly or indirectly subsidizes the cost of fighting
wars and that it could offer some sort of reward for the
belligerents. Clearly there is a need to ensure that
humanitarian aid will not be used to enhance the motivation
or capability of belligerents to commit further violence,
especially against civilians.

The security and safety of the humanitarian mission
itself is of paramount importance, especially in highly
volatile and extremely dangerous areas. The disturbing
increase in the number and scale of direct and calculated
attacks against humanitarian and United Nations personnel
in the field should be strongly condemned. Those concerned
must ensure the security and safety of these selfless and
committed workers who carry out their noble missions in
highly dangerous situations, risking their own lives. Proper
training about the real situation on the ground could, of
course, better equip humanitarian personnel in handling
risky situations in their mission areas, but this should not
absolve the combatants of their own obligations and responsibilities.

Landmines pose as serious a threat to the safety of
civilian populations as they do to the combatants
themselves. Every year, large numbers of civilians, many of
them hapless women and children, are killed or maimed for
life by landmines. What is most distressing is that
landmines can still kill and maim innocent civilians years
after the combatants have left the scene of conflict. We
therefore welcome the global efforts to ban landmines and
commend Canada and other countries for their activities
and leadership role in this regard.

In discussing the issue of civilians in armed conflict,
we cannot ignore the issue of children who become victims
of these conflicts, either as instruments of war or when they
are caught up in the traumas and upheavals of the conflict.
The issue of children in armed conflict - which has been
eloquently highlighted by our speakers, in particular by Mr.
Otunnu - deserves the serious attention of the international
community in its own right, as was reflected by the
Council's consideration of it in June last year. The
appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to deal with this issue was indeed a laudable move
to give greater focus and urgency in addressing the
problem. In highlighting the problem, selected measures
have already been identified by Mr. Otunnu to alleviate
the suffering of children caught in armed conflict. These
measures deserve the strong support of the international
community. Clearly, those who are guilty of acts of
violence against children during armed conflict should be
punished accordingly. My delegation is particularly glad
that, among such punitive measures, the targeting of
schools and hospitals has now been made a war crime
under the new Statute of the International Criminal Court.

The pernicious impact of the proliferation of arms,
in particular small arms, on the security and safety of
civilian populations is amply illustrated by the numerous
armed conflicts that are still raging around the world. Mr.
Olara Otunnu has noted, inter alia, that the development
and proliferation of lightweight automatic weapons has
made it possible for very young children to use arms. The
consequences of this proliferation are indeed devastating.
It means more combatants, more intensified conflicts,
more victims and casualties, more refugees and displaced
persons. In the name of humanity, my delegation appeals
to all States and non-State actors involved in the
manufacturing and marketing of such weapons to restrict
arms transfers which could provoke or prolong armed
conflicts. We also believe that there has to be a more
concerted international effort and collaboration to combat
illegal arms flows. This is imperative if we are to stop
fuelling further armed conflict in our contemporary world.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
remarks made by Mr. Sommaruga and Ms. Bellamy on
the impact of sanctions on the civil population,
particularly children. We ourselves had made that very
same point during the Council's consideration of the
humanitarian aspects of the promotion of peace and
security last month. We are gratified that our speakers
deemed it pertinent to draw the attention of the Council
to this issue. I believe that it was only for the sake of
brevity and the fact that he spoke extemporaneously that
Mr. Otunnu himself did not refer to this issue. I know for
a fact that the matter is also of concern to him as he
carries out his mandate.

This very difficult question before us cannot be
effectively addressed without the requisite political will of
all concerned. The Council can only act in accordance
with its appropriate responsibilities under the Charter.
Other organs and organizations and other relevant actors
must play their parts. At the same time, those directly
involved in the various armed conflicts must be made to
understand the full consequences of their actions aimed
against civilians. Ultimately, they will have to account for

 

their actions and understand that they cannot get away with
impunity. That message, and the will of the international
community to back it up, should ring out loud and clear
from this forum. Beyond that, there should be serious and
concrete follow-up actions by all concerned, including this
Council, to give substance to the many creative and
commendable ideas that have been presented to us.

