The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

We thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for his
briefing. We reiterate our full support for the important
work he is doing with his team. I would like to welcome
in particular the participation of Vice-President
Oscar Adolfo Naranjo Trujillo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs Maria Angela Holguin Cuellar and Permanent
Representative Maria Emma Mejia Velez, and
underscore their commitment and the important role
they are playing in supporting peace.

Peru reaffirms its determined support for the peace
process in the sisterly Republic of Colombia. We would
like to note the courage of its Government in resolving
the long-standing conflict with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) through a negotiated solution, which
enjoyed international support during negotiations and
the Security Council's commitment in implementing
the Peace Agreement.

Building peace in Colombia is of course a complex
process, and as such it faces major challenges. We
therefore highlight the Government's efforts to adapt
national legislation to the Peace Agreement; to ensure
security; to entrench the State's presence throughout
its territory and to promote the socioeconomic
reintegration of former combatants, especially in rural
areas. We also want to encourage the authorities and
the people of Colombia to persevere in those efforts, to
speed up the implementation of the Peace Agreement
and to remain united in building sustainable peace.

Democracy and participation are key elements
of peacebuilding. We welcome the massive turn-out by
citizens in the parliamentary elections last month, which
serves to underscore and confirm their democratic
traditions. We are hopeful about the preparations for
the upcoming presidential elections. We welcome the
resumption of dialogue between the Government and
the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional and encourage the
continuation of talks.

As already stated, the process is complex and
replete with challenges. In spite of significant progress
made and the political will of the Government to
implement the Peace Agreement, there are concerns
about the murders reported outside of the training
and reintegration areas. We underscore our strong
condemnation of the murder of three Ecuadorian
journalists, who were kidnapped by FARC-EP
dissidents. We extend our condolences and solidarity
to their relatives and to the sister nation of Ecuador.
We believe that it is crucial to stand up resolutely to the
enemies of peace. The validity of the rule of law is a
core pillar of sustaining peace. We therefore underscore
that fact that the Peace Agreement guarantees access to
justice for all parties to the conflict in Colombia and
does not in any way encourage impunity.

We believe that Colombians can be optimistic about
the future. Peace has led to a considerable increase in
investment and tourism and a significant decrease in
the murder rate. Colombia is now a vibrant country
that is lucky to be given a second chance. According
to a Colombian tourism advertisement, the only risk is
wanting to stay.

We would like to conclude by voicing our support
for the Verification Mission and for Mr. Arnault's
work, as well as to underscore the unity of the Security
Council with regard to the Colombian peace process.
We reiterate Peru's commitment to sustaining peace in
that sister country and the consolidation of the Latin
America and the Caribbean as a zone of peace.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Vice-President of Colombia.

