We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis- Plasschaert for her tireless efforts and express our thanks and support to the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for its efforts in that very complicated environment. We deeply appreciate what the Mission is doing in the country. We also welcome the participation of the Permanent Representative of Iraq in this meeting. We welcome the appointment of the new Prime Minister and emphasize with satisfaction that his Cabinet's programme has been approved by the Parliament. We are aware of the Government's priorities, which include holding free and fair elections, mobilizing all resources to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, launching a national dialogue, protecting the sovereignty of the country, fighting terrorism and other goals. We are ready to support - and indeed already support - all efforts aimed at improving the situation in friendly Iraq. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on the overall situation in Iraq and has multiplied the political, economic and humanitarian challenges there. In that context, it is important that the international community support Baghdad as it develops comprehensive measures aimed at responding to the COVID-19 outbreak. We are strongly convinced, and we continue to reiterate, that only inclusive dialogue and reconciliation will help overcome the internal disputes in Iraq and restore mutual understanding between Baghdad and Erbil. Further improvement of their relations will help Iraq promote security and the effective use of its economic capacity. We therefore encourage both sides once again to reach and implement a comprehensive agreement on all outstanding issues. We note that the COVID-19 outbreak has led to a suspension of demonstrations across the country. In that regard, we call on all sides to continue to act in a reserved manner. However, we believe that it would be unacceptable for external players to instrumentalize the domestic situation. Iraq should not be dragged into a regional confrontation or become an arena for regional disputes or the settling of scores. Such attempts would contravene international law, violate Iraq's sovereignty and damage the country's national interests. We highly value and encourage Iraq's continued efforts to build constructive and fruitful relations with all its neighbours and the region as a whole. It is high time to begin implementation of resolution 598 (1987), to devise measures to enhance the security of the region and to take a closer look at other relevant initiatives, including the Russian security concept for the Gulf region, France's constructive ideas and Iran's peace proposal. I am of the strong opinion that UNAMI could significantly contribute to the normalization of the political environment around Iran, since the Special Representative has an office in Tehran. We have to use this potential to normalize the operative environment at this difficult time. We are deeply concerned that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is already trying to exploit the pandemic and increase its activities. I would be grateful for the Special Representative's comments on that issue.
