Ms. Bragg: I am grateful for this opportunity to
brief the Council. The following statement is
attributable to the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Valerie Amos.

These debates are an important opportunity for
focused discussion of the protection of civilians in a
number of situations and serve to convey some sense
of what we see in conflicts, which is marked by the
consistent failure of the parties concerned to comply
with their legal obligations to respect and protect
civilians. That failure manifests itself in many ways:
the killing and maiming of civilians; sexual violence;
the forced recruitment of children; displacement across
and within borders; impeded provision of assistance;
and a failure to hold accountable those who perpetrate
or instigate violations and to provide support, justice
and redress to victims.

Eight months of conflict in Libya has led to the
death and injury of thousands of civilians, the internal
displacement of more than 200,000 people and the
outflow of nearly one million migrant workers and
third-country nationals. Intense fighting in urban
centres routinely prevented the wounded, as well as
lifesaving supplies and international assistance, from
reaching hospitals. In addition to posing a serious
threat to civilians at the time, the use of explosive
weapons in densely populated areas in such places as
Misrata and Sirte has led to significant destruction of
housing and essential infrastructure.

Displaced people are starting to return home, and
schools have reopened throughout most of the country.
But normalcy is far from assured. The widespread
availability of small arms and light weapons is of grave
concern, as is the National Transitional Council's
apparent lack of effective command and control over
various militia forces. I am alarmed by reports that
some of those forces are involved in the ill-treatment,
including killing and arbitrary detention, of segments
of the population perceived as loyal to the former
regime and of sub-Saharan African migrants. It is a
reminder that the protection of civilians remains
acutely relevant in the post-Al-Qadhafi period.

Throughout Libya, the risk posed to civilians,
especially children, by abandoned weapons and
ammunition and by explosive remnants of war, is very
high. In parts of Misrata, the presence of unexploded
cluster sub-munitions underlines the importance of the
comprehensive ban on such weapons, as is stipulated in
the Convention on Cluster Munitions. That is why the
ongoing efforts of some States parties to the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use
of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects to adopt new international legal
standards that would undermine that ban and facilitate
the use of cluster munitions is very troubling.

I remain extremely concerned by events in Syria.
Currently, the situation falls short of armed conflict.
However, military operations are exacting a heavy toll.
More than 3,500 Syrians have been reported killed
since March. There are reports of serious human rights
violations, including excessive use of force and
restrictions on freedom of movement. I am also

concerned by the interruption of water and electricity
supplies during military operations, and by interference
with medical services.

In Yemen, conflict, poverty, drought, soaring food
prices and collapsing State services have created a
daily struggle for survival for millions of people,
including 100,000 displaced by recent fighting in the
South, and thousands of refugees from the Horn of
Africa, as well as 300,000 persons displaced by
previous conflicts, in the North. The response to
peaceful demands for greater freedoms, an end to
corruption and respect for the rule of law has been
marked by excessive and disproportionate use of force
by the State. Hundreds have been killed and thousands
injured.

Turning to Gaza and southern Israel, in August, a
series of attacks launched from Egypt into southern
Israel by unknown militants resulted in the death of six
Israeli civilians. In response, Israel conducted air raids
on Gaza, resulting in 30 Palestinian fatalities and 103
injured, the majority of whom were reported to be
civilians. One Israeli civilian was also killed and seven
injured by rockets fired from Gaza during this period.
A more limited escalation of violence at the end of last
month resulted in the death of an Israeli civilian and
injuries to another three Israeli and two Palestinian
civilians.

In Colombia in June, the Government took the
historic and welcome step of enacting legislation that
will provide restitution for up to 4 million victims of
the conflict, including through land restitution for
those who were forcibly displaced. However, ongoing
hostilities involving the guerrilla groups and armed
groups that emerged following the demobilization of
paramilitary forces in 2006 continue to be marked by
violations of international humanitarian law,
displacement and the confinement of civilian
populations in particular areas. In addition, during the
first eight months of this year, 104 civilians were
wounded and 16 killed by mines and improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) planted by the various
groups. Mines and IEDs have also hampered the ability
of humanitarian organizations to reach vulnerable
populations in a timely manner.
In Afghanistan, some half a million Afghans have
been internally displaced by the conflict, 130,000 of
them during the first six months of this year. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan

documented over 1,400 civilian deaths in the first six
months of this year, a 15 per cent rise over the same
period last year. More civilians were killed in May than
in any other month since 2007, when the Mission
began to document civilian casualties. Those deaths
were attributed to the increased use of improvised
explosive devices, as well as suicide attacks, targeted
killings, increased ground fighting and air strikes
involving helicopters.

Turning to sub-Saharan Africa, the recent
escalation in fighting and insecurity along the Somalia-
Kenya border risks increasing the suffering of civilians
already devastated by conflict, drought, famine and
displacement. I am concerned by the air strikes
conducted by Kenyan armed forces against Al-Shabaab
earlier this month, which reportedly killed civilians in
a camp for internally displaced Somalis. The Somali
conflict has long been characterized by the failure of
all parties to respect international humanitarian law,
including the principles of distinction and
proportionality. The need for scrupulous compliance
with the law by all parties is of the utmost urgency.

In the Sudan's Darfur region, fighting between
the national armed forces and armed movements in
such areas as eastern Jebel Marra displaced an
estimated 70,000 people during the first eight months
of this year, while 425 civilians were killed, including
as a result of intertribal fighting. In Southern
Kordofan, fighting between Sudanese forces and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North has
severely affected the civilian population, including the
20,000 people who have fled to South Sudan. In Blue
Nile State, the fighting that erupted in September
initially displaced 130,000 people. A further 28,700
people fled to Ethiopia and over 6,200 to South Sudan.
Meanwhile, the continued presence of Sudanese and
South Sudanese armed forces in Abyei, following
hostilities in May, is preventing up to 110,000 people
from returning home.

South Sudan faces additional security challenges
stemming from militia and intertribal violence. Since
January, there have been nearly 430 conflict-related
incidents, resulting in 3,100 deaths and displacing over
215,000 people. There is the prospect of further
violence as competition over natural resources
increases with the return of South Sudanese from the
Sudan to areas in which basic services are already
stretched.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, attacks
against civilians by armed groups have intensified in
the North and South Kivu provinces this year. The
number of internally displaced persons in North Kivu
increased by 30 per cent during the first half of 2011,
reaching over half a million people by the end of July.
Only 20,000 returns have been registered in North
Kivu this year, compared with 235,000 in 2010.
Throughout the Kivus and neighbouring provinces,
insecurity has made humanitarian access increasingly
difficult, with 135 security incidents involving
humanitarian workers having been reported this year.
Five humanitarian workers were killed last month and
two were abducted in September.

Along with those in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and South Sudan, civilians in the Central
African Republic continue to confront the brutality of
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). Between January
and August, 254 attacks by the Lord's Resistance Army
were reported across the three countries, resulting in
126 deaths and 368 abductions. We estimate that
approximately 440,000 persons are now internally
displaced or living as refugees owing to LRA actions.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo alone,
335,000 people have been displaced, including 49,000
during the first six months of this year.

The situations I have described have many
aspects in common, not least the perpetration of
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. Equally common to most of these situations
is the failure to hold accountable those responsible for
such violations and to provide any form of justice or
redress for their victims. The failure of accountability
has to end. We cannot continue to ignore war crimes
and serious violations of human rights law in situations
of conflict, nor can we ignore the need to ensure that
victims see justice and reparations for the wrongs they
have suffered.

As mentioned by the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Portugal, together with the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, convened a one-day workshop
last week on enhancing the role of the Council in
ensuring accountability for violations. The workshop
saw constructive exchanges on three key aspects of
accountability: individual criminal responsibility, fact-
finding and reparations. With regard to the first aspect,
suggestions were made on the possible development of
a checklist of issues for the Council to consider when
making referrals to the International Criminal Court,
and on how the Council could support national
authorities in conducting investigations and
prosecutions, including the possible role of
peacekeeping missions in that regard.

Participants recognized the richness of fact-
finding practices and the challenges involved,
including selectivity as to the situations under review
and the need to improve follow-up on their findings
and recommendations. Participants also emphasized
the need for the Council to have greater resort to the
findings of fact-finding mechanisms established by
other United Nations bodies.

Finally, participants highlighted the significant
number of reparations mechanisms that exist at the
international and national levels and the breadth of
practice in terms of the forms of reparation awarded. It
was agreed that more detailed discussion was
necessary to determine how such mechanisms could be
supported in the future.

The Council has come far in its efforts to address
the protection of civilians and has set important
precedents, in particular on accountability. However,
we cannot afford to be complacent. We must do more
to advance the protection of civilians and ensure that
progress is made where it matters most - in the midst
of conflict.

