Ms. Power (United States of America): Today, as
a Council, we have recognized and recommitted to
Darfur. We have done so as we face intensifying levels
of conflict and a continuing and brutal campaign waged
by the Government of the Sudan and its associated
militia. We have done so against a backdrop of massive
displacements and reports of horrific crimes such as
mass rapes. Those living in Darfur continue to be
subject to having their homes and communities burned
to the ground and their livelihoods systematically
disrupted.

We have seen more violent displacement of people
in Darfur this past year than in the 10 previous years.
Ten years ago, however, Darfur enjoyed a perch at the
top of the international peace and security agenda.
Today, the suffering of the people of Darfur has become
less visible. Our attention has been diverted. The more
than 2.5 million internally displaced people and the
4.4 million people in need of humanitarian assistance
today demand an urgent refocusing and recommitment
to protecting the civilians threatened in Darfur and, as
others have noted, to advancing peace.

Today, we have unanimously renewed the
peacekeeping mission sent to protect the people of
Darfur from those who would do them harm. As we
have reaffirmed in resolution 2228 (2015) adopted
this morning, the Security Council has an enduring
responsibility to evaluate our peacekeeping operations'
performance. That includes considering when and
how a mission should end. It is, of course, prudent
for the Council to know what it means for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) - or any peacekeeping mission - to have
completed its mission.
Sadly, given the very high level of violence and the
very large numbers of displaced persons, UNAMID's
presence is needed now more than ever, and resolution
2228 (2015) makes it clear that any refinement of the
mission will be based on conditions on the ground
and progress towards achieving the clearly identified
benchmarks, now laid out in the annex to the mandate
in the resolution.

We call upon the Government of the Sudan and
all armed groups to cooperate fully with UNAMID as
it seeks to carry out the difficult and critical work of
protecting civilians in Darfur against the backdrop of
a serious deterioration in the security situation on the
ground.

