Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ambassador Pedersen for
his briefing but especially for his tireless determination,
which has succeeded in getting Syria's Government,
opposition and civil society to sit face to face around
the same table in the framework of the Constitutional
Committee. We welcome Ms. Sabah Al Hallak and
thank her for sharing the insights of her extensive
experience working for the good of Syrian civil society.
We also thank the presidency for inviting her to our
meeting today so that through her we could learn about
the Views and aspirations of civil society, and of women
in particular, as they seek to build a new future for
the country.

Following the first round of negotiations,
Ambassador Pedersen described the constitutional talks
in Geneva as successful, intense, substantive and very
professional. He also stressed that in many ways they
were painful, and that is a good thing. We are hopeful
that, through the facilitation of the United Nations and
on the basis of mutual respect, dedication, commitment
and trust, it will be possible to build bridges and make
progress even in the most difficult areas. We therefore
urge all the members of the Committee, based on their
shared beliefs and common interests, to continue their
deliberations with enthusiasm. Women in particular
have a decisive role to play in these talks, which is
why their participation rate of at least 30 per cent is
so crucial.

Against the current backdrop, my delegation would
like to highlight the following points. It is essential to
build trust through a broad-based political process, for
which the Constitutional Committee is undoubtedly
key. If it does its work effectively, it will strengthen
the Syrian belief that their legitimate aspirations are
attainable. But the work of the Committee will not be
enough and will not succeed in contributing to that
broad-based process if the conditions for building a
unified national vision are not put in place, starting
with meaningful and robust support to its constituent
sectors. Progress on mutual confidence-building
measures is crucial to that process. We fully agree that
releasing women, children, the elderly and the disabled
and people who have been arbitrarily detained who have
become ill would contribute significantly to that and
would also provide families with credible information
about the whereabouts of missing loved ones.

However, perhaps it is up to the Syrians themselves,
whether under the auspices of the Committee or
another platform, to define what other measures the
Government and the opposition can undertake so that
the civilian population can see tangible change in their
lives. That is to say, hope must be rebuilt. We believe it
is more important than ever to reach a lasting national
ceasefire that provides relief and calm to the civilian
population. It is worth stressing the importance of
providing specific assurances that all counter-terrorist
activities will be carried out in strict adherence to
international humanitarian law, which establishes
limits even on hostilities. Those limits are clear - they
apply to civilian populations and infrastructure. In that
regard, we regret and condemn the reports of missiles
being launched from areas controlled by the Syrian
Government that have claimed the lives of 12 people
and injured 56 others, including children. Many will
say that no political process can bear fruit while a
humanitarian tragedy continues, and that this would
be too much to ask for. That is true, but we advocate
treating this tragedy as the force driving every sector of
the population in Syria, wherever they may be, together
with all of us who want peace, to make real progress in
achieving the Syria that its people aspire to and deserve.

