Mr. Baali (Algeria)(interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to convey to you, Sir, the great
pleasure it gives me to see you presiding over the Security
Council with such skill and competence and in a manner
that commands our respect and admiration.

I should also like to pay a well-deserved tribute to the
representative of Kenya, Mr. Mahugu, who succeeded in
conducting the work of the Council with skill and
effectiveness in a particularly busy month.

 

Finally, I would like to express our distress and our
sorrow at the sudden death of Maitre Alioune Blondin
Beye, a most eminent son of Africa, who tirelessly
pursued his mediation efforts in Angola. We wish to take
this opportunity to extend our sincere condolences to his
family, to his country - Mali - and to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations. We express the hope that
the cause of peace and reconciliation to which he so
fervently devoted himself will be realized.

My delegation asked to participate in the work of
this urgent meeting of the Security Council in order to
express Algeria's position concerning the threats to peace
and security that have multiplied in the Middle East
region since the series of unilateral and illegal steps taken
by Israel in the occupied territories, particularly in
occupied Al-Quds.

In fact, over the space of several weeks now Israel
has taken a series of decisions to extend, expand and
tighten its grip over the territories that it occupies. The
occupying Power has decided to pursue its policy of
settlement and settlement enlargement. This is
demonstrated by the project for the new Jewish settlement
at Jebel Abu Ghneim; the creation of a civil guard
composed of Jewish settlers in the occupied territories;
the transformation of the illegal status of the Ariel
settlement in order to make it a fully separate town and
thereby exempt it from the final status negotiations; and,
lastly the extension of the boundaries of the city of Al-
Quds to areas within the occupied territories in order to
encompass a number of Jewish settlements situated to the
east of the Holy City.

The measures taken by Israel to restart its settlement
process are in outright defiance of international law and
the will of the international community. Israel's decision
to expand the municipal boundaries of Al-Quds is proof
of this policy of provocation, because it conflicts with the
rudimentary rules of international law, ignores the
resolutions adopted within the context of international
law, contravenes the principles of the Middle East peace
process and violates the spirit and letter of the Oslo
accords.

This decision is first and foremost in conflict with
international law because it knowingly disregards a whole
set of international treaties, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. That Convention prohibits the
imposition by occupying Powers of their administrative
jurisdictions on territories under their domination, the
transfer of civilian populations to those territories and any

 

disruption of the composition of their populations. This is
precisely what has been constantly done, and is still being
done, by Israel in Al-Quds al-Sharif.

This decision is also deliberately contemptuous of
resolutions of international legality, first and foremost
among which are those of the Security Council and the
General Assembly of the United Nations. The Security
Council has adopted many binding resolutions on the
subject of the city of Al-Quds, all of which have remained
unimplemented. These include resolutions 252 (1968), 476
(1980) and 478 (1980), all of which define Al-Quds al-
Sharif as an occupied city, forbid the occupying Power
from changing the geographic, demographic or urban
configuration of the city and regard any measure that is
contrary to these provisions as null and void and as
something that should be revoked.

Moreover, Israel's decision is not in keeping with the
basic principles of the peace process. It contravenes the
principle of land for peace, which is the keystone of the
peace process on which the participation of Arab countries
in the Madrid Conference of 1991 was based. It is also very
clearly spelt out in the letters of invitation that the sponsors
of the process sent to all the parties, including the
legitimate representatives of the Palestinian people.

Lastly, Israel's decision to expand the municipal
boundaries of occupied Jerusalem - along with other
decisions that affect the Holy City - is a flagrant violation
of the letter and spirit of the Oslo accords signed between
Israel and the Palestinian National Authority. Those accords
decided that the consideration of the question of Al-Quds
al-Sharif would be deferred to the final phase of the peace
negotiations. This was done, however, on the condition that
the two parties would undertake to maintain the status quo
of the city and refrain from any decision or unilateral
measures that would result in a change in the legal status of
the city or its demographic and geographic character.

The Israeli measure is therefore contrary to that
commitment and is clearly a deliberate act on the part of
the Israeli administration aimed at anticipating events and
piling up faits accomplis in order to be able to exercise the
necessary pressure on the Palestinian party during the last
stage of the negotiations on the final status of Al-Quds.

The provocative actions that Israel continues to
undertake in the region of the Middle East in general, and
in Al-Quds al-Sharif in particular, is undoubtedly an
outright threat to international peace and security. The
climate of tension that they create in the region could cause

 

the situation to degenerate at any stage into a fresh
confrontation that would sweep away all peace efforts.

The persistence of the Israeli administration in
defying the will of the international community and
ignoring resolutions - particularly those adopted by the
General Assembly and the Security Council - is simply
an unacceptable act of defiance towards the international
community and very clearly undermines the entire
foundation for action of the United Nations.

In addressing the Security Council, the highest
international forum responsible for safeguarding
international peace and security, the Arab Group expects
that the Council will fulfil its responsibilities to induce
Israel to cease its expansionist projects in the occupied
Palestinian territories, abandon its plans to extend the
municipal boundaries of Al-Quds al-Sharif to the Jewish
settlements that surround it and conform to the rules of
international law that incontestably prohibit any alteration
of the demographic and geographic composition of the
occupied city. In fact, any leniency on the part of the
Council will only lead to extremism and increasing
stubbornness on the part of the Israeli Administration in
the pursuit of its policy that is contrary to peace and to
the letter of the law. The Council is therefore called upon
today to take a firm and clear-cut position vis-a-vis these
Israeli acts of provocation and to shoulder its
responsibilities fully.

The Arab Group also makes an especially urgent
appeal to the two sponsors of the Middle East peace
process - the United States and the Russian
Federation - to act with resolve to salvage the peace
process and put it back on track.

The Arab countries have made a strategic choice in
favour of peace. They remain convinced that the only
way to resolve the Middle East problem once and for all
lies in the establishment of comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the region, on the basis of the principle
of land for peace and guaranteeing the right of the
Palestinian people to create its own independent State on
Palestinian territory, with Al-Quds al-Sharif as its capital.

