Ms. Shalev (Israel): Let me thank Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his informative and
important briefing highlighting the very complex,
broader aspects of the situation in the Middle East.
May I also take this opportunity to bid farewell to a
friend and diplomat, the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom, and to thank him for his great
work for peace and security in this Council. I wish
Sir John Sawers great success in his next mission.

The Security Council meets today for its monthly
debate on the situation in the Middle East and the
question of Palestine. Since the most recent meeting on
this matter, an important trilateral meeting has taken
place between United States, Palestinian and Israeli
leaders. Since that meeting, Special Envoy Senator
Mitchell and his team have been relentlessly engaged
in an effort to put the peace process back on track.

And less than a week ago, the Nobel Peace Prize
was awarded to the President of the United States.
Allow me to congratulate President Obama and the
people of the United States on this honourable
recognition. The Nobel Prize was granted to President
Obama for his "extraordinary efforts to strengthen
international diplomacy and cooperation between
peoples" in pursuit of peace. The Middle East is indeed
one of those areas yearning for peace - a peace based
on the vision laid down by the United Nations itself in
1947: two States for two peoples.

Israel seeks peace. We want a genuine peace, a
defensible peace, a permanent peace. A peace in which
two States, one Jewish, one Palestinian, will live side
by side in peace and security. Recognizing such a
vision will move the peace process forward. Terrorism,
bloodshed and incitement will not.

Let me briefly describe the reality on the ground.
As I have lately communicated, the month of
September witnessed an alarming rise in terrorist
attacks. In the South, 13 rockets and mortars were fired
at Israel from the Hamas-controlled Gaza Strip. Fifteen
other attacks were launched with light weapons and
anti-tank missiles. There were multiple attempts by
terrorists to infiltrate Israel and to plant explosives
along the fence between the Gaza Strip and Israel.

To our North, three rockets were launched on
Israeli territory from southern Lebanon. The Hizbullah
terrorist organization continues to receive deadly
weapons from its sponsors, Members of this
Organization. At the same time, Hizbullah is building a
military infrastructure in the midst of the civilian
population south of the Litani River. Its operatives and
affiliated civilians openly threaten the United Nations

Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), obstructing it
from discharging its mandate. The explosion of an
actively maintained weapons depot in Khirbat Salim on
16 July proved beyond any doubt that Hizbullah's
violations are the greatest obstacle to the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

In addition, two days before the present meeting,
another explosion of arms occurred, in a civilian home
in the village of Tayr Filsay. That grave incident once
again highlights a reality that we have been facing for
years in southern Lebanon, as well as in Gaza: a
terrorist organization, rearming and deploying within
civilian areas, endangering not only peace and security
but, cynically, the very civilians themselves.

The evidence of that phenomenon is clear, as was
demonstrated yesterday in southern Lebanon and seen
on television or on our computer screens. We expect
UNIFIL and the relevant United Nations authorities to
promptly conduct a thorough investigation into that
incident and to share its findings with the Governments
of Lebanon and of Israel and with the members of the
Security Council. Southern Lebanon is occupied by
terrorism: Hizbullah's terrorism. We trust that the
upcoming report of the Secretary-General on resolution
1701 (2006) will offer practical and tangible steps
towards further implementation of that important
resolution.

This is the situation in the Middle East. Behind
Hizbullah's defiance and build-up stands Iran. Iran's
sponsorship and support of terrorism is pushing the
region towards instability and conflict. As Iran hurtles
towards nuclear weapons capabilities, coupled with
long-range missiles, its leaders refuse to truthfully
answer the inquiries and demands of the international
community. The recent Iranian admission of a uranium
enrichment plant outside Qom leaves no doubt: the
Iranian nuclear programme is an international crisis.

That country, Iran, is driven by religious
extremism, officially sponsors Holocaust denial and
violently suppresses the democratic aspirations of its
citizens, while continuing to promote international
terrorism. The world's most dangerous weapons are
quickly falling into the hands of the most dangerous
regime in the world. That is the real threat to peace and
security in our region and in the world.

Five years ago, in the pursuit of peace, Israel
dismantled 21 settlements and uprooted over 8,000
Israelis from the Gaza Strip. The former Secretary-
General, Kofi Annan, called Israel's actions a
courageous decision. This very Council commended
the ongoing implementation of the disengagement
process. Member States assured us that if Israel needed
to defend itself, international legitimacy would be on
our side.

Yet Israel's hope turned into a nightmare. Instead
of promoting a functioning Palestinian society, Hamas
has built an infrastructure of terror. Instead of
promoting peace, Hamas has murdered and silenced
opposition, while inciting an entire generation to kill
and hate. Gaza is occupied by terrorism: Hamas
terrorism. Hamas openly rejects Israel's right to exist.
Hamas openly rejects a two-State solution. Their
charter calls for Jews to be killed and quotes notorious
anti-Semitic citations.

Yet the world does nothing. As Hamas smuggled
a constant supply of deadly Iranian arms into Gaza, the
world did nothing. As Hamas placed weapons and
launched attacks from within schools, mosques and
hospitals, the world did nothing. As Hamas fired
12,000 rockets against 1 million innocent Israeli men,
women and children, the world did nothing. That is the
situation in the Middle East.

This monthly meeting was supposed to take place
next week, but was rescheduled due to what was
described as the urgency of the matter. An outside
bystander would think that the issue of such an urgent
meeting would be the continuous shelling of Israeli
territory by terrorists from Gaza and Lebanon, or the
continuous threats from Iran's nuclear development.

However, the urgency of the matter is a pretext to
hijack the Council's agenda by raising an issue here
that belongs elsewhere. The Member State responsible
for this dereliction of procedure is, as we all know, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. This is the Member State, a
true champion of human rights, which recently offered
an official hero's welcome to an arch-terrorist. That
arch-terrorist is responsible for the cold-blooded
murder of hundreds of innocent men, women and
children over the skies of Lockerbie. This is the same
Member State whose leader, in his memorable
soliloquy before the General Assembly three weeks ago
(see A/64/PV.3), called the Security Council a "Terror
Council".

Today we have heard references to the Goldstone
report (A/HRC/12/48). Although the debate on that
report belongs elsewhere, let me briefly state Israel's
position. I regret to say that the Goldstone report is
one-sided, biased and therefore wrong, just like the
forum and the mandate that established its mission.
The report favours and legitimizes terrorism. It is a
prize for terrorist organizations. It denies Israel's right
to defend its citizens. It falls directly into the pitfall
strategically laid by terrorist organizations around the
world. It prevents and will prevent democratic Member
States from defending themselves against terrorism. It
permits terrorists to victimize civilians, target the
innocent and use those it claims to defend as human
shields.

By trying to bring that report before a so-called
urgent debate in the Security Council, the Council's
attention was diverted from the reality in our region.
Rather than dealing with the situation in the Middle
East, and instead of encouraging the parties to move
towards peace and resume negotiations, the debate in
this Council has been shifted to discussing a narrative
that is destructive to the peace process.

For those of us who seek to resume the peace
process in the Middle East, debating the Goldstone
report in the Security Council is but a tale full of sound
and fury, signifying nothing. If Israel is asked to take
further risks for peace, the international community
must recognize our right to self-defence.

