Mr. Lambertini (Italy): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for
his outstanding commitment to the democratization
process in Afghanistan. We also thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Fedotov, and the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for their briefings.

Between now and the end of2014, two crucial events
will mark the course of Afghanistan's future. First, for
the first time in the country's history, there will be a
handover of power from one head of State to another
based on a democratic process. Secondly, the completion
of the transition process where a mission supporting the
Afghan National Security Forces for training, advising
and assisting will replace the International Security
Assistance Force military presence.

The presidential run-off elections confirmed the
positive trend arising from the first vote. The high
turnout in the elections was a sign that Afghans, not
giving into fear, trust the democratic process and
have high expectations for a new President capable of
tackling the country's problems.

The regularity of the entire election process, up until
the announcement of the new Head of State, is critical.
Only with the perception of a legitimate, credible,
transparent and inclusive process will the outcome be
accepted by the defeated opponents and public opinion
and thus allow for a peaceful political transition with
no upsets. The United Nations is directing its efforts
towards that perspective by reiterating the absolute
primacy of the election process, of the respect for its
rules and regulations and of the importance of dialogue
between the two candidates. In this delicate phase
following the second round of voting, it is essential that
both candidates and their supporters base their conduct
on moderation and a sense of responsibility, avoid
rushing to claim victory prematurely, and channel
complaints through the appropriate mechanisms. That
should be done with the awareness that the post-election
period requires the country's utmost unity, with a view
to its civil and economic development, to be nurtured
by peace and stability.
The contribution of the Afghan National Security
Forces was decisive in guaranteeing the regularity
of the presidential and local elections, thus proving
their capability in successfully overcoming the heavy,
everyday challenge of controlling the country's
territory. As to the insurgence, despite the higher
number of attacks and victims on this occasion than
during the first vote, once again attempts to derail the
elections failed. Nonetheless, we must be aware that the
stabilization of the country will take more time and that
we cannot let our guard down.

In view of completing the transition process,
the announcement by the United States on its future
presence in Afghanistan and on the time table of the
military withdrawal is welcome news. Clearly what
remains instrumental for post-2014 assets is the
signing of the bilateral security agreement between
Afghanistan and the United States, to which both
presidential candidates are receptive, and the finalizing
of the necessary legal framework for the presence of
NATO troops in the country.

Italy confirms its support for the peace process,
recognizes Afghanistan's complete ownership and
expects that it will not be affected by any setbacks in
its gains in democratization and civil and gender rights,
nor yield to terrorism. We reiterate our firm belief in
the fact that, without an internal reconciliation in
Afghanistan, there can be no prospects of stabilization,
nor can any possible stabilization be long lasting
without the genuine and determined contribution of the
other regional actors.

In such a momentous stage of Afghanistan's
process of stabilization and development, it is vital, for
my country, to see that ambitions are not diminished
and that there will be no sacrificing the quality and
quantity of the benchmarks to be respected by the Kabul
authorities. We expect our Afghan friends to remain
committed to the Tokyo legacy and to reach clear and
measurable goals in sectors such as the democratic
and electoral processes, the fight against corruption,
administrative and economic governance and human
rights.

