Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): Since our
last public debate on the situation in the Middle East,
the Israeli-Palestinian crisis has become even more
distressing and tragic. The cycle of violence is
intensifying and the climate of mutual mistrust seems
to dominate the relationship between the parties. This
new period, characterized by a heightening of tension,
is particularly critical, resulting in a greater
deterioration of the situation on the ground and
gradually moving the players farther away from the
path of peace.

In such a context, the stated will of the Israeli
Government to press forward with the building of the
separation wall is a source of serious concern for my
delegation. There should be no doubt that this illegal
measure, taken in the name of security, will reinforce
the feelings of frustration and hate of the put-upon
Palestinian populations. It inevitably leads to a
deepening in the lack of understanding between the two
parties and imperils the very core of the peace process,
namely, the road map of the Quartet, which has been so
carefully negotiated and whose implementation has
barely begun.

Through their dogged insistence on establishing a
barrier between populations whom nothing can
separate and who are fated by history to live in
harmony, the Israeli authorities have chosen the worst
security option. Clearly, the separation wall, whose
route cuts seriously and deeply into Palestinian
territories, is a pernicious way to continue and expand
the settlement of occupied territories and to deprive the
Palestinian people of a territorial element that is
essential to the full exercise of its sovereignty. In
addition, it is the expression of a policy known as
"bantustanization", whose objective is to create
enclaves that are not viable, denying any freedom of
movement to the Palestinian people and reserving the
most fertile and most productive lands for the occupier.

This enterprise is doomed to failure, being
counter to elementary standards of international law,
human rights and humanitarian law. It is ultimately
aimed at undermining the very basis of the peace
process in the Middle East. It runs counter to the vision
of two States, Palestinian and Israeli, living side by
side within safe and internationally recognized borders.
It is one of the most eloquent manifestations of the
denial to the Palestinian people of the exercise of their
right to full sovereignty within the framework of an
independent, free and viable State.

When the continuation of a deliberate policy of
settlements is added to this list, my delegation cannot
but deplore the fact that the Israeli Government is
dragging the Middle East into lasting instability. We
accordingly reiterate our unequivocal condemnation of
the building of the separation wall, which, contrary to
the position taken by Israel, will not satisfy its
legitimate need for security, since it can only lead to a
deepening of the gulf between Israelis and Palestinians
and to the annihilation of the numerous peace efforts.

We therefore once again urge the Israeli
authorities to demonstrate common sense by ending
this deplorable practice, which can only do their
interests a disservice, and to restore to the Palestinian
people the territories arbitrarily confiscated from them,
thus showing a greater readiness to contribute to a just
and lasting solution to the crisis in the Middle East.

The draft resolution introduced by the Arab
Group, of which we are sponsors, calling for the
dismantling of the separation wall deserves the support
of our Council. Its speedy adoption, which we ardently
desire, will show the will of the international
community to put an end to a policy which runs
counter to the objectives laid out by the Quartet's road
map.

In conclusion, my delegation recalls that there is
only one way to re-establish mutual confidence and
dialogue, and once again find the way to peace in the
Middle East: clear and binding implementation of the
road map, with the firm and determined support of the
international community.

