Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): At the outset, let me
thank the delegation of Peru for organizing today's
open debate. Our special appreciation goes out to the
representatives from the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate for their remarks. We also thank
the other briefers for sharing their perspectives on this
very important subject.

The existence of militant groups and organized
criminal gangs is not a new phenomenon. In recent
times, however, their manifestation and intricate
linkages have been of growing concern at the national,
regional and international levels. More important,
their convergence has now become an urgent threat
to international peace and security. Its widening base
at the grass-roots level has led to the failure of some
States and the weakening of others.

There are also increasing similarities between
terrorism and organized crime. Both use extreme
violence and the threat of reprisals. Both use
kidnapping, extortion and assassinations. They also
operate secretly, although at times publicly, in friendly
territories. Both defy the State and the rule of law. For
a member to leave either group is rare and often fatal.
Both present an asymmetrical threat to the nation, and
both are highly adaptable, resilient and innovative.
They have back-up leaders and foot soldiers. While
some criminal groups and terrorists might operate
opportunistically in partnership, others might converge
in a single terror-crime entity.

Three levels of interplay between organized crime
and terrorist groups have been identified, namely,
coexistence, cooperation and convergence. cooperation
can take various forms when criminal groups work
together, from a purely financial or transactional nature
to an operational and organizational arrangement.
Moreover, such groups often cooperate for mutual
assistance with intangible technology transfers, which
are defined as the export or transfer of technology
from one entity to another via non-physical means,
such as the Internet. In the case of organized crime
and terrorism, that might include technical know-how,
intellectual property and manufacturing techniques for
building anything from bombs to drones.

Correspondingly, four major developments have
been identified as enablers ofthe increasing convergence
between organized crime and terrorism. They are:
globalization, which has provided the space for the free
flow of trade and human resources, thereby providing
the opportunity for organized crime and terrorism to
mingle; the end of Cold War, which has reduced State
financing of terrorists, leading to terrorists resorting
to self-help by indulging in criminal activities to fill
financial needs; communication through the Internet;
and the global war on terror, which has led to global
cooperation to crackdown on terror.

Nigeria has had a fair share of outbreaks of attacks by
Boko Haram targeting civilians, public infrastructure,
community and religious leaders, places of worship,
markets and media houses, among others. Further
complicating the security landscape is the increase in
the outbreak of transnational organized crimes that feed
into the so-called terrorist loop in West Africa with
threats of terrorism, drug and arms trafficking, illegal
oil bunkering, piracy and human trafficking, which
have acquired a worrisome transnational dimension in
recent times. Due to porous borders and the growing
demand for arms by criminals and militants, cartels
specialized in arms trafficking are devising ingenious
methods for concealing and conveniently trafficking
arms across borders in West Africa.
In order to address those security challenges, Nigeria
has adopted several mechanisms and instruments
to enhance security, including the national counter-
terrorism strategy, adopted in 2014, the national policy
framework and national action plan for preventing and
countering violent extremism, adopted in 2017, and the
Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF), established
in collaboration with our neighbours, such as Chad,
Cameroon, the Niger and Benin, to defeat the Boko
Haram insurgency. We are therefore making an appeal
to the international community to continue to support
the MNJTF and other activities involving countering
terrorism, peacebuilding and sustaining peace in
Nigeria, West Africa and Africa at large.

It is our expectation that this debate will offer
suggestions to address the prevailing challenges of
terrorism and organized crime, which are increasingly
joining forces to challenge States and threaten human
security worldwide. Policy makers and scholars alike
claim that new and unconventional methods are
needed to counter the existential risks that arise from
cooperation, convergence and the merging of terrorism
and organized crime. Therefore, as distinctions between
terrorists and criminals fade, so too must distinctions
among the traditional measures used in fighting them.
Since organized crime and terrorism are converging, a
single, comprehensive concept is required to counter it.

The challenge, therefore, has not been a regional
lack of frameworks and instruments to respond to those
threats, but rather the failure to address the underlying
factors contributing to the outbreak of those crimes,
as well as the complex linkages among them. In order
to deal effectively with the threats of terrorism and
organized crime, there must be a broad approach that
integrates efforts at the national and regional levels into
a robust strategy focused on improving governance,
development and security.

There is also aneedforimproved knowledge-sharing
and cooperation on all levels, especially internationally.
Following the money trail and countering financing
remain a focus through targeted strategies to prevent and
control money-laundering, extortion and kidnapping
for ransom, among others.

Ultimately, it is important to reiterate that the
eradication of this phenomenon can be possible only
if cooperation can be achieved at the international
level and counter-terrorism programmes, along with
development schemes, are implemented at the grass-
roots level.
