The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.

I would first like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Zerihoun for his complete and factual briefing.

The position of Kazakhstan is very consistent and
based entirely on adherence to the norms and principles
of international law. The Security Council deals with
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security, and respects the sovereignty of States.
We regret the loss of life that has occurred in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, but Kazakhstan considers the
developments there to be a domestic issue that does not
fall under the mandate of the Security Council, since
it does not represent a threat to international peace
and security.

We should be very vigilant, however, and we
reiterate the importance of maintaining global stability
worldwide and in the Middle East, in particular, by
reducing violence and preventing the emergence of new
tensions. We already have too many issues to address in
that region. We truly believe that disputes should always
be resolved by peaceful means in order to prevent the
further escalation of violence and should not become an
inspiration to extremist forces. We therefore join others

in calling on Iran to restore trust and mutual respect
in its society among all the social groups involved. We
note that the level of tension in Iran has decreased and
the situation is gradually normalizing. We hope that
this trend will continue and that a peaceful solution will
eventually be found, based on the mutual tolerance and
wisdom of the people of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Whatever the recent developments in Iran, they
should not undermine the sustainability of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) for the Iranian
nuclear programme. The world community must remain
committed to the JCPOA, which has been successful
and constitutes a factor in regional security.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

