Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I too would like to
extend my delegation's welcome to His Excellency the
Foreign Minister of Iraq, as well as to thank him for his
remarks to the Council today on behalf of the Iraqi
Government. I would also like to thank Special Adviser
Gambari for his presentation, the Controller for his
briefing and you, Mr. President, for your presentation
of behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq.

The Security Council discussed the issue of Iraq
in the Chamber some six weeks ago. At that time, my
delegation noted the progress in Iraq that is still under
way, namely, concerted efforts by Iraq's leaders to pass
laws aimed at uniting the country, underpinned by a
steadily developing spirit of cooperation; continued
forward movement on arranging provincial elections
later this year; and improved security, with the
Government of Iraq taking decisive action and with
cross-party political support, to uphold the rule of law,

in particular in Basra, Sadr City and Mosul. Together,
that sustained progress has helped to rid Iraq of those
who seek to sow havoc and violence, to create
economic opportunities and to provide services to the
Iraqi people. In doing all of that, it has also helped to
make political space for Iraq's leaders to work towards
national reconciliation.

But, as we have heard today, there remains work
to be done. May I take this opportunity to encourage
the Iraqi Government to cement improvements in
security by taking forward economic development
initiatives and by driving political progress. I should
also like to take this opportunity to encourage Iraq's
leaders and the Council of Representatives to agree the
necessary legislation to ensure that provincial elections
take place this year and to allow the passage of
hydrocarbons legislation. The longer that legislation is
delayed, the more the full and effective development of
Iraq's oil sector is held back.

I would now like to turn to the international front.
My Government would like to take this opportunity to
commend the Government of Sweden, the United
Nations and the Government of Iraq for the successful
holding of the first Iraq Compact Annual Review
Conference, in Stockholm. We welcome Mr. Gambari's
role in that. The level of international participation in
the Conference was impressive. The much-appreciated
presence of a number of Iraqi ministers and officials
demonstrated Iraq's commitment to making the
Compact work. Prime Minister Al-Maliki made clear
that Iraq wants, and is prepared to build, strong
relations with the international community, notably its
neighbours. We welcome recent decisions by Bahrain,
Jordan and the United Arab Emirates to appoint
ambassadors to Iraq. We hope that this will serve as
encouragement to others.

My Government continues to support the work of
the United Nations and the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Iraq. We welcome the efforts of the
Special Representative and his team on disputed
internal boundaries and the presentation of the first
phase of the United Nations analysis. We encourage all
parties to continue to engage with the United Nations
and to reach a mutually acceptable solution on the
disputed areas.
The United Kingdom would also like to
encourage the Government of Iraq to work closely with
the United Nations to identify a suitable location for a
new compound in Baghdad for the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), as well as to
make a financial contribution towards its construction.
We echo the calls of the Secretary-General for
additional military advisers for UNAMI and further
contributions to the "middle ring" trust fund. The
United Nations has an important role to play in Iraq.
We should not do anything that casts doubt, or
perceived doubt, on our support for its activities.

The United Kingdom's policy in Iraq has been to
help the Iraqi people to get to the point where they can
take control of their own destiny and security. To that
end, in December 2007 the United Kingdom-led
Multinational Division-Southeast transferred
responsibility for security in Basra province to the
Iraqi authorities. All four provinces in southern Iraq are
now under Iraqi control. Countrywide, half of Iraq's
provinces are now under Iraqi control, with two more
scheduled to transfer in June and July. That transfer has
meant that Iraqis are taking the lead in solving the
challenges and problems that they still face in their
country, taking decisions on their own future and
taking responsibility for those decisions. The
Government of Iraq's crackdown on criminal groups in
Basra launched in March of this year is evidence of
that trend. We welcome the major improvements in
security that that has brought about. The United
Kingdom remains committed to supporting Iraqis in
that endeavour.

United Kingdom forces have a clear mission to
fulfil in southern Iraq, focused on the mentoring and
training of the fourteenth division of the Iraqi army in
Basra until that army is fully operational. Our forces
also remain ready to support the Iraqi security forces,
if requested, through the provision of logistical and
operational support as necessary. In parallel, we
continue to work through the United Kingdom-Iraq
Basra Development Commission and the United
Kingdom-led Provincial Reconstruction Team to build
local governance capacity and to help the Iraqi
authorities increase investment and economic
opportunity in Basra.

