Mr. Zoubi (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Permit me
at the outset to congratulate you, Madam, on your
leadership of the Security Council during this month
and to thank your predecessor for his guidance of the
work of the Council last month.

We condemn Israel's insistence on pursuing its
vast military operations against Palestinian civilians;
those operations are totally unjustified. We also
condemn the collective punishment imposed by Israel

on the Palestinian people in Gaza. We condemn
violence and the killing of civilians anywhere. The
recent developments are extremely unfortunate and do
not serve peace and stability in the region.

We had hoped that all the parties - particularly
the Israeli party - would display a high level of
restraint, because we all know the political difficulties
and security challenges in the region in general. What
the Israeli occupation forces are doing in Gaza after
their unilateral withdrawal only weakens the chances
for the success of the political process and heightens
the atmosphere of violence and extremism.

Today we hope that the Security Council will
send a strong and clear message that this unproductive
and negative situation, brought about by irresponsible
measures, must cease. Our efforts must focus on de-
escalation, the creation of trust between the two parties
and the immediate implementation of the road map. A
failure by the Council to send that message and to turn
the parties in the right direction will not stop the
deterioration of the situation or save the worsening
political process caused by the tensions and the delays
in efforts to put an end to the current deadlock. The
international community's responsibility is paramount
in the implementation of the road map. I wish to recall
that the Government of Jordan is making every effort
to put an end to this dangerous escalation.

We call upon the Palestinian and Israeli parties to
respect all the agreements signed, as well as the Sharm
el-Sheikh agreement, and to cease all measures of
escalation, whether they be rocket firings, incursions,
arrests or kidnappings. We call upon both parties to
focus on the political process.

We look forward with great interest to the
outcome of the Palestinian investigation into the
prisoners' document and of the reconciliation dialogue.
We call upon all Palestinian parties to serve the high
interest of the Palestinian people. We would like to
commend the sincere efforts of President Abbas to
activate the political process. We welcome the positive
measures taken by both parties, such as the meeting
held at Petra in March during the meeting of Nobel
Peace Prize laureates.

We call on Israel, the occupying Power, to put an
end to all practices that violate the human rights of the
Palestinian people and to occupation measures such as
permanent restrictions on, and military action against,
the Palestinian people; ongoing colonization; and the
building of the separation wall. Indeed, all of those
actions, which have been condemned, prevent the
Palestinian Authority from respecting and fulfilling its
commitments under the road map, especially in the
difficult political context that prevails in the occupied
Palestinian territories, as they have created a
humanitarian crisis and threaten to create a security
crisis as well. We call for a speedy reactivation of the
mechanism by the Quartet through cooperation with
the Palestinian Authority.

A settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
will require an end to Israeli occupation and must be
based on the principles of international legality and an
agreed solution to the problem of Palestinian refugees,
based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III). We
must demonstrate political will and work to put an end
to this escalation and resume negotiations. Unilateral
solutions will never produce a lasting peace between
the two peoples.

