Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his introduction
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/470). I
also welcome the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Romano Prodi and the representative of the
African Union (AU) and, of course, the presence
among us of Under-Secretary-General Malcorra.

First and foremost, there will be no peace and
security in the world without peace and security in
Africa. Japan therefore welcomes the opportunity to
discuss how to further strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU.

We are grateful for the report of the United
Nations-African Union panel (see S/2008/813) and the
report of the Secretary-General, which together provide
a sound basis for our considerations. I should like to
emphasize that to achieve peace and security in Africa
we must address peace and development in an
integrated manner. Durable peace cannot be achieved
without securing the safety, livelihood and dignity of
the people living in conflict situations. Efforts towards
peace and security should be accompanied by
appropriate actions in favour of development. In that
belief, Japan continues to support the efforts of African
countries to consolidate peace and achieve economic
growth through the process of the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development, which has been
very successful.

More than 68,000 uniformed men and women are
now deployed in peacekeeping operations, at work
throughout Africa. We are deeply grateful to them.
Taking the magnitude of this number into account,
close cooperation between the United Nations and AU
is indispensable at every stage from conflict resolution
to peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The mandates of
peacekeeping operations increasingly include such
activities as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and the promotion of good governance
and the rule of law. The broad range of peacebuilding
activities which go beyond peacekeeping operations
could be synchronized closely with the operations.
Effective peacebuilding efforts are also an important
factor in planning exit strategies for peacekeeping
operations.

I should like now to turn to the issues of the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the AU, capacity-building and the financing of AU
operations. First, we should further promote the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the AU at all levels - at the Council level and between
the Secretariat and Commission - because it is
beneficial to both organizations to share information
and to consult and coordinate whenever making
decisions affecting each other. Close cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU is also
essential for the planning and management phase of
peacekeeping operations. In this connection, I should
like to urge the Secretariat to review and streamline the
various United Nations presences in its Addis Ababa
office, and to make them more cost-effective, to
achieve the purpose of strengthening the strategic
partnership with the AU.

Secondly, I should like to address ownership and
capacity-building. The efforts of the AU and African
countries to undertake peacekeeping operations should
be highly commended. But durable peace cannot be
achieved by peacekeepers alone. Political and peace
processes are essential to promote and consolidate
peace. The most effective political processes come
from the initiatives of African leaders themselves. We
therefore welcome the political efforts of African
countries, through the AU and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States and the Southern Africa
Development Community, to resolve conflicts with a
strong sense of ownership. We welcome the decision of
the AU Summit to request the AU Commission to take
preparatory steps to increase statutory transfers from
the AU budget to the Peace Fund from 6 to 12 per cent.
Japan has also welcomed and supported the AU Panel
of the Wise, which is playing an important role to
mediate and resolve conflict in the region.

With regard to capacity-building, it is essential to
extend support to strengthen the capacity of African
troop-contributing countries. Japan has committed to
assist the capacity-building of the African Peace and
Security Architecture through the Peace Fund. We are
also contributing to national and regional capacity-
building, including support for peacekeeping
operations training centres in Egypt, Ghana, Kenya,
Mali, South Africa and many other places. It is also
important to support the African Union's Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme, as the Programme will
be evaluated at the end of this year. I hope this
assessment will contribute to improving future
implementation.

Thirdly, with regard to the financial aspects of
African Union-led peacekeeping operations, I wish to
make the following general points at this stage. First,
the launching of peacekeeping operations requires
well-qualified personnel, training, equipment,
transportation, logistical support and financial
resources. We understand the desire to secure stable
resources for those purposes. Secondly, peacekeeping
operations which are authorized and conducted by the
African Union and its subregional organizations are
supported by the African Union budget and voluntary
contributions. Thirdly, the main issue is peacekeeping
operations which are organized and conducted by the
African Union but also authorized by the Security
Council. Such operations are also financed by the
African Union budget and voluntary contributions.
Japan, for its part, has been actively contributing to
African Union operations, including $11 million to
support African Union activities in the Sudan and
$9 million to the trust fund for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as well as support for
other activities.

It is important for all donors to disburse their
pledges early and to monitor and coordinate their
activities with other donors. This practice is similar to
peace operations in other parts of the world which are
also authorized by the Security Council but conducted
by non-United Nations entities. We note recent cases of
using United Nations assessed contributions for United
Nations support packages to African Union
peacekeeping operations - the African Union Mission
in the Sudan (AMIS) and AMISOM. - when it is a
matter of either the start-up stage of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, as in the case of AMIS, or an
essential integral part of a transition to a United
Nations peacekeeping operation, as in the case of
AMISOM.

In order for the United Nations budget to be used
established rules and procedures of the United Nations
must be followed. The United Nations Charter clearly
states that all expenses of the United Nations shall be
borne by Members through assessed contributions.
This is a fundamental rule of the Organization, which
must be taken into account when considering the
options mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General.

In conclusion, the issue of peace and security in
Africa entails many challenges. Japan is hopeful,
however, that the African countries can find a way
towards a bright future, and we are determined to
continue contributing to that process.
