Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for holding this important meeting.
We also thank the briefers Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michele Coninsx,
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, for their briefings and efforts.
We underscore our full support to them.

Today, in my statement I will focus on three main
issues: first, the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS/Da'esh); secondly, the challenges
facing the international community in fighting that
threat; and, thirdly, the international cooperation that
we all desire.

First, with regard to the threat posed by Da'esh, the
number and scale of terrorist attacks launched by it has
recently decreased due to many factors, including the
efforts of the international community, in particular the
international coalition against Da'esh. That has led to a
significant decrease in the number ofits militants in Iraq
and Syria, which, according to relevant reports, is now
estimated to be between 14,000 and 18,000 militants.
However, Da'esh continues to pose a real and direct
threat. It is able to quickly adapt and transform and
to use its available capacities and financial resources,
in coordination with other terrorist groups, in order
to implement its plans whenever it can. We must take
into account that a significant number of its militants
are returning, relocating or released foreign fighters.
Hence, our responsibility now is to unite international,
regional and subregional efforts and to promote the
effective use of tools and measures to keep pace with
the rapid tactical changes made by Da'esh to implement
its agenda and plans.

We reaffirm what was stated in the joint ministerial
statement adopted at the meeting of Foreign Ministers of
the Global Coalition against Da'esh, held in Washington,
DC, on 6 February, concerning the commitment of the
Coalition States to the guiding principles adopted in
Kuwait in 2018.

Secondly, with regard to the challenges facing
the international community in fighting that threat,
perhaps the most prominent of those challenges facing
us today is the ability of Da'esh to finance its terrorist
actions through acquired financial assets estimated
at between $50 million and $300 million, or by self-
funding through illicit actions such as blackmailing,
kidnapping for ransom and transnational organized
crime, as well as the use of social media and other
kinds of media. Da'esh spreads its message through
the media in order to recruit and to announce its local
actions and news, in addition to the negative impact
of returnees or relocating foreign fighters and their
families. All those challenges require international and
national preventive measures within comprehensive
national strategies to address the financing of terrorism
and to counter terrorist narratives. That includes the
implementation of the provisions of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 2354 (2017), as well as the implementation
of the comprehensive international framework to
counter terrorist narratives and other relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We stress the importance for Member States to
implement resolution 2396 (2017), which calls for
reassessing the situation of individuals returning
from conflict zones and their families and applying
administrative justice by adopting special legislation
in every country that focuses on a comprehensive and
clear concept for rehabilitation, within mechanisms in
line with the Madrid Guiding Principles and in respect
for human rights.

Concerning the crimes committed by Da'esh, we
stress the need to hold the perpetrators accountable,
including for those crimes that amount to war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. We support
the international mechanism established by resolution
2379 (2017) to support local efforts to hold Da'esh
accountable. We commend the tremendous efforts of
the sisterly Iraqi Government in fighting Da'esh and in
liberating the Iraqi territories.

Thirdly, with regard to the desired international,
regional and subregional cooperation to fight the
security challenges posed by terrorist groups to
the entire international community, that requires
the following: exchanging information, improving
protection, addressing the root causes of terrorism,
and preventing incitement to terrorism. We must also
remove the sources of revenue of terrorist groups, train
law enforcement officers, ensure support for young
people and education and sign bilateral and multilateral
agreements. The current cooperation among United
Nations agencies and bodies, regional organizations
and Member States pertaining to capacity-building and
the exchange of expertise is critical and essential and
we look forward to further promoting it.

In conclusion, we should all be aware that, while the
Global Coalition has made military advances against
Da'esh and the international community has made
tremendous efforts to eradicate Da'esh, that terrorist
group continues to pose a threat to international
peace and security. It is a global group with a
centralized leadership. If we do not unite the efforts
of the international community in order to target the
financial, logistical, military, intelligence, security and
media networks of the group, it will re-emerge in crisis
and conflict hotspots and the international community
will suffer great losses.

We in the State of Kuwait renew our firm
position of condemning terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations regardless of the motivations behind
it. Terrorism is a criminal act that is unjustifiable and
must not be linked to any religion, nationality, culture
or ethnicity. Fighting terrorism requires mobilizing the
efforts of the international community to overcome this
criminal scourge by taking measures to respect human
rights, the rule of law and good governance.

