Mr. Oshima (Japan): The Japanese delegation
welcomes the timely holding of this important debate
today and expresses its appreciation to the delegation
of South Africa for the initiative taken.

In many regions of the world, regional
organizations are strengthening their capabilities,
including in the area of peace and security, and their
relationships with the United Nations are entering a
new stage of collaboration and cooperation, especially
in Africa. Regional organizations obviously benefit
from their closer knowledge of the region, which
allows them to play an essential role in influencing the
prevention of conflicts and the resolution of problems.

We have already burgeoning examples of
developments in complementary cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, notably in Africa. We are witnessing a
growing body of practices where such a development
in cooperation and partnership is contributing to an
effective maintenance of international peace and
security, in particular in the fields of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

At the same time, it is clear that there is still
much room for further thought and action if the
international community is to fully realize the
advantages to be derived from effective
implementation of provisions envisaged in Chapter
VIII of the Charter. The challenges now laid before the
Security Council in, for example, Darfur and Somalia,
in terms of how best the United Nations can support
regional initiatives relevant to these conflicts,
demonstrate the importance of addressing this matter
with some urgency.

The efforts employed by African States for
developing the increasingly vibrant and action-oriented
African Union, and the other subregional
organizations, merit our praise and support. In Africa,
the African Union (AU) and a host of subregional
organizations have come to play crucial roles in
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in
recent years. Africa is unquestionably at the forefront
of the regional initiatives in these areas and should
rightly be so. The Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) has played a vital role
recently in conflict prevention in Guinea. The African
Union has its AU Mission in Sudan (AMIS) deployed
in Darfur, and the AU Observer Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is beginning to be deployed. The AU Task
Force in Burundi is providing the necessary conditions
for the peacebuilding activities in the country. Those
are but a few examples of the ongoing African regional
initiatives and leadership through regional and
subregional organizations. We highly commend all
such activities as a sign of accelerating African
regional ownership.

On the other hand, the challenges facing Africa
are complex and diverse. A matter of central
importance in facing those challenges is to establish
and strengthen interactive relationships between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

While both the United Nations and the AU should
tackle the immediate challenges by taking appropriate
measures on a case-by-case basis, it would be
worthwhile from a longer-term perspective to give
careful study to several questions. First, what are the
conditions and modalities for assisting AU peace
support missions? Secondly, how could the two
organizations develop more effective cooperation in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding activities?
Thirdly, how can the United Nations Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council best interact?
Fourthly, is there any way to ensure effective use of the
provisions in Chapter VIII of the Charter so that the
interactive relationships are firmly anchored, backed
by the broad support of the membership?

The concept paper for this debate prepared by the
presidency (S/2007/148) provides a useful basis for
further discussion, and we thank the delegation of
South Africa for it. With respect to providing political,
physical and financial assistance to AU peace support
missions, we believe that the Security Council should
make decisions on a case-by-case basis, based on all
general principles governing United Nations
peacekeeping operations and taking fully into account
the independence and accountability of each
organization.

In addition to the aforementioned issues, which
will require further discussion, measures to address
capacity-building for the African Union and the
subregional organizations, including enhancing the
capacities of their respective secretariats, require
urgent attention so as to assist them in their operations
to deploy missions in the field.

In this connection, we commend the African
Union for its efforts to establish the capability to
operationalize the African Standby Force and to
integrate the New Partnership for Africa's
Development into the AU. We also welcome the fact
that, in consultation with the AU secretariat, the
Secretary-General and his team have been developing a
framework for the Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme for the African Union, which resulted in
the adoption last year of a declaration between the two
organs and an action plan for United Nations assistance
to building the AU peacekeeping capacity. Dialogue
and coordination between the United Nations and the
AU are essential, and we thus appreciate the very close
daily communication and coordination efforts by the
two secretariats. We encourage the continuation of
such positive developments.

Japan has supported the efforts and activities of
the African Union and of the subregional organizations
through a variety of measures, including financial
support, and is willing to increase its support further.
Japan has been providing financial assistance to the
AU, ECOWAS and the Southern African Development
Community, for example. Its support for the AU
activities in Darfur totals approximately $8.7 million,
and it provided $2 million for the reintegration project
in the Great Lakes region in 2006.
7

Japan's commitment to supporting the key
concept and practice of African ownership is enshrined
in a number of documents, including those produced in
the course of the G8 summits, the most recent example
of which is the "Update on Africa" issued at the St.
Petersburg summit last year. We would also like to note
that the Government of Japan will organize the Fourth
Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD IV) in the first half of next year.
TICAD IV will certainly contribute to nurturing the
partnership between the international community and
African countries.

We fully share the belief in the importance of
building on today's discussion, which has yielded a
number of useful ideas and food for thought, in an
effort to seek a more effective and efficient
relationship between the United Nations and the
African Union. Based on our continued strong
commitment to Africa, we are prepared to be
constructive in such endeavours.

In this respect, I would like to offer my
delegation's support for the draft presidential statement
to be issued after today's debate.

