Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): It
has been the consistent View of China that the principle
of respect for sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and non-interference in domestic affairs
should be upheld in international relations. That is also
the core principle in the foreign policy of China. It is
also a fundamental principle established in the United
Nations Charter. China fully understands and supports
the desire and demand of Lebanon to establish
diplomatic relations and to define its borders with its
neighbours. We sincerely hope that Lebanon and Syria
will continue bilateral dialogue so that an appropriate
solution can be gradually found.

In the light of that, China hoped that the sponsors
of today's draft resolution would make corresponding
changes to the draft text so that consensus could be
reached in the Council and a positive, balanced and
constructive message could be sent out. We have taken
note, with appreciation, of the efforts made by the
sponsors. Regrettably, the changes made did not
resolve our fundamental concerns. Therefore, China
was obliged to abstain in the voting on the draft
resolution.

At present, Lebanon is at a crucial historical
turning point. We congratulate the Government and the
people of Lebanon on the progress that they have
made. We sincerely hope that stability and unity can be
maintained in Lebanon, which would not only
contribute to domestic security and development but
would promote the peace and stability of its neighbours
and of the entire Middle East region.

All external help should be offered with a
constructive attitude. It should take into full
consideration the sensitivity and complexity of the
issues concerned and should avoid adding new
elements of instability. China is ready to join the rest of
the international community in a common effort to find
solutions to questions between Palestine and Israel,
between Syria and Lebanon, and between Lebanon and
Israel, so that a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
can be established in the Middle East at an early date.

