Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank Mr. Boris Tadie, President of
the Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Skender Hyseni,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Kosovo, for their presence. We listened very
attentively to both of them. I should also like to
commend the activities of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, and
his team, who have effectively and pragmatically
implemented the reconfiguration of the international
presence decided upon by the Secretary-General with
the support of the Security Council.

Last month, Kosovo celebrated the first
anniversary of its declaration of independence. Today's
Security Council meeting is the occasion for a first
assessment, which we regard as mostly positive. As we
had hoped, independence has helped to ease tensions
within Kosovo and in the Balkans, and Kosovo's new
authorities have displayed responsibility and honoured
their commitments. The establishment of a constitution
that conforms to European standards and values and
the adoption of a law promoting the participation of
minorities are both important steps towards a rule of
law that serves all communities, with the support of,
inter alia, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). The increasing number of States,
including States of the region, that have recognized
Kosovo are contributing to the new State's emergence
on the international scene and to the stability of the
Balkans. This first anniversary attests to the path
traversed by Kosovo and the region; it should also be
an encouragement to continue. The building of the rule
of law must continue.
The reorganization of the international presence
is being carried out in favourable conditions. The
European Union is providing essential support with the
deployment of the EULEX mission, which is assisting
in the establishment of institutions and the rule of law
in Kosovo. EULEX is operating within the framework
of resolution 1244 (1999) under overall United Nations
authority. Through the deployment of EULEX and the
appointment of a Special Representative, the European
Union is seeking to contribute to the building of a
democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo. Protecting
minorities' rights is a priority for EULEX, which will
endeavour to fully implement the agreements signed by
Kosovar authorities in this area.

As EULEX has been deployed, the inhabitants of
Kosovo progressively realized that, in spite of the
negative propaganda of some extremist groups, the
European Mission's efforts were benefiting the entire
population and every community. However, we have
noted with concern the recent attacks against EULEX,
which seem to be perpetrated by individuals with ties
to criminal networks seeking to preserve the conditions
that enable them to act with impunity.

The Secretary-General believed that the
reconfiguration of the international presence should be
included in the dialogue involving all concerned
parties. This dialogue is essential to ensuring the
stability of Kosovo and the region. That is why, over
recent months, the European Union has pursued and
intensified the dialogue, addressing first of all, of
course, the Kosovo authorities and communities, as
well as neighbouring countries.

Serbia is an essential stakeholder among those
countries, and its cooperation is indispensable to the
success of EULEX. It is in this spirit that the EULEX
Head of Mission, Mr. De Kermabon, has just arrived in
Belgrade. We welcome the fact that he thus has an
opportunity to seek out practical solutions to the
concrete problems that arise, for example, in terms of
customs and legal cooperation.

We have taken note of the positions expressed by
President Tadie, and I would note above all his strong
reaffirmation of the will of the Serbian Government to
join the European Union, which would be an important
factor in stabilizing the entire Balkan region. By
supporting the initiatives of the European Union to
contribute to the peace and stability of the region, the
Serbian authorities are participating in the efforts to
laying the groundwork for a shared European future for
the western Balkans.

We also listened closely to Mr. Hyseni. The rule
of law, the wish to build a multi-ethnic State that
respects minorities, the desire to have friendly relations
with Kosovo's neighbours and the pro-European
10
commitment of the Kosovo authorities are major
commitments that we should welcome.

Beyond the persistent differences of opinion
expressed by President Tadic' and Minister Hyseni, we
note with satisfaction their common wish to preserve
stability in the region and safeguard the conditions
necessary to a shared future within Europe. We
therefore encourage Belgrade and Pristina to renew
direct dialogue as soon as possible.

The European Union is fully conscious of its
responsibilities in overcoming the obstacles on the path
towards a stable and prosperous future for the western
Balkans. It is in this spirit that we will strive for
progress in the coming months on the path of a shared
future for the Serb and Kosovar people in the European
Union.

