Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ambassadors Patriota and Skoog for their
briefings earlier. I also thank Ambassador Patriota for
his work as the outgoing Chair of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
especially during the outbreak of the Ebola virus in
the three countries on the PBC's agenda. I congratulate
Ambassador Skoog, who is doing important work as
the 2015 Chair of the Organizational Committee, and
the chairs of the country-specific configurations. We
are grateful for their efforts to rally support from the
international community to assist many of the world's
most fragile States in recovering from conflict.

It is clear from the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (S/2015/174) that we have made some
progress in preventing conflict and building conditions
for lasting peace in some places. The Commission
has played a critical role in assisting Guinea-Bissau,
helping focus donor engagement and building domestic
capacity in the security and health sectors. In Liberia,
the Commission's engagement, specifically in the
justice and rule oflaw sectors, has helped build capacity
ahead of a planned drawdown of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia.

It is also clear that gaps still exist between our
collective aspirations for helping fragile States to
solidify peace and the realities in practice and on the
ground. The purpose for which the peacebuilding
architecture was created in 2005 - preventing relapse
into violent conflict - remains easy to talk about but
hard to do. And it is a challenge for all of us. In places
like Burundi and the Central African Republic we are
keenly aware of how important it is that the international
community sustain and increase our joint efforts.

The PBC has an important role in complementing
the work of the Security Council in post-conflict
countries on the Commission's agenda - engaging
international financial institutions, raising the profile
of needs that are not being met and bringing to the
attention of Member States issues that could put peace
at risk. It is an art, not a science, and each case has
unique challenges and unique solutions. There is no
single prescription for how to ensure that peace is
sustained, but there are key factors that should be of
concern to the Peacebuilding Commission.

In the aftermath of the tragic outbreak of Ebola
in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Guinea - all countries on
the Commission's agenda - the PBC played a critical
supportive role in bringing together all the relevant
actors to fight the disease, working in concert with
the efforts of the Security Council, the relevant United
Nations agencies, the United Nations Secretariat
and international partners. Weak national capacity
in the aftermath of conflict can have devastating
consequences, as the outbreak of the Ebola Virus
demonstrated, and the Peacebuilding Commission must
apply itself urgently to bringing together the technical
and financial resources required to build post-conflict
countries' capacity to meet the needs of their people.

The Peacebuilding Commission has played
an important role in refocusing the international
community on the immense challenges that remain in
the Central African Republic. We are optimistic that the
Bangui Forum helped advance that country on its path
towards peace. Yet as the Commission has highlighted,
the Central African Republic's road ahead will remain
difficult, and it requires sustained and significant
support from international partners.

We echo the Commission's call to all stakeholders
in the Central African Republic to help promote an
environment conducive to holding elections, and we
echo its concerns about the $21 million gap in the
funding for the election's budget. We urge all partners
to consider making additional contributions to support
elections in the Central African Republic, advance
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration efforts
and address other urgent priorities essential to that
country's stabilization. The Commission continues to
play an important leadership and convening role as the
Central African Republic advances towards stability,
and it must work to ensure that we remain focused on
the tasks at hand.

We appreciate the Peacebuilding Commission's
special emphasis on engaging regional actors in fragile
settings, particularly the neighbours of those countries
on the Commission's agenda. The Commission has
played a welcome role in encouraging Senegal's
engagement in Guinea-Bissau, as well as in promoting
a dialogue in the dispute between the two countries
over the Casamance region. The Commission has also
engaged the members of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) in their planning
for long-term stability in Guinea-Bissau, recognizing
the essential role of the ECOWAS security mission in
Guinea-Bissau in helping to provide stability on the
ground. That is critical work, and it should continue.

The Commission must ensure that women are
integrated into every step ofpost-conflict peacebuilding.
They must be empowered to make and invest in
choices about the future of their societies. Working
with the Government of Liberia, the Peacebuilding
Commission has ensured the greater involvement of
civil society, including women's groups, in the national
reconciliation process, in addition to promoting an
increased allocation of funds for gender issues from the
Peacebuilding Fund. As a result of the Commission's
engagement, Liberia is one of the countries where the
allocation of the fund for gender-related issues is higher
than the 15 per cent target set by the Secretary-General
in his report on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466).

While we recognize that the Peacebuilding
Commission has had some successes over the past
year in meeting some of those challenges, it is also
critical that we understand the challenges facing it
and its work, including those outlined in the recently
released report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations. As documented in that report, the
Peacebuilding Commission has not met expectations
that its focus would include, importantly, prevention.

By comparison with those provided once a
conflict is under way, prevention efforts often lack
the necessary attention and resources. Moreover, in
contrast to mediation and peacekeeping, the prevention
of armed conflict is approached in an ad hoc manner,
without cohesion among the actors - diplomatic,
political, development or economic. As the Panel's
report clearly states, "Put simply, the international
community is failing at preventing conflict". Failing
to prevent a relapse into crisis is costly, both in terms
of human lives and in the time and resources needed
after a country has relapsed. It is a failure we cannot
afford not to address. The peacebuilding architecture
must play a critical role in that effort. In that vein, we
welcome the five-year review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture currently under way as a
tool for addressing some of those challenges.

The year 2015 is a significant one for United Nations
peacebuilding as the international community focuses
on the need to pay close attention to the key components
of lasting peace after conflict - national ownership,
social and political inclusivity, institution-building and
predictable financing. We look forward to working
with the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office, as well as
other United Nations and international actors, on how
to best respond to the needs of countries emerging from
conflict and to solidify the gains made in countries as
they transition to a lasting peace.

