At the outset, I would like to express our gratitude to the Russian Federation for organizing this debate on the maintenance of international peace and security in connection with the situation in the Persian Gulf region. I would also like to add the Niger's voice to those of the other nations of the world to convey our most heartfelt condolences to the people and the Government of Kuwait following the death of His Highness the Amir of the State of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah. This is an excellent opportunity for the Security Council to discuss an issue that is of great importance to global security. Peace and stability in the Persian Gulf is an absolute necessity for the Middle East and, moreover, the world. I remain convinced that the various contributions to this debate will lead to concrete proposals that will enable us to find solutions to the many challenges facing the region. The Middle East, and in particular the Persian Gulf region, rich in diversity and with immense natural resources, have all the necessary assets to ensure prosperity and peace for their 200 million inhabitants. Indeed, the countries of the region hold the world's largest reserves of oil and gas, share largely the same Islamic culture and are bound by the same millennial history and geography. But unfortunately, the region continues to be the theatre of wars and tensions among countries that were destined to live in peace and harmony. As in most conflicts, the interference of international actors is the primary cause of the instability and persistent tensions in this region. These international actors, each protecting its interests through alliances and agreements with the countries of the region, contribute to fierce rivalries between countries, against the backdrop of an arms race that is increasingly worrisome. The creation of a truly inclusive regional security system as a basis for ensuring a decent future for all the peoples of this region of the world is also inextricably linked to the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. My delegation remains convinced that neither Israel nor the Palestinians can ultimately and sustainably realize their legitimate aspirations for security for one and the creation of an independent and viable State for the other without a negotiated solution based on the relevant Security Council resolutions and international law, namely, the creation of two States living side by side. Likewise, concerning the conflicts in Syria and Yemen, which have direct consequences for the entire region, my delegation remains convinced that there can be no military solution to those crises. The only viable way to resolve them must be the resolute quest for a lasting political solution, inspired and supported by the Syrians and Yemenis themselves, with the support of the United Nations on the basis of its relevant resolutions. We call on the international community, and the United Nations in particular, to spare no effort in supporting peace processes and finding solutions to humanitarian challenges, which are amplified by the persistence of conflict. Regarding the 2015 Iranian nuclear agreement, endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 2231 (2015), the Niger, like the overwhelming majority of Council members, remains convinced that that resolution remains the appropriate international legal framework for the settlement of disputes on the issue. We therefore encourage all parties to remain committed to its full implementation and to act responsibly and in accordance with the standards of multilateralism. I wish to reiterate my country's conviction that there is no alternative to multilateralism and dialogue in the resolution of conflicts involving several nations. I wish also to reiterate our support for the call by the Secretary-General for a comprehensive ceasefire on all parties to the conflict in the region and to commit to respecting international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. Notwithstanding certain violent episodes in the region that have on occasion given rise to pessimism, we remain convinced that the achievement of a prosperous and peaceful Middle East where good-neighbourly relations and friendship predominate, on the basis of mutual respect and of the principle of non-interference, is possible. To that end, the Persian Gulf must be equipped with an inclusive mechanism for cooperation and dispute settlement, with a strong involvement on the part of the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the United Nations. The Council could support such a regional initiative, as it would constitute a strong signal of recognition of the key role that regional organizations play in the peaceful settlement of conflict. In addition, the United Nations could strengthen its presence and become more involved in the quest for solutions to the crises in the Persian Gulf by appointing a representative or a special envoy. I would end my remarks by quoting from the address by His Excellency Mr. Issoufou Mahamadou, President of the Republic of the Niger, to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session: "The impact of the [coronavirus disease] pandemic requires us to revisit the way in which we organize ourselves. What worked 75 years ago no longer works" (see A/75/PV.8). That reflection applies especially to that particular region of the world.
