Mr. Wittig (Germany): Today's unanimous
authorization of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria (UNSMIS) is an important, far-
reaching step. We supported resolution 2043 (2012)
because we stand entirely behind the efforts of Joint
Special Envoy Kofi Annan to achieve a sustainable
cessation of violence and to facilitate a political
transition process in Syria. We supported the resolution
3
because we share the assessment made by Mr. Annan
and the Secretary-General that the deployment of
observers under the right conditions could positively
influence dynamics on the ground.

At the same time, we must all be aware that the
decision taken today is not without risks. Clearly, the
cessation of armed violence is incomplete. The
authorities in Damascus continue their attacks on the
population, they continue to shell the city of Homs
with artillery and they have not withdrawn their troops
and tanks to their barracks.

Other forms of violence continue unabated, such
as arbitrary detention, torture, abduction, sexual
violence and violence against children, women and
minorities.

The Syrian Government continues to play for
time, despite its own commitment made to the Joint
Special Envoy and the repeated demands made by the
Security Council for the immediate and full
implementation of the six-point plan.

Our work is not done with the adoption of today's
resolution. To the contrary, our work has only begun.
We must now ensure that the observers have the
necessary security and can operate freely and in the
right conditions to effectively implement their
mandate. The new United Nations Mission must not,
under any circumstances, become a pawn in tactical
and political games.

We have made every effort to ensure that
resolution 2043 (212) adequately reflects those
concerns. It is now for the Syrian authorities to prove
that they live up to their responsibilities. If they do not
do so the Security Council has made it clear that it will
consider further steps.

We must remain vigilant. Too many commitments
made by Damascus in the past have not been kept. We
have therefore asked the Secretary-General to carefully
assess the conditions on the ground before deploying
personnel. We have also asked him to report
immediately and in short intervals on any obstruction
of the Mission. It will be our task to act appropriately.

The observers may contribute to solidifying a
cessation of armed violence, but they cannot substitute
for a political solution. The deployment of observers is
only one, albeit crucial, element of the six-point plan
by the Joint Special Envoy. We therefore welcome the
fact that UNSMIS will comprise civilian personnel

with relevant expertise, such as on human rights and
gender, to monitor and support the implementation of
the other aspects of the six-point plan.

Here, too, urgent action is required by Damascus.
As stated by the Secretary-General, actions on the
ground must be consistent with stated commitments to
carry out the six-point plan. For instance, the status and
circumstances of thousands of detainees remains
unclear and there are reports of significant abuses. No
substantive progress has been achieved on
humanitarian access to those in need, or on increasing
the capacity of the humanitarian organizations on the
ground.

Clearly, the elements of the six-point plan are all
closely interlinked. We have today made an important
step on one of the six elements. Others need to follow
with the goal of enabling, as quickly as possible, a
political transition process towards a democratic and
pluralistic system. In our view, accountability for the
crimes committed must be a central element of the
transition process. We have repeatedly stressed that
there cannot be a return to the status quo ante.

In conclusion, I would like to applaud Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his strong leadership, and to
reiterate our full support to the efforts of Joint Special
Envoy Annan and his team.

