The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/645, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Ethiopia and Eritrea.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of the commitment of both Ethiopia
and Eritrea to lay the foundation for sustainable
peace in the region and, aware of the
responsibilities of the United Nations under the
Algiers Agreements, remains determined to
encourage and assist both countries in attaining
this objective.

"The Security Council underscores the
acceptance without preconditions by both
Ethiopia and Eritrea of the final and binding
delimitation decision of the Eritrea-Ethiopia
Boundary Commission (EEBC).

"The Security Council urges the parties to
take concrete steps to implement immediately and
without preconditions the delimitation decision of
the EEBC, taking into account the parties'
commitments regarding the Temporary Security
Zone (TSZ) as expressed at the EEBC meeting of
6-7 September 2007 and to comply fully with the
Algiers Agreements and prior Security Council
resolutions and statements of its President,
including on the issue of demarcation.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties
to refrain from using force and to settle their
disagreements by peaceful means, to normalize
their relations, to promote stability between them
and to lay the foundation for sustainable peace in
the region.

"The Security Council confirms the parties'
primary responsibility to resolve the border issue
and their other differences, and expresses its
readiness to endorse the commitments made by
both parties with respect to demarcation and
normalization.

"The Security Council strongly supports the
Secretary-General in any efforts to facilitate these
processes.

"The Security Council commends and fully
supports the continuing operations of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE), underscores the importance for the
parties to provide UNMEE with the necessary
access, assistance, support and protection
required for the implementation of its mandate
and welcomes the ongoing efforts by the
Secretary-General towards the earliest
appointment of a Special Representative."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/
2007/43.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.55 pm.
07-59593
