The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

Please allow me to express my thanks to France as
the penholder of resolution 2502 (2019), adopted today.
The United States fully supports the revised mandate,
which should improve the performance of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, consistent with the
request of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo that the Mission become leaner, better
equipped and better trained, with a stronger mandate
for the protection of civilians.

The United States has historically been and
will continue to be a strong supporter of meaningful
accountability and justice for victims of atrocities
through appropriate mechanisms. However, the United
States does not and cannot support any references to
the International Criminal Court (ICC) and the Rome
Statute that do not distinguish sufficiently between
parties and non-parties to the Rome Statute or are
otherwise inconsistent with the United States position
on the ICC, as announced by the White House on
10 September 2018. In particular, the United States
reiterates our continuing and long-standing objection
to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of
States that are not parties to the Rome Statute, including
the United States and Israel, absent a referral from the
Security Council or the consent of such a State.

Our position on the ICC in no way diminishes our
commitment to supporting accountability for atrocity
crimes. The United States remains a leader in the
fight to end impunity and in supporting justice and
accountability for international crimes, including war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. The
United States respects the decision of those nations that
have chosen to join the ICC and, in turn, we expect that
our decision not to join the Court and not to place our
citizens under its jurisdiction will also be respected.

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

