Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire congratulates you, Mr. Minister, on your
country's outstanding leadership of the work of the
Security Council, and thanks the British delegation
for organizing this important meeting dedicated to
the situation in Myanmar. My delegation also thanks
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his detailed
briefing on the situation of the Rohingya people in
Myanmar and Bangladesh. Lastly, we thank Under-
Secretary-General Tegegnework Gettu, Associate
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, and Ms. Cate Blanchett, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Goodwill
Ambassador, for their excellent briefings.

One year since the beginning of the crisis on
25 August 2017, which led to the large-scale displacement
of populations, the majority of whom were women and
children, the situation in Myanmar - especially with
regard to issues concerning Rohingya displacedpersons,
refugees and human rights in Rakhine state - continues
to draw the attention of the international community.
Despite the progress made since the Security Council's
mission to Myanmar and Bangladesh from 28 April
to 1 May, enormous challenges remain with regard to
the conditions necessary for the return of Rohingya
refugees to their homes and to the complex humanitarian
and human rights situation. Cote d'Ivoire remains
convinced of the need to work collectively to find a
lasting and viable solution to the crisis so as to end the
tragedy that the Rohingya populations in Bangladesh
and Myanmar are enduring daily.

Moreover, it is important to stress that no lasting
solution to this crisis situation will be possible without
Myanmar's full involvement. My delegation therefore
welcomes the commitment of the Government of
Myanmar to working henceforth with the United Nations
within the framework of the tripartite memorandum
of understanding signed on 6 June, with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Development Programme,
and in close cooperation with Ms. Christine Schraner
Burgener, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
on Myanmar. In that regard, my country encourages
the Myanmar authorities to work harder towards
the re-establishment of trust, which will be the
determining factor in ensuring the effective, voluntary
return of the Rohingya refugees in safe, dignified and
sustainable conditions to their places of origin or to a
location of their choice, in accordance with presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/22, issued on 6 November
2017. Furthermore, as part of the fulfilment of that
commitment, it would be fitting for the Government
of Myanmar to consider options to facilitate wider
access to the relevant United Nations agencies and their
partners, in particular in Rakhine state, so as to enable
them to provide humanitarian assistance to those
populations in need.
Cote d'Ivoire continues to believe that genuine
and sustained cooperation between Bangladesh and
Myanmar will contribute effectively to resolving the
crisis. In that regard, my country welcomes the signing
of an agreement on 10 August between the two countries
concerning, inter alia, the repatriation of refugees and
the establishment of a direct telephone line linking
their Foreign Ministers. My delegation hopes that that
new agreement, which is in keeping with the spirit
of the bilateral agreement of 23 November 2017, will
allow for the voluntary, safe and dignified repatriation
of the Rohingya refugees. My country also believes
that a lasting solution to the crisis depends on the
artful management of its root causes. To that end, Cote
d'Ivoire encourages Myanmar to take bold steps to find
solutions to core problems.

The issue of the return of the Rohingya displaced
persons and refugees also brings to the fore the
problem of social cohesion, which must be restored
among the various communities living in Myanmar,
in particular in Rakhine state. The role of civil society
could be decisive to that end. My delegation therefore
welcomes the initiative of religious leaders to assume
a role with regard to that issue, and supports their
work to promote peace and reconciliation within their
country's communities. Moreover, my delegation
believes that concrete measures should be taken, based
on the inclusive economic and social development
of Rakhine state, to ensure a decent and sustainable
future for refugees and displaced persons, which would
encourage their voluntary return. That was the gist of
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, led by the late former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, whose memory we once again honour.
The Commission recommended solutions pertaining
to the economic development of Rakhine state with a
view to ensuring peace and security in the country and
to improving the living conditions of all segments of
its population.

Undeniably, the fight against impunity is a priority
issue with regard to managing the crisis. As the
Secretary-General rightly mentioned during his visit
to Bangladesh refugee camps on 2 July, the Rohingya
refugees are demanding justice with respect to a
situation that is probably "one of the most tragic stories
in relation to the systematic violation of human rights".

The information contained in the report of the
Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on
Myanmar ofthe Human Rights Council (A/HRC/39/64),
released on 27 August, which sheds light on blatant
human rights violations committed by the army and
other security forces of Myanmar, is a source of serious
concern for the Council. My delegation therefore
urges the Government of Myanmar to take urgent
measures to ensure that those responsible for human
rights violations, in particular those involving women
and children, are held accountable. In that regard,
the establishment of an independent commission of
inquiry to assign responsibility for alleged human
rights violations should help meet the challenge
of accountability.

In conclusion, I would be remiss were I not
to point out the importance of adopting a regional
approach to settling this crisis, which remains essential
to maintaining peace and security in that part of the
world. In that regard, my delegation commends the
leadership of the Chinese Government and pays tribute
to the Government and the people of Bangladesh for
their great generosity. cote d'Ivoire also calls on the
donor community and all relevant actors to provide
special support, following the example of the World
Bank, for Bangladesh, which, in its 20 July letter to the
Security Council, drew the attention of the international
community to the possible damage to security that
could result from the continued presence of Rohingya
refugees within its territory.

Cote d'Ivoire once again calls on the international
community to firmly commit to supporting Myanmar
in its quest for peace and stability, as well as in its
reconstruction efforts.

