The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank the
Security Council for its consideration of the effectiveness
of United Nations support to the promotion of the rule
of law in conflict and post-conflict situations.

In January last year, the Council requested the
Secretary-General to submit a report on this subject.
Since that request, we have been working hard to
analyse and improve our institutional arrangements
in order to maximize the impact of our work on the
ground. Today, I will provide an interim briefing on
our efforts. We will report fully to the Council in June,
once we have better assessed the results of our efforts.

The General Assembly's historic - and I
intentionally use the word "historic" - High-level
Meeting on the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels in September 2012 recognized
the Security Council's positive contributions in this
field. Eighteen of 23 Security Council missions include
rule of law activities in their mandates. The Meeting's
Declaration (General Assembly resolution 67/1) also
emphasized that the rule of law provides keys to
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. Indeed, delivering justice and
security through the rule of law mitigates conflict and
helps reduce the risk of relapse into further conflict.
The Declaration also requested the Secretary-General
to ensure greater coordination and coherence among
United Nations entities and with Member States to
improve the effectiveness of our rule oflaw efforts.

In his 2011 report to the Council (S/2011/634), the
Secretary-General acknowledged the need for stronger
policy coherence to achieve real changes and results on
the ground. At that time, roles and responsibilities were
not clearly delineated, and there was no single lead
guiding the United Nations system in this work. After
internal consultations, the Secretary-General made
a decision in September to realign our institutional
response to the challenges we face in supporting the
rule of law in conflict and post-conflict States.

At the field level, the Secretary-General enhanced
United Nations field leadership, making leaders
responsible and accountable for guiding United Nations
rule of law strategies, addressing local challenges, and
coordinating United Nations country support on the
rule of law. At the same time, United Nations agencies
in the field continue to be responsible for carrying out
programmes in their respective areas of expertise.

At Headquarters, the Secretary-General designated
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) as the joint global focal point for the police,
justice and corrections areas in post-conflict and other
crisis situations in order to support field leadership in
carrying out its responsibilities. The aim is to link all
relevant United Nations entities and coordinate our
support to the field.

At the strategic level, the Secretary-General
strengthened the role of the Rule of Law Coordination
and Resource Group, which I have the honour to chair.
The Group aims to ensure that the United Nations
can foresee and address emerging opportunities and
mobilize our partners in response. We plan later this year
to assess the impact of these institutional arrangements.
I have confidence that they are appropriate and useful.

At the same time, we have to acknowledge that
evaluating the impact of our work is not easy. This is
especially true in complex environments where it can
take a long time to see real change and the effects of our
actions. For instance, justice and security sector reform
may not be linear; in some cases, progress can be very
uneven. Rule of law work also demands a holistic
approach that links justice, security and development
and that aims to reach vulnerable groups in society. All
these processes are difficult to measure. While there
has been significant progress in measuring impact in
many sectors, rule of law measures continue to lack
the benefit of systematically collected and analysed
information with which to measure the impact.

Even where we can measure tangible progress, it is
difficult to attribute it to a particular entity's assistance.
We need baseline data to understand the context,
define the objectives and measure progress. All rule
of law initiatives should, in my view, be subjected to
such analysis. We are working hard to ensure that this
happens. In Malawi, for example, information from the
UNDP-supported justice baseline study was used to
shape the Government's democratic governance reform
strategy. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, UNDP-led public
surveys have played a role in the development of a
national transitional justice strategy.

The improved availability and quality of national
rule of law data would assist us in evaluating the impact
of our work. Such data support national policymaking
and enable an informed public to hold Governments
accountable. That is very important, in my view. Data
gathering should, however, clearly not be seen as an
exercise in ranking countries. It is, rather, a tool for
Governments to set their own priorities and, where
needed, galvanize international support. National
ownership is an aspect of the work of the rule of law.

I encourage Governments to make pledges to
support these data collection efforts in conflict and
post-conflict States. Such pledges would build on those
made at the General Assembly High-level Meeting of
24 September, which generated more than 400 pledges
to strengthen the rule of law. This is a very encouraging
sign of the interest taken in this new and growing
momentum on the rule of law. Better data will help
us tobetter plan and prioritize so that we can optimize
resources, carry out more accurate assessments and
mitigate risks.

The United Nations has developed a number of
tools to help States advance the rule of law. Let me,
again, offer some concrete examples. DPKO and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
have developed the United Nations Rule of Law
Indicators Project, which allows Governments to gather
information on law enforcement and justice and prison
systems, and measure their transformation over time.
This tool is now being used by the Governments of
Haiti, Liberia and South Sudan. Next year, UNDP will
also publish a user's guide to measuring rule of law,
justice and security programmes. As we continue to
enhance our ability to measure the impact of the United
Nations work, there is increasing evidence that our
efforts are indeed delivering results.

Here in the Security Council, I am gratified to note
that in Cote d'Ivoire, the United Nations peacekeeping
operation has supported the Ministry of Justice in
reopening 17 courts and 22 prisons, which is a very
concrete and substantial result. In Haiti, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti has supported
the start-up of 18 legal aid offices. In Serbia, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees worked with the Government and local
non-governmental organizations to help prevent
marginalized individuals from becoming stateless,
providing more than 20,000 Roma with official
documents. More than 250 persons have been indicted
by the ad hoc international criminal tribunals for war
crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide, and more
than 120 have been convicted to date. These initiatives
have shown results in helping to deliver justice while
setting societies on course for lasting stability.

In closing, let me reaffirm that there can be no
peace without development, no development without
peace, and neither without full respect for human
rights and the rule of law. The focus of the Security
Council on the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
situations underlines and strengthens this important
relationship. Together with the Secretary-General, I
deeply appreciate the Council's in-depth consideration
of the rule of law, and look forward to its continued
engagement.

