Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I welcome you,
Mr. President, back to New York and back to a debate
on a theme that you addressed with distinction when
you were Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
I would also like thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his very insightful briefing this morning.
He made a very important contribution when he was
President of the General Assembly, in 2005, when the
Peacebuilding Commission was established. It is good
to see him back at the Councl as we debate the problem
of how to make peacebuilding meet our needs. We have
not yet accomplished that task, as said by a number of
participants this morning.

The issue that brings us here together is fundamental
to ensuring long-lasting sustainable peace in countries
emerging from conflict. In the past years the United
Nations peacebuilding system has deployed important
resources to support countries to move forward from war
to peace and to development. While some experience has
been successful, as mentioned, in other cases the efforts
by national States, the United Nations and international
partners were not able to avert a relapse into conflict.
As we welcome the review of the peacebuilding
architecture after 10 years of the existence of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we expect that the review
will enable us to have a better understanding of the
challenges and insufficiencies. Above all, we hope that

it will provide us with recommendations to improve the
system, thereby rendering it more effective and better
able to serve goals for which it was established. Based
on our experiences as a post-conflict country, Angola
would like to share with the Council some views and
some flag some aspects that we consider essential in
order to ensure a successful peacebuilding process.
In political terms, taking into account the principle
of national ownership, peacebuilding requires
trust and good faith by the main stakeholders who
are working towards the achievement of genuine
national reconstruction. In Angola the peace and
reconstruction process required, in the first instance,
the extension of State authority to the whole country,
institution-building, respect for human rights and
the rule of law. Social and political inclusion is a
fundamental feature of any peacebuilding process. The
efforts deployed by the Angolan authorities to reach
out to former adversaries and to integrate them into
society, State institutions and economic life in general
was a determining factor for the success of peace,
reconstruction and nation-building.

Furthermore, the full participation of political
actors, women, youth, civil society and media in the
national debate led to the adoption of constitutional
and legal mechanisms associated with peacebuilding.
In social and economic terms, peacebuilding required
the rebuilding of infrastructure destroyed by war,
especially to provide basic services to the population
such as roads, bridges, railroads, airports, ports,
schools and hospitals. The success of the disarmament,
demobilization and social reintegration process of more
than 100,000 military personnel was a pivotal element
in the consolidation of peace, which established the
foundation for a sound social and economic recovery.

The prevalence of conflicts in general entails a
regional dimension. In the case of Angola it was the
struggle to end apartheid and colonialism in Southern
Africa and the external interference that fuelled the
conflict. As such, regional and subregional institutions
should be an integral part of the solution of conflicts
and of peacebuilding efforts. It is therefore essential
that the subregional dimension of peacebuilding be
properly addressed and that comprehensive solutions
be sought at the same time. The review of the
peacebuilding architecture offers a unique opportunity
to arrive at a clear definition of the partnership that
should be established between the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council as the organ with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance ofinternational peace and security.
However, the debate that was initiated some time ago
did not advance sufficiently - a shortcoming that we
hope the present review will also address.

In that connection, we hereby agree with the
suggestion made by Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
during our debate this morning on the need for synergies
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The joint
review of both peacekeeping operations, initiated by
the Secretary-General, and peacebuilding, now under
way, offers a very good opportunity to address the
critical problem of the allocation of resources, as both
peacekeeping and peacebuilding have to be seen as
complementary.

I would like to conclude by expressing our full
support for the presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/2)
adopted this morning. I think it is a good start for the
review we will undertake to ensure peacebuilding
definitively rests on foundations that are crucial for us
as an organ to play our essential role of keeping the
world at peace.

