Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Allow
me to associate myself, Mr. President, with the remarks
that you made to Ambassador Wang and to tell him
how much I have benefited from his wisdom and the
clarity of his analyses, in particular, as well as his
human warmth over the past months in the Council. I
personally thank him wholeheartedly and on behalf of
my delegation. At the same time, I would like to
welcome Ambassador Mufios of Chile and wish him all
the best at the Security Council.

I would like to thank Jean-Marie Guehenno for
his briefing and Mr. Costa for his complementary
statement. Bulgaria fully associates itself with the
declaration that will be made later on by the permanent
representative of Greece on behalf of the European
Union. But I would like to make a few comments in my
national capacity.

It is very difficult for me not to react to the rather
gloomy picture that Jean-Marie Guehenno has just
drawn concerning the security situation and other
matters in the Afghan provinces. I will not elaborate on
that in detail. I would just like to mention the fact that
only one fifth of the expected budget revenues have
been collected thus far in the Afghan provinces. One
third of Afghan territory is inaccessible to the United
Nations. These details and the human rights violations
that continue in Afghanistan should, in my View, cause
us to reflect on the situation.

Drug production is one of the most important
dimensions of the Afghan situation for the international
community, given that such production has
implications first for the country itself, for the region
and indeed for the entire world, especially for Europe. I
thank you, Sir, for having focused our discussion this
time on this subject. As you know, Bulgaria is
geographically on the so-called Balkan route, the drug
route that originates in Central Asia. The problem of
drug production in Afghanistan has always been of
central concern to us.

Bulgaria is following with growing concern the
trend towards stabilization of a rather high-level of
drug production that we are witnessing in Afghanistan,
and which Mr. Costa has just confirmed. In 2002, the
area of poppy cultivation in Afghanistan is estimated to
cover 74,000 hectares, and 3.3 million Afghans are
involved in poppy cultivation, which makes up more
than 20 per cent of Afghanistan's gross domestic
product. Between 70 and 90 per cent of heroine in
Europe comes from Afghanistan.

It must be noted - and here, I associate myself
with what Mr. Costa just told us - that, in the light of
that situation, we cannot expect that the problem of
poppy production in Afghanistan will be resolved in
the near future. However, we must not succumb to
fatalism, because poppy cultivation is not traditional in
Afghanistan, but, in terms of history, a relatively recent
phenomenon. But it currently seems to have structural
importance for the Afghan economy, and that,
therefore, is the main source of our concern.

The efforts that the Afghan Transitional
Administration is undertaking in its drug strategy
represent an important element that we fully support. I
shall not elaborate on the economic dimensions of the
problem. It is clear that, unless alternative sources of
income are created in the Afghan fields, it will be very
difficult to talk about any solution to the poppy
problem.

I take this opportunity to thank all the countries
that are doing important leadership work in this area:
the United Kingdom, as far as the drug problem itself
is concerned; Germany, with regard to modernizing the
Afghan police force; and Italy, as regards modernizing
the justice system and establishing the rule of law.

It is clear that one of the surest ways to deal with
the problem of poppy cultivation in Afghanistan is -
as Mr. Costa said - to reduce demand in the consumer
countries and the transit countries; there is now
practically no difference between them. From that
perspective, I must say that, according to the competent
Bulgarian authorities, a positive trend regarding the
Balkan drug route has been observed recently. The
quantities of drugs on that route are gradually
diminishing; alternative routes are being been taken. In
that regard, the Paris ministerial conference on drug
routes from Central Asia to Europe was a very
important and very useful event.

One of the explanations for this trend is perhaps
the fact that the countries of South-East Europe are
undertaking major efforts to coordinate their work in
this area, particularly within the framework of the
Regional Centre for Combating Trans-Border Crime,
which is part of the South-East European Cooperation
Initiative. In the Centre, there is a drug task force
headed by Bulgaria. Recently, in May, under the Greek
presidency of the European Union, a third regional
operation coordinated by the European Police Office
took place, with very satisfactory results. My country
is determined to continue to work within that
mechanism to further improve the cooperation of the
countries of the region and the subregion with regard to
drug trafficking.

Before concluding, I should like to associate
myself completely with the presidential statement to be
made regarding the problem.

