The Secretary-General: Let me start by thanking
you, Mr. President, and your delegation, for arranging
this important discussion on a key topic for all of us. It
is also good to welcome you back to New York.

Let me, in my turn, add my words to yours, Sir,
by thanking Ambassador Arias for the contribution he
has made to the United Nations and to this Council.
Mr. President, you have said it all, but I also agree with
you that we will miss his sense of realism and his wit.
With that wit he often pulls us back to what is possible,

what is real, and he encourages us not to drift too far
into wishful thinking. I think that is a quality that we
are going to miss. I think I speak for all of us when I
say that it has been a pleasure working with you,
Ambassador. We will miss you. I understand you are
going back to Madrid to arrange a championship
match. I hope we will all be invited. All the best,
Ambassador.

We are facing a time of surging demand for
United Nations peacekeeping. Last month there were
more than 53,000 troops, military observers and
civilian police serving in 15 United Nations missions
around the world, the highest number of personnel
since October 1995. Many of these missions are large
and complex. Most go beyond the limited military
functions that have marked traditional peacekeeping
missions.

Even more missions loom on the horizon. The
Security Council has recently authorized a new mission
in Haiti and has expanded the existing mission in Cote
d'lvoire. Missions are being planned for Burundi and
the Sudan. By the end of the year, to absorb the new
and enhanced missions, we may need an extra $1
billion for the United Nations peacekeeping budget,
which is currently $2.82 billion.

Our duty must be to meet this demand and to
seize the opportunities to bring longstanding conflicts
to an end. For millions of our fellow human beings,
United Nations peacekeeping missions offers their best
and sometimes only hope of emerging from conflict
towards a safe and stable future. A recent study by
Oxford University economists points out that the
economic cost of civil wars, in terms of lost revenue
and local and regional output, averages $128 billion
year and that, measured against the costs of conflict,
peacekeeping is extremely cost-effective.

Mr. President, your laudable initiative in
organizing this Security Council debate leads us to ask
two broad questions.

First, what is the nature of the peacekeeping
challenge that we face? And second, is the United
Nations able to do it - which really means, are you,
the Member States, ready and willing to do it?

Peacekeeping today has become increasingly
multidimensional. The missions you mandate are
implementing peace agreements, helping manage
political transitions, building institutions, supporting
economic reconstruction, organizing the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons, assisting
humanitarian aid programmes, supervising or even
organizing elections, monitoring human rights, clearing
minefields and disarming and demobilizing militias
and reintegrating their members into civil economy.

As the complexity of mandates has increased, so
too have public expectations about what these missions
can achieve. Peacekeeping operations are called to
assist when peace is often new and fragile, but they
must be part of a longer-term strategy to solidify the
foundation of peace, lest we find that, as in Haiti and
Liberia, we must return again. To this end, the
international community must better integrate the
security, political, economic and social levers that it
has at its disposal to keep and build peace in the
immediate post-conflict period and beyond. All the
United Nations departments, agencies and
programmes, not just the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, have their part to play in the peacekeeping
process. We must also ensure that our efforts to build
peace never lose sight of the fact that we are there to
assist and that it is the local population that must take a
lead in the decision-making that affects their lives.

Especially as the United Nations moves into non-
traditional aspects of peacekeeping, our peacekeepers
become targets for people who seek to disrupt the
political process, in the hope that further violence will
enable them to achieve their aims. It is the
responsibility of all of us to ensure that those who
serve the United Nations Charter in peacekeeping
missions are protected. To assess, guard against and
manage such threats, the United Nations needs to have
a clear picture of the environments in which it is
operating. United Nations peacekeeping operations
need not only information but the capacity to analyse
this information and the means to conduct their
mission.

How do we deal with these challenges? First, and
above all, we have to show commitment. The
international community must be prepared to stay the
course with political will and resources, particularly
during times of trial, to ensure that peace processes do
not falter and give way to renewed conflict.

This Council bears a heavy responsibility as the
body that mandates these difficult and dangerous
missions. To succeed, our peacekeepers need your
sustained solidarity and mandates that are clear,
implementable and achievable. It is up to you to lead
other Member States in ensuring that each mission
receives the troops and the resources it needs.

Your support is especially important when a
mission faces challenges to the legitimacy of its
mandate from would-be spoilers. United Nations
peacekeepers must be equipped to withstand such
challenges and to do their work effectively. For this
they need a robust mandate, shaped by clear political
objectives and backed by a strong international
consensus.

Furthermore, they must be provided with
adequate resources and appropriate reinforcement so
they can protect civilians, keep the peace and maintain
security when confronted by significant opposition.
With your help and that of the General Assembly,
we have been able to implement many of the
recommendations in the Brahimi report. We are
definitely more efficient and better coordinated than
we were five years ago. We are also better equipped,
both here at Headquarters and at our logistics base in
Brindisi, to support our field operations and to respond
more rapidly to sudden developments.

Notwithstanding these advances, the scale of the
current surge may well outstrip our capacities to
backstop the operations, and we will have to look at
augmenting these capacities.

United Nations missions remain hampered by a
lack of specialized military capacities, generally
available from the military forces of developed
countries. Unfortunately, these countries today make
only limited contributions of troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. At the same time, many
States that are willing suppliers of troops have great
difficulty in deploying staff within the necessary time
frames.

I urge Member States to do their utmost to help
fill these gaps so that United Nations peacekeeping
operations are able to draw on specialized capacities
and to deploy rapidly. The United Nations is also
working with regional, subregional and international
arrangements to ensure complementary capacities, for
example with early temporary force deployments that
can bridge the gap until the United Nations
peacekeepers can deploy.

Another critical gap is our urgent need of French-
speaking personnel, especially police, to tackle
assignments in Francophone countries. As we add or
expand missions this year in Haiti, Cote d'Ivoire and
possibly Burundi, that pressure will only intensify.

There is work to be done. I have outlined only
some of the challenges. The non-paper before the
Council provides a more comprehensive picture of the
whole range of challenges that must be overcome if we
are to meet the goals that we have set ourselves. Both
in theory and in reality, peacekeeping embodies the
spirit of the United Nations.

Through United Nations peacekeeping, the
international community comes together in a unique
way to pursue peace, using some measure of military
means. That was not originally envisaged in the
Charter, as we all know, but it is entirely in keeping
with the Charter's vision. Peacekeeping sends a
powerful signal of the international community's
intention to ensure that peace is preserved. But, to have
real effect, that signal must be reflected in Member
States' presence on the ground. Peacekeeping does not
relieve nations of their responsibilities. Rather, it pools
national responsibilities for the greater good.

The presence of peacekeeping troops sends a
signal that is all the more powerful when they come
from across the international community, from
countries rich and poor. So I urge Member States
across the United Nations to contribute troops.

The signal sent by a peacekeeping operation must
also be backed up by political commitment from
Member States. They play a key role in supporting
peace processes and encouraging the parties to
continue on the path to peace. Especially in these
difficult days, when our focus is on a few major crises,
the surge in peacekeeping will stretch the international
community's attention. Each new mission, each new
effort to resolve conflict, will depend for success on
the sustained political engagement of Member States,
participating directly in peacekeeping operations and
through diplomatic, political and other channels.

Our peacekeeping missions have a long
history - one that includes times of great pride and
times of great difficulty, if not failure. We must recall
the hard lessons of the past and ensure that, as we enter
this new period of surge, everything that can be done to
ensure success is done. Today's new missions must be
guaranteed the necessary resources and commitment to
handle the uniquely complex and challenging tasks to
which they are called.

