Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): At the outset, allow me to
extend our appreciation to Poland for convening today's
open debate and to the Secretary-General for the annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2019/509).
I would also like to thank the briefers, especially
Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for their remarkable work
and for their dedication and determination to improve
the well-being of children.

Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I would
like to highlight a few aspects of significance to
my country.

The fact that this year's report registers a spike
in a number of the categories of grave violations that
are subject to monitoring and recording is highly
alarming and testifies yet again of the horrific impact
and disproportionate effect that armed conflicts have
on children. There were more cases of verified killings
and maiming in 2018 than in any previous year. Sexual
violations have also reached an all-time high of 933
verified cases. We need to ask ourselves what we have
done to address the situation and what else we can do.

The international community has taken some
important steps in that direction. Resolution 2467
(2019), adopted earlier this year, has a strong focus on
the protection of children from sexual violence and
addresses children born of sexual violence.

Children are indisputably among the most
vulnerable groups during conflicts, which is even more
valid for young persons with disabilities. Resolution
2475 (2019), adopted last month at the initiative of
Poland and the United Kingdom, which Bulgaria also
co-sponsored, highlights that children with disabilities
require sustainable, timely, appropriate, inclusive and
accessible assistance. Furthermore, Bulgaria shares the
view that mental health, reintegration, rehabilitation
and psychosocial support are a conditio sine qua non for
the development of a child suffering the consequences
of a conflict, and we welcome the work by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mrs. Virginia
Gamba and UNICEF in that regard.

The objective of today's debate is to find measures
to remedy the challenges related to children and armed
conflict. Bulgaria is convinced that prevention is
key. Therefore, child protection and sexual violence
training for civilian and military personnel is crucial
before embarking on a mission. Bulgaria has endorsed
the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers, which are an instrument to operationalize
child protection within United Nations peacekeeping.

We are deeply concerned that very often children
allegedly associated with armed forces or groups are
being treated as perpetrators or a security threat, not as
victims. Detentions are not yet considered as a measure
of last resort. Therefore, the monitoring of and reporting
on the detention of children for being associated with
armed forces or groups need to continue and finding
alternatives to detention should be a priority.

Despite all the initiatives that have been put in
place, we need to improve efficiency and admit that
children's human rights are still being systematically
violated and abused. Furthermore, even with the
significant decrease in cases, humanitarian access is
still being denied to many children. Therefore, we urge
all conflicting parties to stop the violations and take
action to prevent them from occurring in the future. We
also call on all States to become a party to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, the
Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles.
Bulgaria is convinced that fighting impunity for such
grave crimes is an international concern. We continue
to see the role of the International Criminal Court as
essential in that regard.

To conclude, we need to do a great deal more to
ensure that children are protected, and we need to do
it consistently. Our main focus should be on prevention
and on ensuring that those already affected have a
chance to live in dignity and to flourish.

