Mr. Arreaza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is finally our turn to speak. We
have a written statement, but I would like to make a few
preliminary remarks.

We would also like to thank Mr. Mike Pompeo
because, in the light of the failure on Thursday,
24 January, at the Organization of American States,
the United States was bold enough to impose a draft
resolution and request that the Security Council
convene today's meeting. Both President Maduro and
I had also been thinking about calling on the Council
to debate, not the situation in Venezuela but rather the
unconscionable intervention of the United States in our
country using the crudest means. We must point out
that, on this occasion, the United States is not behind the
coup d'etat. I admit that it is not behind the coup d'etat.
It is in front of the coup d'etat. It is spearheading the
coup d'etat. It dictates orders not only to the Venezuelan
opposition but also to the satellite Governments of the
United States in the region, and apparently in Europe
and other parts of the world as well.

We have all kinds of proof: tweets, social
network posts, calls from Secretary of State Pompeo
and Vice-President Pence to the security forces and
the National Bolivarian Armed Forces to speak out
against the legitimate authorities and the constitutional
Government of President Nicolas Maduro. It was a
tweet with a video from Vice-President Pence on
22 January that gave the green light for the coup d'e'tat
in Venezuela and also, according to Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo, for someone to name
himself as President. He was not sworn in by any
institution or formal process or ceremony, but by means
of the self-proclamation of a member of Parliament in
a crowd, at one of the many peaceful public rallies held
in Venezuela over the past few years.

I therefore ask, if we consider article 233 the
Constitution of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
word for word, provision by provision, sentence by
sentence: where is the legality? And going beyond our
internal legal order, where is the legality with regard
to the fundamental principles of public international
law? Or are we now discarding international relations
based on international law and imposing international
relations based on the use of force, while bending
multilateral institutions to our arbitrary goals and
objectives? If any of this meeting's participants were
to ask, in what article or provision of the Charter of
the United Nations can the legal basis be found for the
self-proclamation of an individual who was not elected
by anyone as President of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, we would have a legal debate, but I do not
think that is going to be possible.

We also have to ask ourselves, when is this all
going to end? Mr. Rex Tillerson, former Secretary of
State of the United States, and then President Trump
himself, on the first day of the general debate of this
session of the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.6),
on the sacred podium of multilateralism, not only
announced sanctions - unilateral coercive measures
in contravention of international law - but also had
the nerve to announce a series of measures against
Venezuela that blatantly violate the Charter of the
United Nations, the sacred charter of multilateralism.
How is it possible that a President who threatened to
use military force - not John Bolton, not Mike Pence,
not Marco Rubio, but Donald Trump himself- against
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has not been
challenged by global multilateral institutions and now
takes it upon himself to accuse the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela because its Government and its people
have strictly adhered to their Constitution and to
international law?

In 1911 there was a military invasion in Mexico.
In 1912 United States Marines invaded Nicaragua,
which then led to an occupation that lasted almost
continuously until 1933, when Augusto Ce'sar Sandino
and the Nicaraguan people threw them out of the
country. In 1914 the United States invaded Mexico; in
1915 Haiti; in 1916 the Dominican Republic; in 1918
Panama; in 1924 Honduras; in 1925 Panama; in 1926
and 1927 Nicaragua; in 1930 the Dominican Republic;
in 1933 and 1934 Nicaragua; and in 1941, Panama.
Then came the School of the Americas, followed by
the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance
and Cuba in 1952. Jacobo Arbenz was overthrown in
1954 in Guatemala. In 1956 the United States invaded
Nicaragua. In 1960 President Eisenhower authorized a
large-scale covert operation to topple the Government
of Fidel Castro, and then came Giron beach in 1961.
I could go on. Joao Goulart in Brazil in 1964. How
many people, Mr. President, died in the Dominican
Republic in 1965 following the invasion, supported
by the Organization of American States, to topple a
Government that did not suit its members or whose
ideology they did not like - a Government let by the
great Dominican, a great Latin American, Juan Bosch?

With respect to the Monroe Doctrine, the United
States should have been the country scrutinized and
subjected to ongoing review, given its perpetual
disregard for international law, interference in the
internal affairs of countries and its invasions following
coups d'etat. Then came the 1973 coup d'etat against
President Salvador Allende, following the invasion in
Guatemala. In 2002, under President George Bush,
there was a coup d'etat in Venezuela. It failed, but the
dictator was recognized. What occurred in 2002 set the
precedent for the situation in Venezuela today. At the
time the United States was behind the coup d'etat, it was
not in front ofit like it is now. It recognized the Carmona
dictatorship, which lasted 47 hours. An investigation
conducted by United States experts proved, through a
series of declassified documents, that the United States
had been involved in the coup attempt.

Something similar occurred in 2004 with President
Jean-Bertrand Aristide in Haiti, and in 2009 in
Honduras, where at first no one had even suspected that
the United States had been behind the coup attempt,
until Hillary Clinton admitted in a book that she had
given the order to topple the then President of Honduras
because she wanted to encourage the formation of a
constituent assembly. Meanwhile, other Presidents in
Central America have been elected without even being
candidates in elections. They have lost elections. There
were even reports by the European Union and the
Organization of American States citing election fraud.
But then Donald Trump makes a call; and they promise
him that they will move their Embassies from Tel Aviv
to Jerusalem. And then that is recognized not only by
Trump but by all of the satellite Governments in the
region of our America.

I simply wanted to illustrate the pattern we see in
social media, which really see. And I refer only to Twitter,
not other social media, and to official spokespersons of
the Government of the United States. Note how the trend
ticked up dramatically in January. The United States
was expecting a coup d'etat and military uprising on
22 or 23 January, which was not in the offing because
the National Bolivarian Armed Forces put their lives on
the line to defend the Constitution. The United States
could not, through extortion, financing or incitement,
convince our military forces to overthrow President
Nicolas Maduro, and it will not be able to do so. It was
yet another misstep by the Government of the United
States and those who joined them.

This is just incredible, like recognizing a new State
at the United Nations: when President Trump tweeted
that he recognized the member of Parliament as the
dictator of Venezuela, immediately Colombia, Chile,
Argentina and Guatemala were all waiting for the order
to recognize him too. It is very clear and shameless:
you can see through this coup d'etat from every angle.
This cannot be accepted by the United Nations. Rather,
it must be condemned. I wish there were a Security
Council meeting to determine who was behind the
coup d'e'tat and punish them. It would not take too
much judging to do that, for the proof abounds on social
media and in press releases.

I have here today's Wall Street Journal, which,
as The New York Times did in September 2018, shows
that members of the Venezuelan military held meetings
with United States officials to supposedly overthrow
President Maduro. That is not coming from the
intelligence services of Venezuela, Cuba or Russia; it
is The New York Times, and also newspapers in Spain.
Today it is in the Wall Street Journal. It is right here
very clearly. The only missing piece to the strategy
for the coup d'etat was an oath. The Associated Press,
which is also a United States news agency, very clearly
today came out with information that the member of
Parliament in question made covert trips to Colombia
and the United States to meet with officials. The
strategy was very well put together, but ham-fisted. The
carried it out quite badly, leaving too many trails.

One almost has to be sorry - we understand
that satellite Governments in the region have as
Presidents business persons who are subordinated
to the interests of the United States. But not so with
respectable Governments. Many small States of the
Caribbean - respectable States - have not yielded
to, or been blackmailed by, the United States, not at
the United Nations, in the Organization of American
States or anywhere else, despite even public threats by
Vice-President Pence, the Secretary of State and by
some in Congress. Not them. It is understandable that
satellite Governments in Latin America would yield to
the United States in that way. But it is surprising that
Europe falls in line behind the United States - and
not so much the United States, but the Government
of Donald Trump. Europe is giving us eight days?
For what? How do they think they have any power
to impose deadlines or ultimatums on a sovereign
people? How do they come up with such a meddlesome
action - I would even call it puerile? As President
Nicolas Maduro asked yesterday, why does not Pedro
sanchez hold presidential elections? Who elected him?
Dare to hold elections in the United Kingdom. Why is
President Macron focusing on Venezuela, instead of
devoting his time to the ongoing yellow jacket protests
and the French working class? As soon as someone
wearing a yellow jacket approaches the Elysee Palace,
the guards all come out because they are afraid of the
people. Mind your own business. We do not interfere
in yours. Respect and comply with the Charter of
the United Nations. Respect the self-determination
of peoples.

Candidate Henri Falcon was here last year; you
know him well, Mr. President. He led Henrique
Capriles' presidential campaign in 2012. Mr. Capriles
lost to Comandante Hugo Chavez. Oh, how they
pressured Henri Falcon to withdraw his candidacy.
Even European Presidents pressured him, as did, of
course, every United States spokesperson. He did not
withdraw it. But do you know what he did? He came
to the United Nations and told Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres that it was essential that the United
Nations send observers to monitor the elections. That
did not take place. Why? Why were there no observers
from the United Nations? He was even in contact with
Federica Mogherini. I myself took Ms. Mogherini an
invitation to request that observers be sent to monitor
the elections in Venezuela. They refused outright. And
why? Because the plan for the coup d'etat was already
under way. Three months prior to the elections Deputy
Secretary of State Sullivan was the first to say that
the elections would be fraudulent. Presidents then
came forward - from Colombia, Chile, Europe - to
say that they would not recognize the results of the
elections. Again, that was months before the elections
took place. When has that ever happened? How many
cases of the elections in Venezuela being impugned
have there been? Go for yourselves. Show me there was
fraud, even one vote. Mr. Duncan said that there was
vote stuffing, and yet Venezuela uses an automated
electronic voting system, and that includes verification.
The system produces a receipt that is then compared
with the electronic tally. And the tally matches up
100 per cent of the time.

The United States wants to build a physical wall
on the border with Mexico, but it is really building an
ideological wall. Many of the points made by Secretary
Pompeo today are reminiscent of the rhetoric used
during the Cold War and by Senator McCarthy and
President Nixon. They are trying to bring back the
Cold War and the Monroe Doctrine of 1823. It is not for
nothing that, in 1929, Liberator Simon Bolivar said that
the United States appeared to be destined by Providence
to plague America with misery in the name of liberty.
It was a self-fulfilling prophecy. In other words, it was
a prediction, because that is exactly what the United
States has done.
Do you know what the cost has been to Venezuela
since 2017, when the United States started to implement
unilateral coercive measures against it, in contravention
of international law, and up until December 2018? It
amounts to $23 billion, thanks to the blockade and
persecution of the property and resources of Venezuela.
Would the Venezuelan economy be in its current
problematic state if it had been able to count on those
resources? An offer of $20 million was made at the
Organization of American States, which they then
took from us. At Euroclear alone, in Belgium, there
is $1.2 billion in frozen funds - Venezuelan wealth.
We cannot conduct any banking transactions. Any
transaction that is conducted through New York or
London cannot take place; the funds are either returned
or they freeze the money. Is that really fair to the
Venezuelan people? The representative of Russia was
very clear here - but for others there are no so-called
sanctions; there is no blockade. That is a lie. There have
been 18 or 19 rounds of sanctions against Venezuela,
but according to them they do not exist. We must think
about that. There is an ideological wall being erected
around Venezuela.

We support the dialogue initiative that was proposed
earlier by the representative of the Dominican Republic.
But that did not come out of nowhere. President Nicolas
Maduro appointed me - if I may be allowed to speak
of myself- as Foreign Minister in August 2017. Two
days later I met with you at your home, Minister Miguel
Vargas, and after that with President Danilo Medino at
the presidential palace, and called on the leaders of the
opposition and President Maduro to carry out a dialogue
in Venezuela. And what happened? We reached an
agreement. You know that, Sir. A document exists,
likely stored away in the archives of the presidency
of the Dominican Republic, that contains a signed
preliminary agreement. When we were about to sign
the agreement, President Medino and former Spanish
Prime Minister Rodriguez Zapatero, along with other
Foreign Ministers supporting them and other supporters
in Venezuela, were made to look like fools. They did not
sign the agreement. By coincidence, Rex Tillerson was
in Bogota at the time. According to reliable sources,
the head of the delegation of Venezuela, who today is
taking refuge in Colombia, received a call instructing
him not to sign the agreement and to further complicate
the situation. These are truths.
Furthermore, let me say that, without rigorous
substantiation, many untruths have been spoken here. I
would say with respect: ask the International Monetary
Fund about the information provided by Venezuela and
whether or not its statistics on inflation are anywhere
close to the statistics we heard today. Ask the Director
of the International Monetary Fund. Be a bit more
rigorous in your investigations when speaking to the
world from this forum, which is essential when it comes
to the future, peace and security of humankind.

But ask about the 3 million migrants as well. As
mentioned by by the Foreign Minister of Colombia,
there is indeed a problem with migration, one that we
have not seen before. But it has a lot to do with the
financial persecution of Venezuela and the economic
situation, which we do not deny. We are working with
our people to try to restore the economy, with plans
to boost economic growth and achieve social and
economic prosperity. However, how many times have
we asked the Governments of Colombia, Peru, Chile,
Ecuador and Argentina for data? How many times have
we said, send it to us? We know that a Venezuelan
might leave through a bridge to Colombia and then
end up in Chile. How do I know that? You know what
happened in recent days? The President of Ecuador,
Lenin Moreno, called for the establishment of brigades
to go after Venezuelan migrants in Ecuador. Our
Embassy in Ecuador filled up with migrants asking
us to help them leave Ecuador because they were
facing xenophobic, fascist persecution in Ibarra, in the
north of the country. It was very painful. And do you
know what happened this Wednesday? Three planes,
including the presidential plane, went to pick up more
than 230 Venezuelan migrants. Three planes were sent
again today, as our Embassy is full. We are paying for
hotels, even with the difficulties in sending money to
our diplomatic missions because of the blockade. Yet
overflight authorization was not granted to aircraft
on a humanitarian mission to pick up Venezuelans
so they could return t their homes and families. This
is persecution. What is it about, this war against
Venezuela? We are awaiting a visit from Mr. Eduardo
Stein, which should take place this week. We are also
awaiting a visit from a former President and our friend,
Michelle Bachelet.

With regard to the violence, you here are saying
that the dictatorship is repressing and killing people.
Please study the history of Venezuela over the past few
years. The insurrectionist marches by the opposition,
with dead put in place by them, facilitated the 2002
coup d'etat. Sharp-shooters were also used. Look into
how many of the people who died in recent days died in
genuinely peaceful demonstrations. Who killed them?
The Venezuelan judiciary and Public Prosecutor's
Office are investigating those incidents. The judiciary
has sovereign authority and needs no intervention from
any independent body. We will tell the truth about each
and every one of the dead, for in Venezuela we respect
each other. Those of you who sponsored the coup d'etat
of 23 January were expecting tragedy and bloodshed
in the streets of Caracas, but it did not happen because
measures were taken; despite the fact that groups of
12 or 13 people went out in the night in the heavily
populated areas of Caracas to loot and destroy private
property, wherein we prevented a recurrence of the
tragedies that occurred on 11 April 2002, in 2014 and
in 2017, when extremists of the Venezuelan opposition,
who were funded by some countries represented here
today, took to the streets in an attempt, by way of mob
force, to overthrow first President Chavez and then
President Maduro.

We support dialogue initiatives just as we
supported the earlier initiative of the Dominican
Republic. We support the fact that Mexico, Uruguay
and the Caribbean Community have expressed a desire
for Venezuelans to sit together, with their facilitation,
to find our own way out, without being imposed upon.
No one is going to set deadlines for us, or tell us ifthere
will be elections or not. Any decisions will be taken by
Venezuelans, with members of the opposition and the
Government seated at the table.

The President of the National Constituent Assembly,
Diosdado Cabello, met with deputy Juan Guaido
on 22 January to establish a channel for dialogue.
Compromises were arrived at, with Mr. Guaido then
doing exactly the opposite the other day. After all, well,
he was under pressure - the tweets from Pence and
Trump and all the pressure from his people. What do
they want, to start a civil war in Venezuela? They will
not succeed. Presidents of the United States will, at
times, declare war when they face domestic problems.
President Trump already regrets saying that Iraq was
better off with Saddam Hussein and that Libya was
better off with Muammar Al-Qadhafi - whom they
brutally overthrew and assassinated, with the Secretary
of State at the time laughing about it. Savagery and
force cannot be permitted in today's world. The United
States is even withdrawing its troops from Syria; is
it now going to look for a war in Latin America? Is
Venezuela Mr. Trump's war trophy? We will not give
Donald Trump a war in Venezuela. Peace, stability and
understanding will prevail in Venezuela, in spite of
the efforts of many of the countries represented here
looking for a war.

With regard to the deadline Europe is trying to
give us, we recall the Liberator Simon Bolivar in the
year 1818 and the first dispute he had with an official
of the United States. Remember that the United States
did not support our countries' struggles for freedom.
It had already gained its independence on its own,
winning a war against the British Empire. But when
the colonies of South America confronted the Spanish
Empire, the United States declared itself neutral. Is
that not interesting? And then afterwards, not only did
they declare that they were neutral, but they actually
secretly helped the royalists, the Spaniards. In one such
instance of clandestine support, at the Orinoco River in
Venezuela, they violated the decrees of the legitimate
Government of the then-President of the nation, Simon
Bolivar, and American ships with ammunition and
supplies were stopped, leading to a dispute. Ultimately,
the Liberator informed Irvine, the United States agent,
that it made no difference to Venezuela whether it fought
Spain or the whole world if the whole world offended
it. We take the same position again today. Fortunately,
we have great friends, who have spoken here in the
Council. However, whoever offends Venezuela will
find the people of Venezuela 4 along with President
Nicolas Maduro, the communal councils, the Poder
Popular and the armed forces - standing ready to
defend our sovereignty and integrity.

Allow me to conclude by reading from my prepared
statement and mentioning an article in our Constitution.
An effort has been made, surely hatched in laboratories
in Washington, DC, to give a constitutional veneer to
the self-appointment of an individual whose name is just
becoming known in Venezuela - even the President of
Paraguay could not pronounce his last name correctly
the other day. Allow me therefore to read article 233 of
our Constitution.

"The President of the Republic shall become
permanently unavailable to serve by reason of any
of the following events: death; resignation; removal
from office by decision of the Supreme Tribunal
of Justice; permanent physical or mental disability
certified by a medical board designated by the
Supreme Tribunal of Justice with the approval
of the National Assembly; abandonment of his
position, duly declared by the National Assembly;
and recall by popular vote."

A recall referendum is held mid-term in Venezuela
if the people are unhappy; it happened in 2004 with
Commander Hugo Chavez, and he was retained.

"When an elected President becomes
permanently unavailable to serve prior to his
inauguration, a new election by universal suffrage
and direct ballot shall be held within 30 consecutive
days. Pending election and inauguration of the new
President, the President of the National Assembly
shall take charge of the Presidency of the Republic."

Did not an inauguration take place in Venezuela? Were
there no elections?

If there is a discrepancy at one of the
branches - and there are five in Venezuela, all of them
legitimate - such as at the National Assembly, then go
to the other institutions. Go to the Supreme Tribunal
of Justice. But how can it be that because an individual
deputy proclaims himself as the interim President,
Governments throughout the world begin to recognize
him, Governments that are taken seriously, with legal
departments in their ministries that uphold the Charter
of the United Nations and are familiar with States'
Constitutions? To do so is to subject the rule of law to
force, and that is dangerous for humankind. We must
stop that today, here at the United Nations.

I think that what I have outlined is sufficient. To the
Venezuelan people, who are listening to us, we say that
we have seen here that Venezuela is not alone, a fact that
will continue to be demonstrated at this meeting, as it
has been in other international organizations, including
at the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which
Venezuela chairs. The reason Venezuela is not alone is
because it upholds its Constitution and the Charter of
the United Nations.

We will continue following the path of our
democracy. We will not allow any decision or order
to be imposed on us by anyone. Under-Secretary-
General DiCarlo herself said that this individual
deputy proclaimed himself President. Where is self-
proclamation mentioned in this Constitution? I ask
those present to find it in the Constitution and show it
to me, and then we can debate it. On behalf of President
Nicolas Maduro, the public authorities, the people,
the Poder Popular and the communes and communal
councils, we insist that Venezuela is, as the Constitution
says, irrevocably free and independent and that no
Power, however powerful, can dictate to our country its
destiny or the steps to follow.

