Mr. Mladenov: Let me begin by wishing all our
Jewish colleagues and their families "shanah tovah" on
the occasion of Rosh Hashanah. I would also like to
wish "eid mubarak" to all our Muslim colleagues who
will celebrate Eid al-Adha next week.

I begin my briefing today with grave concern over
the violence and continuing clashes in and around the
Old City of Jerusalem. On the morning of 13 September,
the Israeli police entered the area outside the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in what they said was an operation to head off
attempts by extremists to disrupt visits by Jews and
non-Muslim tourists. As Palestinian youth sought to
barricade themselves in the Mosque, clashes ensued.
According to an official statement by the Israeli police,
pipe bombs, flares and stones had been stockpiled by the
protestors. The Muslim Waqf reported that during this
period its guards, for the first time, were not allowed
in the compound and that three of its staff membes had
been injured. At least 60 others were injured in related
fighting.

This pattern of clashes has continued with varying
intensity for three days in the Al-Aqsa compound/
Temple Mount and the Old City of Jerusalem. It comes
after sweeping restrictions on entry into the compound
that Israel applied beginning on 26 August. Since then,
the Government has decreed an entry ban for members
of Muslim and some Jewish groups considered to be
extremist. These latest incidents have echoed widely
and have been condemned across the Muslim world
and beyond, including by Palestinian President Abbas.
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu has stated that his
Government will use all means to maintain the status
quo and law and order at the compound.

As the Middle East faces a vicious tide of terror and
extremism, such serious provocations have the potential
to ignite violence well beyond the walls of the Old
City of Jerusalem. I urge all political, community and
religious leaders to ensure that visitors and worshippers
demonstrate restraint and respect for the sanctity of the
area. All sides have a responsibility to refrain from
provocative actions and rhetoric. It is imperative that
the historic status quo be preserved, in line with the
agreements between Israel and His Majesty the King
of Jordan, as Custodian of the Muslim holy sites in
Jerusalem.

Against this backdrop, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has left an indelible scar on the people and
landscape of the region. Frustration, fear and violence
have continued to spiral, undermining belief in finding
a way out of the impasse. Over the past three months,
the Middle East Quartet envoys have actively consulted
with Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the League of
Arab States, the Gulf Cooperation Council and key
international partners on how to preserve the two-State
solution and establish conditions for the parties to return
to meaningful negotiations. All of our discussions
have highlighted the region's determination to play a
constructive role in resolving the conflict.

But the message from all could not be more clear.
Patience is running out. A comprehensive approach
must be advocated, consisting of bold, concrete actions
on the ground, in the region and internationally. It
will necessitate significant policy shifts on the part of
Israel, as well as an unflinching commitment on the
Palestinian side to achieving genuine national unity.
I am encouraged by the efforts of Israel in recent
months to ease some restrictions in the West Bank
and Gaza. I call on the Government to expand upon
them in order to address humanitarian, economic and
infrastructural challenges, particularly in Area C of the
West Bank. Progress in these areas, based on previously
agreed steps, would significantly increase economic
opportunities and strengthen security for Israelis and
Palestinians alike.

Such initiatives must be part of a wider political
process aimed at facilitating, not substituting for, a
final status agreement. The Palestinian people also
rightly expect their leaders to act decisively to advance
national unity. I note the decision of the leadership to
consult over the next three months with all factions
and concerned Arab States on holding a meeting
of the Palestinian National Council for the first
time in almost two decades. The Secretary-General
encourages all factions to seize that opportunity to take
constructive steps to achieve unity on the basis of the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) principles
and to strengthen the PLO as the sole and legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people.

Regional and international constructive engagement
is also key in this process. I encourage Israel to
recognize the potential of the Arab Peace Initiative not
just for sustainable peace and economic development,
but also for creating a shared security architecture in
a region that is in turmoil. At the international level,
the Secretary-General will chair a meeting of the
Quartet on 30 September in order to discuss how to link
regional and international efforts to create conditions
on the ground for a return to meaningful negotiations.

Even as efforts intensify to return to an atmosphere
conducive to talks, the situation on the ground
remains precarious. This past month, clashes between
Palestinians and Israeli settlers in the occupied
West Bank continued, injuring one Palestinian and
four Israelis. One hundred and fifteen Palestinians
were injured by the Israel Defence Forces, while six
members of the Israeli security forces were injured by
Palestinians. In the West Bank, Israeli security forces
arrested 282 Palestinians. On 13 September, one Israeli
died and two were slightly injured in a car accident
in Jerusalem, which may have been caused by a rock-
throwing incident.

Also deeply troubling is the continuing Israeli
policy of settlement construction and the demolition
of Palestinian-owned structures in Area C of the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. I call upon
Israel to freeze demolitions, to reverse relocation
plans and - critically - to expedite the approval
of outstanding planning submissions and enable
community-led planning processes. Since my last
briefing, some 50 Palestinian structures have been
demolished. I am alarmed that the calendar month of
August saw the highest number of demolitions since
June 2010, with 142 Palestinian-owned structures
demolished and over 200 people displaced.

Turning to Gaza, let me begin by reminding the
Council that the situation there remains precarious and
there is growing discontent among the population. With
power outages averaging 12 to 16 hours per day, and
with 40,000 public sector employees not having received
full salaries for over one year, the people of Gaza are
suffering. The United Nations will continue to support
the efforts of the legitimate Palestinian institutions and
to reach out to all factions in order to ensure that the
humanitarian, social and economic challenges of Gaza
are addressed.

Over the last month, five rockets were fired at Israel
by militant groups from Gaza, of which one impacted
an open area in southern Israel without causing injury,
while a further 10 rockets were test-fired at the sea.
Israeli security forces conducted two airstrikes inside
the Strip, neither of which resulted in injuries. Such
incidents underscore the fragile dynamics within Gaza
which, without positive change, will continue to provide
fertile ground for extremism to flourish - extremism
that will ultimately undermine the Palestinian goal of
statehood.

Israeli measures to relax some movement
restrictions on Gaza over the past year have not enabled
people to maintain normal family and economic ties or
to increase their economic self-sufficiency. Moreover,
restrictions on the import of goods defined as having a
dual use continue to impede humanitarian recovery and
reconstruction efforts.

The United Nations reiterates its call for a full
lifting of all closures on Gaza, as envisaged in
resolution 1860 (2009), with due consideration for the
security concerns of Israel and Egypt. In that context,
I am glad to report that reconstruction, despite funding
shortfalls, is picking up speed. I reiterate my call to
international partners to disburse their pledges made
during the Cairo conference. Meanwhile, some 94,000
homeowners have procured construction material to
repair their homes. Construction is also progressing
on 315 projects, including housing, water networks
and schools, which have been submitted for Israeli
approval. Eighteen projects have been completed and
149 are ongoing.

Let me be clear on one point related to Gaza: without
genuine Palestinian reconciliation and unity, all efforts
to improve the situation will face major difficulties.
I welcome the determination of Prime Minister
Hamdallah and his efforts to find a solution to the
problem ofpublic sector employees in Gaza. The United
Nations stands ready to work with all stakeholders and
to support the Government in mobilizing the necessary
resources for that process.

With regard to Lebanon, the Council heard a
briefing by Special Coordinator Kaag on 2 September.
We welcome the launch of a political leaders' dialogue
on 9 September to address key issues, including
the presidency. On the same day, Prime Minister
Salam convened the Cabinet, which agreed on a new
waste-management plan. Demonstrators continue to
raise demands relating to services and the performance
of the political leadership.

On 22 and 25 August, heavy clashes between
factions in the Palestinian refugee camp of Ain
Al-Hilweh led to a number of fatalities. Following
the negotiation of a ceasefire, the situation has now
returned to calm.

The situation in area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remains
generally quiet. The cooperation of Israel and Lebanon
with UNIFIL was illustrated on 20 August. when four
rockets exploded in northern Israel without causing
injury. Close coordination between UNIFIL and the
parties resulted in quick clarification that the rockets
that had landed south of the Blue Line had in fact
originated from Syria and not from southern Lebanon.
In response, Israeli forces hit Syrian military positions
in and near the town of Quneitra.

Allow me to conclude by underlining that, for too
long, the Israeli and Palestinian populations have lived
their lives vacillating between hope and fear, with fear
frequently triumphing. The time has now come to right
that balance and restore the hope for a peaceful future
for both Palestinians and Israelis. To do so will require a
broad approach that integrates tough political decisions
by the parties on the ground, focused engagement and
goodwill of key regional actors, and coherent, reliable
support from the international community. The United
Nations stands ready to play its role in helping to
shape this strategy and to work towards the goal of a
comprehensive and just peace in the region.

