Mr. Rostow (United States of America): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for your indulgence with
regard to the schedule.

First of all, I should like to express the sorrow of
my Government at the loss of the life associated with
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) civil helicopter which crashed this
morning in Sierra Leone and to extend condolences to
the families of the victims and to the Governments of
their respective countries.

My delegation welcomes, of course, the
appearance of President Meron, President Mose, Chief
Prosecutor Del Ponte and Chief Prosecutor J allow, and
thanks them for their reports. The Council asked for
those reports because of its strong support for the
Tribunals' work, including their own completion
strategies.
The United States has been and remains a strong
supporter of both Tribunals. We support the efforts of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda to increase efficiency and fulfil their
respective completion strategies to conclude
investigations by the end of this year and trials of first
instance by the end of 2008 and appeals by 2010. We
also applaud efforts to strengthen local judicial systems
so that lower-ranking defendants can be tried there.

We recognize that the process of building up
judicial capacity is not a quick or easy one but that it is
indispensable to bringing alleged war criminals to
justice as well as to strengthening the rule of law in
societies that recently have been the scene of grave
conflict.

Implementation of the completion strategies
depends principally on two things: first, United
Nations Member States simply have to fulfil their
obligations to support the Tribunals by, first, doing
everything in their power to arrest fugitive defendants.
As the Council has said repeatedly, Mr. Mladic,
Mr. Karadzic and Mr. Gotovina must be tried at The
Hague, and Mr. Kabuga must be tried at Arusha.

Regional countries must step up and meet their
responsibilities with respect to bringing at-large
defendants to the Tribunals. United States engagement
with such countries is ongoing, as it has been in the
past.

Secondly, all United Nations Member States have
to fulfil their financial obligations to support the
Tribunals. At this time, according to their own
completion strategies, the Tribunals should be winding
down their investigative work and preparing for final
trials, understanding, of course, that the most important
defendants at large have to be brought to justice, and
that the completion strategies cannot be fully
implemented without those defendants being tried. The
United States is continuing to work to see that the
high-ranking defendants are brought to justice before
the Tribunals.

