Judge Mase: It is an honour to address the
members of the Security Council and to present the
updated version of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) completion strategy submitted to
the Council on 29 May 2006.

When the ICTR Prosecutor and I appeared before
the Council in December 2005, 52 persons had their
cases completed or ongoing. That number has now
increased to 55 - one more than indicated in the
document the Council received about a week ago. On 2
June 2006, Joseph Serugendo, a technical adviser of
the Radio Television Libre des Mille Collines (RTLM)
radio station in Rwanda in 1994, was sentenced to six
years' imprisonment. He had pleaded guilty to direct
and public incitement to commit genocide and a crime
against humanity: persecution.

The other judgment which has been rendered
during the last six months involved Paul Bisengimana,
a former boargmestre, who on 14 April 2006 was
convicted of crimes against humanity: murder and
extermination. He was sentenced to 15 years'
imprisonment following a guilty plea. Twenty-eight
accused have now received judgments, of whom seven
have pleaded guilty.

There has been considerable progress in the six
single-accused trials. In a few weeks' time, judgment
will be rendered in the Rwamakaba and Mpambara
cases. Therefore, the ICTR will soon have completed
cases involving 30 accused. Another two trials,
Mavunyi and Seromba, are virtually completed.
Judgments are expected later this year, after the closing
arguments.

One new trial, Karera, started as scheduled in
early January 2006. The prosecution completed its case
within 16 trial days. The defence is now midway
through the presentation of its case. Let me also recall
that the Mpambara trial was completed in 28 trial days,
during which 26 witnesses and closing arguments were
heard. These two cases are new examples of the ability
of the ICTR to conduct single-accused trials within a
very limited time. In Zigiranyirazo, the prosecution
case is near completion and the defence will present its
evidence after the judicial recess.

The progress in these six single-accused trials
will make it possible to commence new trials.
Following the recent Serugendo judgement, l4
detainees are now awaiting trial. It is expected that
three new single-accused trials may commence during
the second half of 2006, taking into account Trial
Chamber and courtroom availability.

Let me now turn to the five multi-accused trials,
which have continued to progress at a steady pace over
the past few months. The Butare trial, with six accused,
is expected to be completed in 2007. The second of the
accused has presented his evidence and is now being
cross-examined. The Military I trial, with four accused,
is on course to reach completion of all evidence in
2006. Most witnesses on behalf of three accused have
been heard. In the Government trial, with four accused,
the defence teams are presenting their respective cases.
This trial is expected to be completed in 2007. The two
remaining joint trials, Military 11, with four accused,
and Karemera et al., with three accused, are now at the
stage where prosecution witnesses are testifying.

I have now described the high level of
productivity at the ICTR over the past six months, with
the Tribunal conducting 11 trials involving 27 accused,
and rendering two judgements. All our four courtrooms
are in full use. The ICTR remains on course to
complete the trials of 65 to 70 persons by the end of
2008, as indicated in our completion strategy.

The Prosecutor will provide the Council with an
update of his plans to transfer cases to national
jurisdictions. Let me simply note that the prosecution
has made one request for transfer in accordance with
rule 11 bis of the rules of procedure and evidence,
which was denied by the Chamber. That case is now on
appeal.

There are 18 indictees at large. The Prosecutor
will provide further information. I wish to stress that
cooperation from Member States is vital for the arrest
and transfer of these accused, as well as of other
persons suspected of having participated in the events
of 1994. It cannot be overemphasized that the accused
must be brought to justice, either at the international or
the national level, in order to determine their guilt or
innocence. Impunity for alleged perpetrators is not a
viable option.

At the December 2005 meeting, I mentioned the
need for cooperation from Member States to
accommodate persons who have been acquitted by the
Tribunal. Two accused in the Cyangaga trial were
acquitted in February 2004. Four months ago, in
February 2006, their acquittals were confirmed by the
Appeals Chamber. They are still in a safe house in
Arusha, in spite of numerous attempts by the ICTR to
relocate them to possible host countries. That is a
serious problem. The ICTR depends on the assistance
of Member States.

In order to ensure successful implementation of
the ICTR completion strategy, continuity and
maximum efficiency are of the essence. In my letter of
21 March 2006 to the President of the Security
Council, I therefore asked for an extension of the
mandate of the 11 permanent judges, instead of
proceeding to elections. In May 2007, which,
according to the Statute, is the commencement of the
next four-year term for the judges, virtually all of them
will be occupied in trials. Some of them will be
completing the remaining multi-accused trials, whereas
others will be conducting the new single-accused trials
which will commence in the second half of 2006. If
some of them are not re-elected, the result could be a
serious disruption in the work of the Tribunal. In the
worst-case scenario, trials may have to start de novo,
with new judges.

It is true that a prolongation of the mandate of
individual judges who are not re-elected is possible.
However, that is not a practical solution. Such a
solution has only been used for partially-heard cases
and not with respect to other judicial activities, leading
to under-utilization of available resources. It would
also not be cost-efficient. Moreover, even if our judges
are replaced with the most experienced judges from
national jurisdictions, new judges joining the Tribunal
will need time to acquire the necessary institutional
knowledge. That time is not available at this important
stage of the Tribunal's life. Elections would mean that
judges were elected for a four-year term, from May
2007 to May 2011. However, the completion strategy is
built on the premise that the trial judges will complete
their work by the end of 2008. Under those
circumstances, it is clearly preferable to extend the
mandate of the judges for about 19 months, instead of
electing them for four years.

I noted with pleasure that the Secretary-General,
in his letter of 3 May 2006 to the Presidents of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, has
requested that the mandate of the judges be extended.
It would be highly beneficial to the work of the ICTR
if the Council could accede to our request as soon as
possible.

It has been a deliberate policy to use the same
approach in the various versions of our completion
strategy. That makes it easy to compare the information
provided every six months and to assess the progress
made. Moreover, the document has intentionally
focused on the judicial activities of the Tribunal and on
the measures adopted by the judges to increase the
pace of trials. That being said, it is important to
emphasize, in parallel with these core activities, there
have been constant endeavours by all three branches of
the ICTR also to improve the working methods in other
ways, which may be less visible to observers of the
Tribunal. As these measures have contributed
significantly to our efficiency, this seventh version of
the completion strategy contains new annexes.

Annex 6 describes some of the initiatives taken
by the Office of the Prosecutor to facilitate the trial of
cases. The Prosecutor will address those initiatives in
his intervention. For my part, I would like to refer to
annex 7, which in table form lists measures adopted by
the Registry to support the judicial process. I can
assure the Council that this list of commendable
initiatives could have been made longer. However, in
the interest of brevity and simplicity, it was not
possible to mention in that annex all of the measures
that have been implemented. Let me briefly draw
attention to only two examples from the list.
The first illustration concerns interpretation.
Almost all our witnesses testify in the Kinyarwanda
language. Until 2000, we had a system of consecutive
interpretation. The interpreter sat next to the witness,
took notes and, after having heard a portion of the
testimony in Kinyarwanda, started translating it into
French. Interpretation then followed from the booth
into English. Subsequently, due to extensive training, it
was possible to achieve simultaneous interpretation
from Kinyarwanda into French and then from French
into English. That led to the saving of about 25 per
cent of effective court time. More recently, the
language section has achieved simultaneous
interpretation, not only both ways between
Kinyarwanda and French, but also between
Kinyarwanda and English. Thanks to that advanced
level of interpretation, significant time has been saved
and the pace of our proceedings has accelerated.

The second example deals with transcription. All
of our proceedings are transcribed by court reporters.
Originally, a hard copy of the transcripts was delivered
after the daily session. However, as a result of the
introduction of CaseView software, the transcripts now
appear on the laptops of the judges and the parties
seconds after the words have been spoken. This makes
it possible to follow the testimony even more
meticulously, correct mistakes, scroll back, confront
witnesses with contradictory testimony, et cetera.
Owing to that new system and to the fact that our court
reporters are highly qualified, the discussions that used
to take place between the parties as to the exact words
spoken by the witnesses no longer occur. This
innovation has saved valuable court time.

I would also like to draw the attention of the
Council to the new annex 5, which gives an overview
of the Tribunal's outreach and capacity-building
programme in Rwanda. A flagship of the outreach
programme is the information centre in Kigali, which
receives a large number of visitors from all walks of
life. Our capacity-building programme includes the
training of jurists, advocates and human rights
practitioners. A special fellowship programme for
Rwandan students has been operational for the past six
years. The Tribunal continues to receive delegations
from Rwanda. Direct observation of our trials and
discussions with Tribunal officials provided a better
understanding of our contribution to justice and
reconciliation in Rwanda.

The ICTR also conducts regular workshops in
various provinces in Rwanda. The purpose of the
workshops is to inform the Rwandan people of the
work of the Tribunal. The Tribunal has received funds
from the European Commission, which will be used to
set up information centres in the various provinces
within Rwanda. Negotiations with the Rwandan
Government for that purpose are currently in progress.

Rwanda has continued to cooperate with the
ICTR by facilitating a steady flow of witnesses from
Kigali to Arusha and by providing relevant documents
for the court proceedings. This is appreciated by the
Tribunal. It is important to avoid delays in the
processing of documents. Flexibility by the authorities
will contribute to that end.

Let me conclude by thanking the members of the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the Member
States for their support for the successful completion of
the work of the ICTR.

