The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of C6te d'lvoire, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-
Bi (Cote d'lvoire) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2006/736, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to photocopies of a letter dated
13 September 2006 from the Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004) concerning Cote d'Ivoire addressed to the
President of the Security Council, which will be issued
as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/2006/735.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2006/736). Unless I hear any objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America.


The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1708 (2006).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
06-5216]

