Ms. Loj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The countries of
Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia - and the Associated Countries,
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association country of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.
It is a pleasure to be able to start my intervention
by thanking our former colleague Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, for his statement regarding the
situation in Timor-Leste. Allow me also to commend
you, in your capacity as President of the Security
Council, for convening this open meeting on the United
Nations Mission in East Timor's (UNMISET). The
European Union welcomes this opportunity to
congratulate the people and the elected representatives
of Timor-Leste on the birth of their new nation, as well
as Timor-Leste's admission to the United Nations.

In its efforts to build a nation, the people of
Timor-Leste have shown great political maturity,
choosing to support democracy and to establish sound
and friendly relations with their neighbours as the only
viable path to peace and progress.

The European Union welcomes and supports the
efforts of the new Government, under President
Xanana Gusmao, to consolidate the fragile political
institutions in Timor-Leste. Furthermore, the European
Union supports the efforts to ensure and uphold
democratic institutions and the rule of law while
building the new nation. We support the Government's
commitment to respect human rights, including its firm
rejection of the death penalty.

We welcome the positive development in the
neighbourly relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. The first decisions on border delineation
have recently been taken. We hope the cooperation in
this field will continue in the same friendly spirit and
we believe that the present steps bode well for future
cooperation between the two countries on a number of
crucial issues. Cooperation is highly called for on
bringing those responsible for serious crimes
committed in 1999 to justice. Refugee issues are
another area of importance. The European Union
supports the efforts of the Government of Timor-Leste
to welcome back the refugees still remaining in West
Timor.

In spite of the achievements of the past three
years and in spite of continued progress, there are still
major tasks to be accomplished in the coming months
and years. As one of the poorest nations in South-East
Asia, Timor-Leste faces a number of challenges. There
is a critical need for the continued support of the
international community.

The United Nations continues to have an
important role to play in the nation-building efforts of
Timor-Leste. We note with satisfaction that
UNMISET's operations have generally progressed
according to schedule. UNMISET should stay in
Timor-Leste as long as it is deemed necessary for the
fulfilment of its mandate. A strategy has already been
set out, including deadlines for downsizing personnel.
This strategy must be kept under review in order to
make sure that it accurately takes into account
developments in relation to both the internal and the
external security situation.

The European Union is concerned about the
recent atrocious events in Bali, which constitute a
worrying indicator of increased international terrorist
risks in the region. The European Union commends the
ongoing efforts by the Timorese authorities to ensure
external security, in parallel with its efforts to maintain
internal security, the rule of law and law enforcement.
We nevertheless worry about the potential vulnerability
of a country still in the process of building its security
institutions. In this regard, we underline the importance
of continued international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism and of the adoption of adequate
measures to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism.

Many European Union nationals have
participated in the successive United Nations missions
in Timor-Leste and will remain present in UNMISET.
The European Union has made considerable efforts to
support the new nation, and the European Union, as
well as its member States, will continue its
development cooperation with Timor-Leste.

