Ms. Chan (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica expresses its sincere appreciation to Argentina
for organizing this open debate and for the substantive
participation of Ms. Kimberly Prost and Ms. Fatou
Bensouda on this occasion.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the 23 States members of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group, and we also align
ourselves with the statement to be made later by the
representative of Liechtenstein on the International
Criminal Court and the use of the veto.

Costa Rica, in its national capacity, wishes to make
the following observations and recommendations.

There is an undeniable connection between
conflict prevention and the working methods of the
Security Council. Acting constantly only in crisis
mode, responding and reacting rather than preventing,
the Security Council will never be able to anticipate
events and intervene early enough to have a preventive
effect and to save lives.

Costa Rica's call for improving the working methods
of the Security Council is not done in a vacuum. The
working methods of the Council play a fundamental role
in the Council's ability to fully discharge its mandate
of maintaining international peace and security, as we
have recently seen in the crises in Gaza, Iraq, Ukraine,
Syria, Libya and South Sudan.

In that respect, Costa Rica wishes to acknowledge
the work of Argentina and its outstanding team as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, and applauds its efforts to
leave a substantial legacy in the Working Group.

Presidential note 507 encompassed many of
the concerns expressed by the membership of the
Organization and resolved several of them, at least
conceptually. Thanks to its adoption, we have made
significant progress in the areas of transparency and
accountability. Nonetheless, a review of the Council's
practices reveals that the challenge of consistently
implementing adopted agreements still remains.

Costa Rica has called, for example, for the formal
adoption of the rules of procedure of the Security
Council, and we have called for the adoption of an
action plan to fully and systematically implement
presidential note 507 and subsequent notes. We will
continue to reiterate this call until our voice is heard.

In making these reflections, allow me to make the
following recommendations.

Costa Rica welcomes the adoption of resolution
2171 (2014), which set out a whole range ofinstruments
aimed at promoting conflict prevention. We must now
make use of them. My delegation expects that the
Secretary-General and his Special Advisers on the
Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to
Protect, inter alia, will inform us as soon as warning
signs of potential conflict situations appear. Such
warnings must be clear, depoliticized and heeded at the
earliest possible moment.

In that regard, we also express our support for the
Department of Political Affairs in its horizon-scanning
briefings and for its Arria Formula meetings, including
the participation of civil society.

We cannot overlook the relationship between
a serious worsening of the human rights situation
and conflicts. Such situations must be brought to
the attention of all relevant United Nations bodies,
including the Security Council. In this regard, Costa
Rica fully supports the Secretary-General's Rights Up
Front initiative.

As part of the small five group and now the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group,
Costa Rica has objected to the use of the veto for
obstructing measures seeking to avoid or to resolve
conflicts. Costa Ricans are amazed at how, by invoking
the principle of sovereignty, some permanent members
have prevented the Security Council from intervening
when it should have acted to save lives. We reiterate
our call on the permanent members to refrain from
using the veto, especially in situations of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. We support
the French proposal for the development of a code of
conduct regarding the use of the veto and encourage
permanent members to adopt a declaration of principles
to mark the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations next year.

As the time for appointing the new Secretary-
General approaches, Costa Rica calls for a more
inclusive, transparent and democratic process. My
delegation will pay close attention to that process.

Costa Rica believes that the Security Council
should move from a mindset of reaction to one of
preventive action. It must be vigilant, strategic and
proactive, and more democratic, inclusive, transparent
and accountable. Also, the Council must ally itself
more closely with, and acknowledge more directly,
the work of other United Nations agencies responsible
for issues related to international peace and security,
which frequently spill over onto the Council's already
overstretched agenda.

Many improvements could be achieved by
improving the working methods of the Security Council
itself. What is missing is political will. We hope that
this debate will be able to strengthen that will.

Costa Rica congratulates the President, once again,
on convening this important meeting, which represents
a big step in the right direction and a reconfirmation
of our commitment, and that of all Member States,
to improving the working methods of the Security
Council.

