Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to tell you, Sir, how pleased
we are to see you chairing the Council for this
important discussion. I thank Mr. Guehenno for his
briefing which accurately described recent
developments in Kosovo. We associate ourselves with
the statement that will be made by the presidency of
the European Union and, at the same time, I would like
to emphasize three points.

First, I would like to note the importance of the
initiative that was announced on 5 November 2003, to
break the impasse concerning the issue of Kosovo.
That initiative, as the Security Council noted in its
presidential statement dated 12 December 2003, is
fully along the lines of the framework established by
resolution 1244 (1999) and the policy line that the
international community has set forth, namely, the
principle of standards before status.

France is pleased that this initiative has been
favourably received in Pristina and Belgrade. That
positive reaction has created a new impetus which
should allow us, at the right time, to chart out a final
solution for Kosovo. At this time, we must not lose
time, and we must make certain that this initiative
proceeds exactly as the Council has decided. A first
step was made last week by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General who issued a document
entitled "Standards for Kosovo" (UNMIK/PR/ 1078).

A second step which is just as important, must be
taken quickly, and we hope that this will be done
before the end of January 2004 - the adoption of an
implementation plan for those standards, for the period
up to mid-2005. That plan needs to be established by
the Special Representative for the Secretary-General,
in close consultation with the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government in Kosovo, which will be
responsible for its implementation. However, we would
like that consultation to be extended, as needed, to
other parties concerned - including the Belgrade
authorities, which must be in a position to express their
viewpoint in those areas where they would have
responsibility - but without delaying or blocking the
process of adopting the implementation plan.

We also hope that the States or institutions that
have a specific responsibility in Kosovo, including the
European Union, would be involved by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in preparing
that important document, which will serve as the basis,
to a large extent, for the evaluation in mid-2005, that
we will make of the progress made in the
implementation of the Standards for Kosovo.

Secondly, I would like to reiterate our full support
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Holkeri, who now, more than ever, will
have a critical role to play in the upcoming months,
both for seeing to the implementation of the standards
for Kosovo, and to provide, on a regular basis, at least
every quarter, an assessment of progress made.
Mr. Holkeri will need to take difficult decisions. His
presence on the ground, as much as possible, will be
necessary in order for the implementation plan to be
established and implemented without delay. In those
circumstances, it is equally important that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as head of
UNMIK, redouble his efforts in the daily management
of other affairs relating to Kosovo. We fully trust him
to do so and we call on all parties to cooperate with
him.

In conclusion, let me be certain no ambiguity
exists concerning what the international community
expects from the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government in Kosovo during the 18-month period
before us. The implementation of Standards for Kosovo
is based on those authorities and only on those
authorities.

We are pleased they have reacted positively
towards the initiative that was announced in November
2003. Their constructive attitude at that time was a step
in the direction set by the United Nations. On the other
hand, we clearly regret the decision they took on the 11
December 2003, in an effort to unilaterally put an end
to one portion of the regime of applicable law in
Kosovo. As was stated by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, that vote of the Parliament of
Kosovo was taken in vain and had no effect. We regret
this kind of counter-productive action which is
contrary to the decisions of the international
community and which can only complicate the
situation.

We remind the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government in Kosovo that we are prepared to support
them, as they advance in implementing the Standards.
We would also point out to them, that for the good of
Kosovo and all its inhabitants, there must be strict
compliance with the rules established by the Security
Council. That is the sine qua non and the absolute
precondition for any progress towards a final solution.

We would also remind them, as well as the
Belgrade authorities, that a direct dialogue on technical
questions of common concern must be rapidly engaged
in and must be conducted by both sides in good faith.

