Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): In accordance
with paragraph 24(e) of Security Council resolution
1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011, I have the honour to
report to the Security Council on the work of the
Committee established by the same resolution. The
report covers the period from 23 December 2011 to
29 February 2012.

I would like to begin by noting that two important
documents are before the Committee. The first is a
working document put together by the Panel of Experts
and reflecting the contributions of the Panel, the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, on the threats and challenges
of arms proliferation from Libya to the region. The
second is a final report by the Panel on its monitoring
of the implementation of the relevant measures,
including the arms embargo, the travel ban and the
asset freeze.

The working document is currently under the
consideration and review of the Committee and will
form the basis for the Committee's report to the
Council pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 2017
(2011). The Panel's final report, which was submitted to
the Council on 18 February pursuant to paragraph 24 (d)
of resolution 1973 (2011), will be discussed during the
Committee's next informal consultations on 5 March.

During the reporting period the Committee met
once in informal consultations, on 9 February.
Members of the Committee received from the Chair an
unofficial compilation of the arms embargo and asset
freeze notifications and exemption requests that had by
that time been processed in the Committee. As of 9
February, the Committee had processed a total of 31
notifications or exemption requests concerning the
arms embargo and a total of 151 notifications or
exemption requests concerning the asset freeze.

Since my last periodic report (see S/PV.6698), in
connection with the arms embargo, the Committee has
approved one request for an exception to that measure
under paragraph 9 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011). The
Committee has also expressed no objection to a second
request that invoked paragraph 9 (c) of the resolution.
Furthermore, no negative decision was taken by the
Committee in relation to 10 notifications under
paragraph 13 of resolution 2009 (2011), which allows a
supply of arms and related materiel of all types
intended solely for security or disarmament assistance
to the Libyan authorities.

With respect to the asset freeze, no negative
decision was taken by the Committee in relation to one
notification under the basic expenses provision set out
in paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011) and two
notifications under paragraph 16 of resolution 2009
(2011). Members of the Council will recall that the
latter paragraph provides for the unfreezing of funds
for various additional purposes. Moreover, in four
cases, the relevant Member State was informed that the
entity to which the funds belonged had already been
de-listed by the Committee. Therefore, the submission
of notifications or exemption requests did not apply in
relation to that entity.

Also on 9 February, members of the Committee
discussed several requests for guidance or assistance
received from Member States that related to the status
of the subsidiaries of the two remaining listed
entities- the Libyan Investment Authority and the
Libyan Africa Investment Portfolio. They noted that
entities owned or controlled, either wholly or partially,
by the Investment Authority or the Investment
Portfolio are not subject to the asset freeze measure. At
present, in response to the requests for guidance, the
Committee is preparing a general notice, to be
disseminated to all Member States and posted on the
Committee's website, on the proper application of the
asset freeze measure.

Furthermore, members of the Committee received
an update from the Panel of Experts, via
videoconference, on the preparation of the working
document that I referred to earlier, that is, concerning
threats and challenges of arms proliferation. As I also
stated earlier, that document is now under the
consideration of the Committee and will be submitted
to the Council shortly. The Committee also looks
forward to discussing the Panel's final report under
resolution 1973 (2011), and is pleased to note that all

countries that the Panel approached for a possible visit
have responded positively.

Finally, at the request of the relevant Libyan
authorities, the Committee amended an entry to its list
of individuals and entities designated as subject to the
travel ban and/or asset freeze.

I would like to conclude by noting that, to date,
the Committee has received reports from 55 Member
States on their implementation of the relevant measures.

