Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Allow me first to
welcome the Presidents of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judges
Agius and Meron, as well as Prosecutor Brammertz.
I thank them for today's briefings and reports, and
reassure them again of Croatia's full support for their
continuous efforts to ensure accountability and promote
the fight against impunity.

Last month we marked the sorrowful twenty-
fifth anniversary of the tragedy of the Croatian city
of Vukovar. This is no ordinary event for Croatia;
on the contrary, the tragedy of Vukovar has a special
place in our history and our memory, so I pay a tribute
to Vukovar by starting my speech today in this way.
Besieged for three long months in 1991, that once
prosperous baroque city on the Danube was leveled
to the ground with 6.5 million projectiles. Finally, on
18 November 1991, the city fell into the hands of its
invading oppressors.

Today, 938 white crosses in the Vukovar cemetery
recall some of the victims - those exhumed from mass
graves in and around the city. This includes the site at
Ovcara, where some 270 sick and wounded were taken
from the Vukovar hospital and brutally executed. The
crosses also stand as a reminder of the 86 children
killed during the siege, the youngest being a six-
month-old infant. Some 291 persons from Vukovar are
still missing.

For the horror of Vukovar, which at the time was
the largest massacre in Europe after the Second World
War, the ICTY convicted two persons. One has died in
the meantime; the other was sentenced to 10 years in
prison and released early. Such a misbalance between
the magnitude of crime and the smallness of justice
served is something we shall always have in mind while
making the final, historical evaluation of the Tribunal.

Throughout the years, Croatia has spoken
extensively in this Chamber on the subject at hand. Our
position regarding the ICTY is well known. So while
we face the Tribunal's final chapter in its 23 years of
existence, let me just add the following.

It is important to note that regional cooperation
in criminal matters is evolving not in a vacuum, but
against the backdrop of conditions so clearly described
in the reports before us. These circumstances must
change; they must improve in order to fully pave the
way for the advanced regional cooperation that we long
for. Any assessment of this complex field must take that
into account.

The judiciary in some parts of the region, while
still struggling with inherent deficiencies, appears also
to be increasingly subject to unwarranted interference
as regards the prosecution of war crimes. For instance,
in Bosnia and Herzegovina we note with concern
inconsistencies in the prosecutorial approach, depending
on the nationality of the accused, thus resulting in
different laws and legal institutions being involved in
war crimes prosecutions against individuals belonging
to the different constituent nations in that country.

We emphasize the need to establish a consistency
of jurisprudence across the country and to achieve
better harmonization of case law in criminal matters.
In parallel, the level of expertise needs to be improved
in order to ensure international and European standards
in the prosecution of war crimes, as well as consistency
in the evidentiary and legal characterization of cases.
We emphasize once again the utmost importance of
refraining from any form of manipulation or bias in
investigation and prosecution processes. The work of
the judiciary must remain impartial and independent,
outside and above daily politics. That goes both for
cases transferred by ICTY to national courts and to
those initiated by domestic prosecutors.

Croatia, as a State member of the European Union
(EU) whose judicial system was under intense scrutiny
during its successful accession to the EU and with an
established record of accomplishment in prosecuting
war crimes, stands ready to assist its neighbours in that
regard. Croatia will not be deterred in its staunch support
for the European and Euro-Atlantic perspective of the
region, in particular that of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
the best impetus for the strengthening its institutions
and the independence of its judiciary, as well as for
guaranteeing the equality of its constituent peoples.

Let me reiterate again that full cooperation with
ICTY must be ensured and that both the Tribunal and
the Mechanism must receive all necessary support to
complete their mandates on time. Croatia is carefully
following all remaining cases before the ICTY and
the Mechanism and expects their efficient and swift
conclusion. While ICTY has irreversibly shaped
contemporary international criminal justice and the
world's attitude towards impunity, let us not forget that
the work is not done yet and that countless Victims are
still waiting for justice to be served. In this regard,
the final chapter in the work of the Tribunal and the
Mechanism must also live up to expectations, in
particular with regard to the scrupulous interpretation
and appropriate implementation of international
humanitarian and human rights law.

Finally, Croatia is considering with interest the
proposal developed within the Tribunal for a series of
legacy and closing events. We are ready to take part
in these events, share our experiences and engage in
discussions on how best to ensure its lasting legacy.

