The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
(spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the Portuguese delegation)

I would like to begin by warmly welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Zacarias da Costa, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste, as well as Her Excellency
Mrs. Vera Lucia Barrouin Crivano Machado, Vice-
Minister of Brazil. I also wish to convey a special
greeting to the non-members of the Security Council,
including the delegation of Angola, whose
representative will speak in its capacity as President of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and Ms. Ameerah Haq, Head of UNMIT and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Timor-Leste, for the excellent work on the ground. I
also thank all the staff and contributors to the Mission.

It is a happy coincidence that this debate is taking
place during the Portuguese presidency of the Security
Council one year before 2012, when, among other
things, we will celebrate the tenth anniversary of
Timor-Leste's independence and the fifth centennial of
the encounter between the Portuguese and Timorese
with the arrival of Portuguese navigators to the island.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/201l/641)
that has been presented today most appropriately
highlights the progress that Timor-Leste has made
during the period under review. In that regard, I would
like to focus on some of its most significant aspects
that provide so much hope for the future of Timor-
Leste, very clearly pointing to great progress and
promise. Here in the Security Council, I should like to
say that Timor-Leste is a success in the history of
United Nations efforts. As an Organization, we should
be very proud of that success.

With regard to the security situation, we
congratulate the Timorese authorities for taking over
responsibility for security throughout the entire
country- which the national police has done
effectively and without compromising stability. We
also note the positive developments in officer training
and in the area of discipline.

In this pre-electoral phase, we are pleased to note
the country's political stability and the increasing
dialogue, and even consensus, with the opposition and
civil society. I would like to emphasize improvements
in public administration, the establishment of the Audit
Chamber and the increased capacity to absorb
international support, both financial and in terms of
human resources training. Those developments reflect
growing institutional capacity and consolidation in
Timor-Leste.

The efforts that Timor-Leste has made in
economic planning are also noteworthy, as seen in the
adoption of the strategic infrastructure construction
plan for the period until 2030 and the investments in
the non-oil sector of the economy, which are essential
to ensuring sustainable growth for the benefit of future
generations.

I would like to welcome the adoption, in
September, of the joint transition plan, which is a good
example of the close cooperation that exists between
the Timorese Government and UNMIT. The plan is an
essential component in the future re-definition of the
partnership between the Government of Timor-Leste
and the United Nations.

We believe that the necessary conditions are now
in place for the presidential and parliamentary
elections to take place in 2012, which will include
150,000 new voters and take place in accordance with
recognized international standards. That will be a great
opportunity for Timor-Leste to demonstrate to the
world just how solid and deep its democracy is.

Portugal will extend its commitment of
Portuguese police personnel in positions that UNMIT
considers to be key, and calls on the other contributing
countries to respond in a similar vein to the Secretary-
General's request.

Portugal has been and remains committed to the
exceptional framework of bilateral cooperation with
Timor-Leste, with particular focus on areas that the
Government has identified as priorities. In the area of
justice, we are working with Timorese institutions in
human resource development, and providing technical
assistance in the preparation of legislation and the
development of a legal lexicon in the Tetum language.
Education is another key area. During the past
10 years, we have developed technical cooperation
programmes in education by sending Portuguese
teachers, training Timorese teachers and providing the
educational materials required to teach in both
Portuguese and Tetum, the country's two official
languages.

In the areas of security and defence, we have
contributed to the education, training and

professionalization of the armed and security forces. In
that regard, we note the new technical-military
dimension of the cooperation between Portugal and
Timor-East, represented by the signing of two
protocols in September establishing the inclusion of
Timorese military personnel in Portuguese contingents
taking part in United Nations and European Union
peacekeeping missions. Twelve members of the
defence forces of Timor-Leste are currently undergoing
training in Portugal in order to be included in the
Portuguese engineering company that will leave for
Lebanon at the end of the year to join the ranks of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon during the
first half of 2012.

In our opinion, that initiative is a good
demonstration of Timor-Leste's desire to become an
active member of the international community and to
not shirk its responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security, which are the primary
goals of the United Nations.

Timor-Leste is also a valued and active member
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), which is represented here today by a four of
its members. The CPLP and its member States have
also repeatedly expressed their commitment to
cooperating with and assisting Timor-Leste and to
contributing to strengthening the stability and
consolidation of their institutions. I endorse the
statement to be made by the representative of Angola
on behalf of the CPLP.

We are now approaching a new phase in Timor-
Leste's development as an independent State with the
support of UNMIT as it makes the transition to a new
and different presence in the United Nations. It is up to
Timor-Leste, in dialogue with the United Nations, to
decide on the format and composition of the
Organization's presence in Timor-Leste after UNMIT
withdraws. Portugal has absolute confidence that the
transition process will unfold as planned, guaranteeing
the transfer of capacities and competencies to Timorese
institutions, and that it will allow the country to
consolidate the work that has been carried out by the
current United Nations mission.

It is never superfluous to stress - and I wish to
do so on this occasion - the extraordinary progress
that Timor-Leste has made since achieving its hard-
won independence. The determination of the Timorese
people and their leaders to overcome the greatest
challenges is today reflected in the remarkable progress
that the country has made, which has earned them the
international community's full confidence in their
future.

I reiterate that Timor-Leste is a success story -
the success of its people, of its partners, of its friends
and of the United Nations - and an example of how
the international community can respond to the hopes
of a people and give freedom to its destiny. We know
and recognize, however, that Timor-Leste still has a
long way to go before achieving its legitimate
aspirations with respect to economic and social
development standards. It is therefore important that
the international community and the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, remain firmly
committed to that country. In that regard, I would like
to highlight the contribution of the European Union to
Timor-Leste. We align ourselves with the statement
that will be made shortly by its observer.

To conclude, we look forward with optimism and
confidence to developments in Timor-Leste in the year
ahead. It has been 10 years since independence, but
after 10 years of a resistance and a suffering unique in
the history of the freedom of peoples, Timor-Leste is
today a viable State under construction and a society
that has embarked on the search for development.
Rarely has so much been achieved in so short a time.
Portugal will remain bilaterally and multilaterally at
the side of Timor-Leste.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Australia.

