Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me thank all
briefers for their comprehensive updates of the current
situation in Yemen. Let me also seize this opportunity
to renew Poland's full and continued support for all
efforts of the Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, and to pay
our most heartfelt tribute to all brave United Nations
staff members, men and women, particularly those on
the ground, who are providing life-saving assistance to
Yemeni men, women and children.

Let me first address the situation in Al-Hudaydah.

We welcome the recent meeting of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and we are encouraged by the
finalization of agreements on concepts of operations
for both phases of the mutual redeployment. In our
view, it is critical to preserve the ceasefire and to
expedite the implementation of the remaining stages of
the redeployment, in full cooperation with the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA). We also encourage the parties to take
meaningful steps to ensure the full implementation of
all provisions of the Stockholm Agreement.

The ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah was intended to be
a confidence-building exercise designed to help pave
the way for the resumption of the political process. It
demonstrated that direct dialogue between the parties
is possible. But the Al-Hudaydah agreement itself will
not resolve the conflict and will not put an end to the
violence that has surged in other Yemeni governorates.
As Mark Lowcock highlighted, conflict and violence
continue in many places throughout the country.

We strongly believe that it is time to step up efforts
to find a comprehensive solution to the conflict through
the resumption of the political process, which should
be conducted in parallel with the implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement. Let me reiterate that we
strongly support the Special Envoy's tireless efforts
in that regard and we call on all parties to engage
constructively with Mr. Griffiths, because as Mr. David
Beasley said, the reason that the United Nations and
the international community are providing assistance
in Yemen is because all parties engaged in the conflict
have failed in their responsibility to protect the civilian
population and to provide them with the conditions to
live in peace and security.

In that vein, we also urge the parties to refrain from
taking actions that threaten to undermine the United
Nations-led political process. Like other delegations,
we condemn all attacks on the territory of Saudi
Arabia, which pose a security threat to the Kingdom
and might have a negative impact on broader regional
stability. In that context, I wish to echo Martin Griffiths
in stressing that we should keep Yemen out from other
potential ongoing conflicts in the region.

Given the current fragile security environment, it
is crucial that the parties de-escalate tensions and show
utmost restraint. They must also meet their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law
and ensure the protection of civilians at all times. As
we keep stressing in this Chamber, complying with
international human rights and humanitarian law is not
a matter of choice; it is a matter of obligation under
international law.

The protracted conflict in Yemen has created
conditions in which the survival of millions of Yemenis
depends entirely on the delivery of humanitarian aid. We
have just heard briefings by Mark Lowcock and David
Beasley in which they painted quite a bleak picture,

unfortunately. Allowing humanitarian assistance to
reach all the people in need is not a matter of choice;
again, it is the responsibility and obligation of the
parties to the conflict. Therefore, we urge them to allow
and facilitate the flow of humanitarian and commercial
imports, including in-country shipments of fuel, and to
ensure free, safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian
assistance and personnel to all parts of the country. All
bureaucratic restrictions imposed on the movement of
humanitarian convoys - and in that regard I wish to
refer to the intervention by David Beasley - as well as
any form of denial of humanitarian access, diversion of
resources or interference in humanitarian operations is
just unacceptable.

Let me also echo Ambassador Pierce's intervention
in urging the Houthis to revoke the death sentences
they have imposed and in calling upon all parties to
comply with their obligations under international law,
in particular international human rights law.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to express Poland's full support for the work of all United
Nations agencies and their personnel in Yemen, as well
as to welcome the extension of the UNMHA mandate.

