Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Permanent Mission of the United States for having
prepared the draft ofresolution 2218 (2015), concerning
Western Sahara. France voted in favour of the resolution,
which it also sponsored, as it appropriately addresses
the whole host of aspects pertaining to the question of
Western Sahara. It provides the necessary impetus to
the political process. It renews for a year the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO). And, lastly, it refers to
the human dimension of the situation in the territory.

This resolution, which we adopted unanimously,
provides the necessary momentum to the political
situation. The text clearly indicates that the
consolidation of the status quo is not acceptable, and
that the parties must engage with more resolve and
demonstrate greater political will, realism and spirit of
compromise in order to advance towards a just, lasting
and mutually acceptable political solution.

Resolving the question of Western Sahara is
necessary to respond to the expectations of the
population of the territory, to achieve the political and
economic integration of the Maghreb and to respond to
the deteriorating security situation in the Sahel, where
we must together overcome the challenge posed by the
heightened threat of terrorism.

The historic differences can be resolved. The United
Nations has a responsibility to help the parties to move
ahead in the negotiations. In that regard, we reiterate
our full support for the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy, Ambassador Christopher Ross, Whose shuttle
diplomacy is necessary to facilitate dialogue and bring
the positions closer together. Moreover, France believes
that the autonomy plan presented by Morocco to the

Secretary-General on 7 April is a serious and credible
basis for a negotiated solution.

This resolution renews MINURSO's mandate.
France supports the role of MINURSO and of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Ms. Kim
Bolduc, with whom the parties should continue their
full cooperation. For more than 20 years, MINURSO
has been making a contribution to maintaining
calm in a region experiencing numerous challenges.
It has done so by carrying out the three aspects
of its mandate, namely, monitoring the ceasefire,
contributing to de-mining activities and supporting
confidence-building measures, especially the family
visit programme, to which the resolution refers. In that
connection, we regret the suspension of the programme,
which was put in place by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and which
provided relief to refugee families while maintaining
channels for dialogue. We hope that the programme
will resume without delay.

Lastly, the resolution appropriately addresses the
human aspect of the issue of Western Sahara. We urge
the parties to continue their efforts to strengthen and
promote human rights in Western Sahara and in the
Tindouf refugee camps. As the resolution underscores,
Morocco has taken steps to strengthen its National
Council on Human Rights commissions operating in
Dakhla and Laayoune, as well as its interaction with
the special procedures of the Human Rights Council
and with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We welcome those
initiatives and the other structural reforms carried
out by Morocco - such as its ratification of the
additional protocol to the Convention against Torture
and its reform of the law on military tribunals - which
benefit the population of Western Sahara. The situation
also recalls that the very precarious situation of the
Saharaoui population in the Tindouf camps must not
be forgotten. In that connection, it calls for further
efforts to be made in order to register the refugees in
the camps. This is in the general direction of the goal
of maintaining the necessary provision ofinternational
humanitarian assistance in the camps.

