Mr. Harper (Canada) (spoke in French): I am
pleased for the leadership demonstrated by the Security
Council. We also thank you, Secretary Kerry, as well
as President Obama, for convening this meeting and
inviting other countries as well.

The threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters is a
source of great concern. The conflict in Syria and in
Iraq is increasingly alarming people around the world,
including Canada.

(spoke in English)

The presence of a large number of foreign fighters
in Syria and Iraq is not only aggravating and an
already dangerous regional security situation, for us
it involves the risks that individuals may return home
with knowledge and experience gained in terrorist
activities to motivate and recruit others and potentially
to conduct attacks.

Canada is taking action on this. In 2013, we brought
forward the Combating Terrorism Act, which created
new criminal offences in connection with leaving
or attempting to leave Canada for terrorist purposes.
Recent amendments to the Citizenship Act will also
enable us to revoke citizenship from dual citizens and
to deny it to permanent residents who are convicted
of terrorism offences. We are also using existing tools
to take appropriate actions to counter foreign fighter
threats, including passport revocation, the listing
of terrorist entities under the Criminal Code and
supporting capacity-building initiatives abroad. As we
go forward, we are examining how to strengthen all of
these and other tools. Of course, terrorism and crime for
terrorist purposes cannot, as has been recognized in the
Council, be prevented by security and law enforcement
alone.

(spoke in French)

It is also essential to support prevention efforts
to fight violent extremism before certain individuals
become foreign fighters.

(spoke in English)

I should mention that in Canada our security
and intelligence agencies work well, and work most
particularly well with our Muslim communities, in
identifying such threats. It is also important that we
track and squeeze off terrorist financing wherever
possible.

Canada is pleased to have been a sponsor of
resolution 2187 (2014) today and to support efforts to
improve the international response to the foreign fighter
phenomenon. We will also continue to work with the
Government of the United States, the Government
of Iraq and our other friends and allies on a range of
humanitarian, political and military assistance to those
fighting this phenomenon in the region.

