Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
outstanding leadership as President of the Security
Council during the past weeks, steering its
deliberations to successful results on issues of critical
importance.

We listened with keen interest to the briefing
given by Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi. My delegation
commends him for his dedication and competence in
handling a daunting task. We have also noted the
observations contained in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2002/737) on the situation in Afghanistan.

During the past month, the international
community witnessed some encouraging political
events in Afghanistan, such as the successful
conclusion of the Emergency Loya Jirga and the
inauguration of the Transitional Authority under the
presidency of Mr. Hamid Karzai. Such welcome
developments are indeed testimony to the fact that
Afghanistan is moving forward on the path towards
political stability and economic viability, as envisaged
in the Bonn Agreement. Those achievements are the
culmination of tireless and concerted efforts of the
leaders and the people of Afghanistan in particular and
of the international community as a whole. In that
regard, my delegation warmly congratulates the
Afghan people on their wisdom and maturity,
demonstrated in the course of launching the new
Transitional Administration. We also commend, most
notably, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) for their indispensable role.
As far as ISAF is concerned, my delegation believes
that, under the new Turkish command, it will continue
to promote security in the coming months.

We are fully aware, however, that the positive
developments achieved thus far are only the beginning
of a long and difficult process of recovery and stability.
The security, economic and humanitarian situation still
falls far short of what is needed for the existence of a
stable, strong and full-fledged democracy. The recent
violent act resulting in the demise of a prominent
member of the new Administration reflects the fragility
of the political and security environment in
Afghanistan. Among the acute challenges facing that
nation are building the necessary security and
administrative structures and securing the material
resources needed for the implementation of the
Government's programmes in the health, education and
humanitarian fields as well as in other basic areas.

The Republic of Korea, commensurate with its
capacity, has been actively participating in the
international efforts aimed at the reconstruction and
security of Afghanistan. At the Tokyo Conference on
Afghanistan, held in January, we pledged to provide up
to $45 million for reconstruction projects in the
country over the course of two and a half years, until
2004. In the initial stage of our assistance programme,
the Republic of Korea will have contributed $10
million by the end of this year. In the field of security,
my Government will dispatch a military medical team
to Kabul later this month and will also provide some
items of radio equipment, with a view to assisting in
the process of establishing an Afghan national army.

Finally, we believe that the urgency of the
situation calls for the sustained engagement of the
international community, in close partnership with the
Afghan people, to ensure that the ongoing transitional
process in Afghanistan will lead to a successful
outcome. Thus, the Security Council should remain
closely seized of the situation in Afghanistan,
especially considering the importance of that country's
stability and prosperity to the entire international
community.

