Mr. Mahamat (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Russian Federation for having
organized this very important meeting on the settlement
of conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa and
countering the terrorist threat in the region. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his briefing.

The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations
affords us an opportunity together to ponder not only
the persistence of armed conflicts but also to reflect
on a new type of threat, that of terrorism, which is
spreading at a mind-boggling pace and threatening
peace and security throughout the world. This meeting
comes at just the right time. I hope that it will enable
us to carry out a comprehensive, in-depth analysis of
all the scourges afflicting the Middle East and North
Africa and to contemplate collective actions based on
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.

At the outset, we need to ask ourselves
about the root causes of terrorism today and its
manifestations - Daesh, Al-Qaida, Jabhat Al-Nusra,
Ansar Al-Sharia and so forth - before we turn to
coming up with solutions. In the part of the world we
are discussing, extreme socioeconomic crises and a
lack of political reform that meets people's aspirations
for greater democracy and freedom are sources
of significant frustration. Corruption, oppression,
discriminatory practices and marginalization of ethnic
and religious minorities have all further exacerbated
the situation. That explosive situation has been
compounded by external interference, as the chaos that
has taken hold of certain countries, such as Syria and
Libya, serves to bear out.

If we take the case of Libya, for example, we
should recall that during the very first hours of the
crisis the African Union sought a negotiated solution.
A mediation process was on the verge of achieving
success. Unfortunately, it was ignored - and even
undermined. No chance was given for a peaceful
settlement to the crisis. The consequence was the
destabilization of a country and an entire region, which
today has become the favoured arena of terrorists of
all stripes. The chaos that followed continues to impact
most of the African continent as well as Europe,
notably with the phenomenon of migration. This chaos
threatens all the countries of the Sahel region, including
those neighbouring my country, Chad, as a result of
the illicit flow of weapons and the actions of terrorist
groups active in Libya. Among the factors that further
exacerbate the conflict in the Middle East and North
Africa are the illicit transfer of weapons to non-State
actors, the shortcomings of conflict-prevention
mechanisms and the poor coordination between the
United Nations and regional organizations. We must
be frank that the situation is compounded by the slow
response of the international community, especially
that of the Council.

Allow me to touch on a few possible avenues to
find solutions to confront terrorism and tackle the
crises that have resulted in the region recently.

First, there is a need to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The conflict, which is as old as the United
Nations and has persisted for decades without any
prospects for peace, is a major source of the problems
in the region. With regard to the Palestinian issue, we
are of the firm belief that there is no alternative to a
two-State solution, one that can put an end to the Israeli
occupation and create an independent, sovereign and
viable Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in
peace and security. In that regard, the Security Council
must clearly determine responsibilities and exert the
necessary pressure on the parties to ensure that the
two-State solution becomes a reality. The international
community must not simply accept the situation of what
Palestinians experience on a daily basis - continued
settlements, the expropriation of land, the destruction
of homes, forced displacement, repeated incursions and
the ongoing desecration of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.

Secondly, we believe that only a political solution
via a direct dialogue among the parties to the conflict
that addresses the underlying causes of the Syrian
crisis stands a chance of putting an end to the human
tragedy and to preserving the unity of that country.
Against that backdrop, we think it is high time for the
Security Council to fully play its role to lend renewed
momentum to the search for a political solution to the
crisis, which would enable us to implement the 2012
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

The flow of Syrian refugees into Europe across
the sea - a journey fraught with peril to their
lives 4 reflects the gravity of the Syrian crisis. Above
and beyond the emotions aroused by the recent shocking
images, this unprecedented migration, with its toll in
desperation and suffering, should move our conscience
to analyse the situation in a realistic way and to take
the necessary steps to find a political solution to the
conflict.

Thirdly, with regard to Libya, Chad reiterates the
need for an urgent political solution that safeguards the
territorial integrity and unity of the country and the
cohesiveness of its people, including the establishment
of a Government of national unity that is able to put
an end to the hostilities. A national reconciliation
agreement remains necessary and pressing to restore
order and security to avoid the country's collapse. We
continue to believe that there can be no military solution
to the Libyan conflict and that all the parties must act
responsibly and put an end to their use of violence.
The Security Council must send a strong message to
those who wish to undermine the political process by
promoting a military solution as the negotiations are
under way. We urge the international community to
come together with the countries of the region and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union
and the League of Arab States, to enable them to
contribute effectively to the peace process.

Fourthly, as far as the fight against terrorist acts
is concerned, we need to recall that the sanctions list
to date includes 20 Al-Qaida-associated entities in
North Africa and the Middle East. That is alarming.
Despite the numerous Security Council resolutions
and the collective efforts against terrorist groups,
unfortunately, we are forced to conclude that the terrorist
threat continues to increase and poses an existentialist
threat to some States. Countries need to cooperate at a
subregional, regional and national level by exchanging
information and by improving their mechanisms for the
extradition of terrorists.

In conclusion, we want to underscore that
the Security Council, which bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, must play a leading role in the prevention
and management of conflicts in the Middle East, North
Africa and elsewhere. Regional organizations such
as the African Union and the League of Arab States
must be fully involved in the prevention and peaceful
settlement of conflicts by setting up and strengthening
a strategic partnership between the United Nations and
regional organizations. The growing interdependence
throughout the world and the links among regional and
local conflicts requires joint coordinated action more
than ever.

