Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We would like to express
appreciation to the Ukrainian presidency for
organizing and to you, Mr. President, for presiding
over this important debate on the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks. We welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) and our
thanks also go to all the briefers for their presentations.

With the growing threats of terrorism and violent
extremism, the vulnerability of critical infrastructure
to attacks by terrorists has been a source of great
concern. The devastating economic and security impact
of such attacks to some of the infrastructure that we
normally take for granted in our daily lives, such as
water, electricity, telecommunication and the Internet,
transportation, banking and finance is too ghastly to
contemplate. Of course, the airline industry has often
been the primary target of terrorists and a series of
measures have already been put in place to enhance
aviation security. However, the airline industry still
remains vulnerable to terrorist attacks; hence the need
for greater international cooperation in closing any
loopholes that could be exploited by terrorists.

We all know that terrorists and other criminals
have developed the capacity to launch coordinated and
sophisticated attacks on other critical infrastructures.
Public institutions, private businesses, factories
and industries, roads and bridges, shopping malls
and sport centres, among others, have increasingly
become targets of attacks aimed at disrupting normal
economic activities. Cyberterrorism carried out with
the aim of causing damage to computer systems and
telecommunication infrastructure has also become a
real danger.

All countries big and small are indeed vulnerable
to these kinds of threats. As we are living in a volatile
neighbourhood, which is facing threats of terrorism and
violent extremism, attacks against critical infrastructure
by terrorists are not remote possibilities for us. They
are real threats and they have already happened in our
region. We believe it is through effective international
cooperation that the protection, security and resilience
of critical infrastructure can be enhanced.

The protection of critical infrastructure can be
said to have been partly addressed by international
treaties and conventions related to civil aviation,
maritime security and nuclear weapons. However,
there has not been a resolution dedicated to this issue,
and the resolution we adopted today will, we hope,
fully contribute to promoting greater international
cooperation to effectively counter terrorist attacks
against critical infrastructure.

As the concept note (S/2017/104, annex) rightly
points out, there is a need to build national capacity to
prevent and react to potential risks and threats in this
regard. The roles of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
along with its Executive Directorate and the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (CTITF), will be critical in closely following up
on this issue and helping Member States build their
capacities. The designing of tailor-made programmes
on the protection of critical infrastructure by CTITF,
in line with the potential threats and risks they face,
could certainly be very helpful. Reactivating the
CTITF Working Group on the Protection of Critical
Infrastructure Including Internet, Vulnerable Targets
and Tourism Security will be instrumental in achieving
this objective; no doubt, so would be the very timely
initiative that the Secretary-General is contemplating
to enhance the capacity of the Secretariat to better
coordinate the United Nations counter-terrorism effort,
which indeed has so far lacked coherence.
Finally, we believe that the sharing of experiences
and best practices among countries and regions
could also go a long way in enhancing capacity
and responsiveness to such threats. The United
Nations in cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations could possibly facilitate such platforms
to enhance their awareness and enable the exchange of
valuable experiences in connection with the protection
of critical infrastructure.

