Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize for asking to speak again, in
view of the late hour, but my delegation would like to
comment on the allegations made by the representative
of Turkey in his statement.

Over the past four years of the crisis in Syria,
we have repeatedly informed the Council of Turkey's
unrestrained support for terrorism and radical Takfiri
organizations, as well as its exploitation, along with
its allies, of foreign fighters, whom it trains, arms and
sends into my country. The Turkish regime has used the
pretext of protecting the shrine of Suleyman Shah to
justify its acts of aggression against my country. Who
can forget the leaked sound recording that unmasked
the plans of the current Turkish President, who at the
time was Minister for Foreign Affairs and the head of
Turkish intelligence, and of other figures in the Turkish
regime to target the shrine of Suleyman Shah with shells
fired by Turkish intelligence agents in order to provide
a pretext for military intervention in my country?

My delegation would first like to affirm the
Syrian Government's position on Turkey's recent act
of aggression, which we have outlined in letters sent
today to the President of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General, in which we state that the
Turkish regime's acts constitute an act of aggression
against Syria's sovereignty and a blatant violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
They are also proof of the extent of the ties between the
Turkish regime and the terrorist organization known as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. I should also
add that the act of moving the shrine of Suleyman Shah
from one place to another within Syrian territory was
undertaken illegitimately and unilaterally by Turkey,
without the prior agreement of the Syrian Government,
and can in no way be justified or recognized. The
Turkish representative's statement that he informed the
President of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General about that move is unacceptable. With all due
respect to the President and Secretary-General, where
is the consideration of the principle of sovereignty of
the State concerned? Once again, we ask the Council to
condemn Turkey's act of aggression, hold the Turkish
regime accountable for its support for terrorism and
its recent aggression, and compel it to end its practices
threatening international peace and security.

Secondly, regarding the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia, I would like
to once again affirm that a demonstration of interest in
Syria and concern for the Syrian people can in no way
consist in supporting terrorism or spreading extremist
Takfiri ideas, which have no relationship to humanity,
civilization or any religion. Nor can they involve efforts
to undermine the Syrian State, obstruct a political
settlement and spread chaos and terrorism.

Thirdly, concerning the statement made by the
representative of the Israeli occupying Power, I would
like to say briefly that occupation, aggression and
Israeli State terrorism have dogged the United Nations
from its inception seven decades ago to this very day.
The Israeli crimes will continue as long as the double
standards within the Organization do. We should
not forget that in and of itself the Israeli occupation
is a breach of the most fundamental principles of
international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations.

