Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): We would like to thank
the delegation of the United States for convening this
meeting on a subject of vital importance to international
peace and security. We also want to acknowledge the
presence of participating Foreign Ministers and to
welcome them to the Security Council. We listened
attentively to the Secretary-General's briefing, and
we thank him not only for sharing his perspectives on
this subject, but also for being a moral voice in global
politics.

The conflict in Syria is a matter of concern to
Nigeria as well. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist groups associated
with them are taking advantage of the situation to
entrench themselves and consolidate their positions.
They are committing war crimes and crimes against
humanity and, to that extent, they constitute a grave
threat to international peace and security.

Containing and defeating the terrorists should be a
top priority for the international community. Achieving
that will require that the Syrian conflict be resolved
urgently, expeditiously and comprehensively. The
warring parties must agree on a ceasefire without delay.
That is a crucial first step and a valid point of departure
to de-escalate the conflict and create the conditions for
achieving a political solution.

The establishment of the International Syria
Support Group has given much-needed momentum to
the search for a peaceful resolution of the conflict in
Syria. The presence of key international and regional
stakeholders in the Group is a clear indication that the
international community is prepared to work in unison
to resolve the Syrian conflict. We note the outcomes of
the Group's meetings of 30 October and 14 November,
held in Vienna, and the meeting held today in New
York. We support the efforts of the Group to resolve
the Syrian conflict on the basis of a Syrian-led political
process and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2254 (2015)
today is an unequivocal indication of the commitment
of the Council to resolve the Syrian conflict. Indeed,
as others have aptly noted this afternoon, it presents a
clear road map on the way forward. We urge the warring
parties to build on the momentum of the resolution
to bring the conflict to an end and restore the much-
needed peace, security and stability in Syria.

