Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you very
much, Mr. President, for this opportunity to hear
briefings on the work of the three Security Council
Committees dealing with the issue of terrorism. Our
thanks also go to the three Committee Chairs who
briefed the Council and the membership as a whole this
morning.

The recent adoption by the General Assembly of
the International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (General Assembly resolution 59/290) is but one sign that the work of the
United Nations in the area of counter-terrorism has
gained new momentum. Over the next few months, we
have to work hard to preserve and further develop that
momentum in the intergovernmental process. At the
same time, it is important to continue strengthening the
operational capacities of the United Nations bodies
involved. In that regard, we note with satisfaction
recent developments in all three Committees, in
particular the increase in expert capacity and
operational activities. While we join others in calling
for greater discipline by Member States in reporting,
we also underline that this must be accompanied by
quick and thorough expert analysis of the reports once
they are submitted in order to preserve the relevance of
the dialogue.

In the current discussions in preparation for the
summit in September, the fight against terrorism
clearly figures among the most prominent issues. We
believe that last week's discussions on the clusters of
issues proved that there is strong momentum in that
respect.

We share the sense of urgency felt by many with
respect to the need to further strengthen our counter-
terrorism framework, and we have welcomed the
strategy of the five "D"s outlined by the Secretary-
General. Progress is necessary in particular in the
negotiations on a comprehensive convention on
terrorism designed to fill the gaps not addressed by the
13 sectoral conventions.

At the same time, we are concerned that due
process, human rights and humanitarian concerns are
not addressed in an equally urgent and thorough
manner. We have consistently held that the procedures
regarding the listing and delisting of individuals on
sanctions lists as well as procedures for humanitarian
exceptions must be reviewed in the light of
international legal standards of due process. That
implies a minimum degree of transparency and
independent review for decisions affecting the rights
and the obligations of individuals, depending in
particular on the gravity of the deprivation of rights.
Improving those procedures will, in our view, greatly
facilitate implementation of Security Council sanctions
by Member States and strengthen the legitimacy of
sanctions regimes. As a means of transparency, we
have therefore requested that the list of pending
requests for humanitarian exemptions in accordance
with resolution 1452 (2002) be made accessible to all
Member States.

Today's meeting addressing the work of all three
relevant Security Council Committees is a clear sign
that our efforts are moving in the right direction, in
particular regarding coordination among the three
Committees and their experts. It is also a welcome step
towards a more comprehensive, transparent approach.
In that respect, we express our appreciation for the
scheduling of a meeting of the working group
established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) on 27
April - this Wednesday - providing interested States
with an opportunity to share their views on the future
work of the working group. Indeed, the inclusion of a
broad range of Member States in the Security Council's
work on counter-terrorism is a crucial element for more
effective decision-making and better implementation of
its decisions. We thus look forward to continuing
cooperation on this matter with the Council and its
subsidiary organs.

