Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We join others in
expressing our congratulations to you, Mr. President,
for assuming the presidency of the Council for the
month of November. You have our full support. We
also join in expressing our thanks to Ambassador
ngu for the skilful manner in which she directed our
affairs in the month of October. We also thank Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo for his progress report. We continue
to support the Court's efforts to bring justice to the
victims of atrocities committed in Libya.

We supported the referral of the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court because of
our long-standing commitment to the fight against
impunity for serious crimes. When the Prosecutor
presented his first report to the Council, we reminded
him that justice is blind and requested that all atrocities
committed in Libya since 15 February 2011 should be
investigated and prosecuted if sufficient evidence is
found.

The protection of civilians, which inspired the
introduction of resolution 1970 (2011), should benefit
all Libyans caught in the crossfire of the conflict in
which that country found itself.

South Africa is concerned about reports from the
United Nations Commission of Inquiry on Libya into
arbitrary mass arrests and mistreatment, in particular of
black Africans suspected of being pro-Qadhafi
mercenaries. We hope that the possible targeting of
black Africans will receive due attention by the Office
of the Prosecutor.

We have also noted with concern several reports
by organizations, such as Amnesty International and
Human Rights Watch, to the effect that atrocities have
been committed on both sides of the conflict. Just last
week, the Secretary-General's Special Representative
for Libya provided information to the Council with
respect to reports that killings among the duelling
camps were committed by both sides in the final battle
for Sirte. We are pleased that the National Transitional
Council (NTC) has distanced itself from those
atrocities and has expressed its intention to conduct
investigations. That will be important for
complementarity, which is important for the Court. It
will, nonetheless, be necessary for the ICC
investigations to convene.

We encourage the Office of the Prosecutor to
convene new investigations into cases of sexual
Violence, including cases of gang rape. In that regard,
we have noted with the United Nations Commission of
Inquiry that, while the reports of rape could not be
verified, there was sufficient information to warrant
further investigations. We welcome the decision of the
Office of the Prosecutor to conduct on-site
investigations as well as the assurances of the NTC that
it will fully cooperate.

We have taken note of the Prosecutor's progress
report, especially in terms of the following issues: first,
the contacts with Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi concerning
his surrender; secondly, the progress in on-the-ground
investigations that have been undertaken thus far;
thirdly, the willingness of the Office of the Prosecutor
to conduct investigations into the circumstances that
led to the death of Muammar Qadhafi; and fourth, the
need for comprehensive investigations into possible
further crimes committed by NATO, the NTC and
pro-Qadhafi forces.

We look forward to your report in May, Sir.

