Mr. Corr (Ireland): This public meeting of the
Council today on small arms addresses a subject of the
greatest importance. My delegation is therefore
especially grateful to you, Sir, for convening it. We
also appreciate the issues paper you have circulated. I
would also like to express appreciation, as others have
done, to Ambassador Valdivieso and Colombia for the
orientation paper, and to Colombia for all of the work it
has done on this issue since joining the Council.

Ireland fully associates itself with the statement
that will be made later in this debate by the
representative of Denmark on behalf of the European
Union.

May I first express the appreciation of my
delegation for the report of the Secretary-General on
small arms and to Under-Secretary-General Dhanapala
for his introduction and briefing this morning. The
report is candid, detailed and makes a number of
important recommendations. Ireland fully endorses all
of the proposals made by the Secretary-General.

Arms control activities, including combating
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, remains
an essential dimension in conflict-prevention and
peace-building efforts. As the Secretary-General states
in his report, small arms fuel, intensify and contribute
to the prolongation of conflicts. They are, in summary,
instruments of death that cause over half a million
deaths each year, mostly of civilians and mostly of
elderly people, women and children.

The United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, held in July last year, agreed a modest but still
worthwhile Programme of Action as a first step
towards controlling the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. It also made a range of proposals for
Security Council consideration and action. The
Conference was, in summary, a first important step -
though it was nonetheless only a step - in achieving
meaningful international action in this area.

In general terms, the Security Council should
offer its full assistance and support to the United
Nations agencies and programmes which are active or
may be established in efforts to counteract the illicit
spread of these weapons. Ireland would encourage the
Council also to urge all Governments to support such
agencies.

Two particular challenges for the Council are
worth emphasizing today.

First, the Council has imposed an arms embargo
as part of all current United Nations sanctions regimes.
The Council has also sought to strengthen compliance
with arms embargoes through the establishment of
independent panels of experts and monitoring
mechanisms.

The States Members of the United Nations and
regional organizations have the main responsibility for
monitoring and enforcing arms embargoes. We support
consideration of Council action against States that
deliberately violate arms embargoes. The experience of
the Monitoring Mechanism on Angola has shown that
the flow of weapons from producing countries can be
stemmed - particularly with the cooperation of those
countries.

Many of the world's conflict situations are fuelled
in large measure by the easy supply of small arms. The
ease with which they are concealed and moved, their
low cost and the flagrant manner in which Council
arms embargoes are often violated makes it an
extremely difficult task to retrieve and destroy these
weapons. It makes sense to do everything possible to
stop their supply at the source.

We believe that Member States have a primary
responsibility in this area. Accordingly, we support the
recommendation contained in the Secretary-General's
report that Member States should be called upon to
bring their own national legislation into compliance
with the Security Council's measures and sanctions, in
particular arms embargoes.

My delegation attaches importance to the
recommendation that the Security Council should
encourage States which have not already done so to
establish the necessary legislative or other measures to
ensure effective control over the export and transit of
small arms and light weapons. This includes the use of
authenticated end-user certificates. We know from
various Panel reports that forged end-user certificates
have been the route through which illegal arms
shipments have been made in recent conflicts. We have
to do more on this.

The Council has made considerable progress in
this work, but I think it fair to say we still have some
distance to go in detailed monitoring; in controlling
financial sources used for the purchase of illegal
weapons; and in working with business, financial
institutions and other actors - internationally,
regionally and at the local level - on the
implementation of arms embargoes.

The Secretary-General's report rightly draws
attention to the link between the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons and the illicit exploitation of
natural and other resources. We agree with his
recommendation that we should look at the
recommendations of the various panels established to
investigate such links, including that of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Panel, with regard to the issue
of small arms.

There is a second challenge for the Council that
we need to address. The Security Council has made
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
central to conflict resolution and post-conflict peace-
building. Sierra Leone, Liberia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are all current examples, to a
greater or lesser extent, of the challenges facing the
United Nations in this area.

Ireland strongly supports the recommendation of
the Secretary-General that the Council call upon parties
to conflicts under its consideration to place activities
relating to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in the texts of negotiated agreements, and
that disarmament, demobilization and reintegration as
well as weapons collection and disposal activities be
included in the mandates of peacekeeping operations.

In summary, Ireland endorses all of the
recommendations made in the report of the Secretary-
General on small arms.

We fully agree, in particular, that the Security
Council should call upon Member States to support
efforts aimed at developing an international instrument
to identify and trace illicit small arms and light
weapons.

We also agree with the specific recommendations
of the Secretary-General on more vigorous use of arms
embargoes; the establishment of monitoring
mechanisms under each relevant Council resolution
involving arms embargo issues; and the inclusion of
clear DDR provisions in the mandate of peacekeeping
operations.

My delegation sees merit in the recommendation
that consideration be given to ensuring that DDR
activities are not entirely dependent upon voluntary
contributions from Member States. We would therefore
favour strengthening the financing of DDR
programmes through the expansion of measures
covered under the budget for peacekeeping operations.

Finally, let me say that small arms is an issue
that, above most others, requires strong political will
and leadership. We in the Council have made a good
start, but we still have a good distance to go.

