Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Like preceding delegations, we would like to warmly
thank Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Tuliameni
Kalomoh and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Ramos Horta, for the
information that they have provided to the Council and
for the perspectives they offered for the restoration of
democratic order in Guinea-Bissau.

When the joint Economic and Social Council-
Security Council mission visited Guinea-Bissau, we
took note of the fragility of the process. We spoke with
the military authorities, political parties and
Government officials, and we noted that the process
was fragile and that there were imminent risks.

In our assessment we underline, as other Council
members already have, that the economic and social
situation of Guinea-Bissau and the conditions in which
the Government operated augured serious problems if
emergency economic assistance - which was and still
is necessary - was not provided.

My Government condemns and regrets the coup
d'etat that took place in Guinea-Bissau. We believe it is
a breach of constitutional order that cannot be
considered a starting point for establishing a
democratic Government. However, given the critical
conditions existing in Guinea-Bissau, we appreciate the
efforts of the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) to ensure
that even in those circumstances, the political process
will be restored and the necessary internal agreements
and consensus will be reached, enabling the holding of
legislative and presidential elections.

We regret that the elections have been delayed
beyond the date announced during the Economic and
Social Council and Security Council mission. However,
we understand that holding those legislative elections,
the first step for the restoration of constitutional
democracy in Guinea-Bissau, requires the support and
participation of all political forces and the full trust of
the citizens.

We consider that a basic first task of the United
Nations lies in that process. We believe that the United
Nations, in conjunction with the African Union,
ECOWAS and the CPLP, is the most suited to ensuring
in those circumstances that the population and the
political parties of Guinea-Bissau view the process of
legislative elections as the solution the country
requires. There is much that the United Nations and the
international community can do to focus and strengthen
the transparency and fairness of the process and to
ensure the participation of all citizens. We hope that the
United Nations will organize the efforts of the
international community in support of, first, the
legislative elections and then the presidential elections,
to which it now appears the new authorities Guinea-
Bissau are committed. We also underline that the
international community's vigilance will be
indispensable in the coming months to ensure that the
difficult economic and social conditions prevailing in
Guinea-Bissau do not aggravate the political crisis.

It is very important for the international
community to be active in Guinea-Bissau by fulfilling
its previously pledged obligations and offers of
economic assistance. It should be a priority of United
Nations action to help ensure that this economic
assistance is in fact delivered and that the instruments
of the international community ensure that the
economic aid is used for the purposes for which it was
intended. We believe that one of the reasons why there
has been some delay in the arrival of economic
assistance to Guinea-Bissau is because donors were not
fully confident that those resources would be put to
their intended use. Now, in the new Circumstances, we
should redouble our efforts so that, with the support of
the African Union, ECOWAS and the CPLP, the United
Nations can play an important role in ensuring that the
resources provided in fact serve the ends for which
they were intended.

Guinea-Bissau is part of a region that is going
through difficult circumstances. To allow Guinea-
Bissau to go adrift at this moment, when it is
confronted with the economic and social problems and
the political crisis, would perhaps create a more fertile
ground for the violence that has unfortunately
developed in Western Africa in recent years. During
our visit to Guinea-Bissau, we did not fail to notice the
great number of unemployed young people lacking
dignified living conditions in the economic conditions
in their country, who could potentially be victims of
violence, leading to situations similar to those the
Council saw in neighbouring countries.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that
attending to the problems in Guinea-Bissau, from an
international perspective of conflict prevention and of
resolving the dispute that arose there, calls for
coordinated efforts among the agencies involved and
the organs working at the regional level and at the level
of the United Nations.

My country therefore hopes that the Security
Council will continue to work closely with the
Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Guinea-Bissau, the Group of Friends of
Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau to ensure the effective
work of all actors according to their areas of
competence. In our case, that is restoring peace and
security; for the Economic and Social Council it is
creating conditions conducive to sustainable economic
and social development. Working together we will be
able to find an answer to the situation prevailing in that
country.

