Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President - Ramlan - and your entire team
for your work this month, as well as to congratulate
you on your presidency, which concludes today with
success. I also appreciate the concept note that you have
circulated in order to guide the discussion in this formal
wrap-up session. Spain is in favour of a sharper focus
in the debate on the issues in the wrap-up sessions,
and we underscore our desire for transparency and for
participation by all Member States. I will focus on two
areas that I think were the most important in work of
the Security Council this month. The first has to do
with non-proliferation issues, and the second with the
situation in Syria.

On the issue of non-proliferation, the month of
August has brought us both bad and good news. On the
subject of the bad news, we must once again lament
the fact that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
continued to ignore Security Council resolutions. The
developing momentum in the situation in the Korean
peninsula is particularly concerning, given that ballistic
missile launches are taking place more often and with
greater success in reaching nearby coastal areas of
neighbouring States. This month, for the first time, we
have seen the successful launch of a ballistic missile
from a submarine, and the first one to fall within the
exclusive economic zone of another State. Despite
that disturbing situation, we also have to welcome the
fact that the Security Council has regained its unity
when it comes to the matter. On Friday, 26 August, we
unanimously condemned the launching of missiles by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, while also

reiterating our determination to adopt new, meaningful
measures pursuant to resolution 2270 (2016).

Under the heading ofgood news, Spain is grateful to
the Malaysian presidency for convening the open debate
(see S/PV.7758) on non-proliferation, which took place
on 23 August. The presence of the Secretary-General
and of the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs
and the participation of 61 delegations and international
organizations all served to highlight the great interest
that exists in the issue. During that debate, we noted, on
the one hand, that there existed shared concern about
new threats - in particular given the link between
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction and the
risks that have arisen due to technological and scientific
advances. On the other hand, however, there was also
a desire to strengthen preventive mechanisms and
instruments, such as resolution 1540 (2004), so as to
adapt them to the new context. The recent report of the
Joint Implementation Mechanism (JIM) shows that the
risks that resolution 1540 (2004) tries to prevent are not
illusory or amorphous. On the contrary, they are very
real risks, such as have already materialized in the case
of Syria. The terrible facts in the JIM. report should to
serve as a stimulus for us to bolster the non-proliferation
regime within the scope of the United Nations.

On the second issue -Syria - the assessment
necessarily has to be a negative one, both from the
perspective of the evolution of the conflict as well
as from the vantage point of the Security Council's
response. We began the month of August with a threat
that the distribution of assistance to Aleppo could be
blocked because of the fighting and the closure of the
Castello Road. Several Council meetings were held at
which we had an opportunity to discuss the issue in
depth - from the Arria Formula meeting on 8 August
to the open briefing on 22 August (see S/PV.7757).
However, we end the month in nearly the same
situation, with the United Nations calling for a 48-hour
humanitarian pause in order to enter the city, so far
without success.

All of us are aware of the dialogue between the
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group.
Spain is confident that the dialogue between the United
States and the Russian Federation can contribute to
renewing the cessation of hostilities - and even to
opening the door to a new round of talks in Geneva,
as has happened in the past. Nevertheless, the Security
Council has a responsibility to support the work being
done by the United Nations in Syria, in particular in
the humanitarian area. That is why, in close contact
with all of the members of the Council - especially
Egypt and New Zealand - we will continue to follow
developments in the situation very closely. I take this
opportunity to congratulate New Zealand for the
priority attention it intends to accord the issue in the
programme of work for September.
Lastly, we are confident that the JIM. report
presented yesterday to the Council will allow us
to ensure accountability with regard to the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. We thank you once again,
Mr. President, and we welcome New Zealand and
assure it of our full support during its presidency, which
begins tomorrow.

