Mr. Boubacar Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): My delegation too would like to thank Mr.
Guehenno for his update on recent political
developments and Mr. Ramcharan for his moving
account of the human rights situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The way he described the
numerous human rights violations and violations of
international humanitarian law in Ituri, particularly in
Mambasa and Drodro, amply demonstrate the extent of
the atrocities that have been committed, generally due
to ethnic hatred and greed for money and political
power. My delegation believes that those reprehensible
and deliberate acts must be investigated thoroughly and
that their instigators and perpetrators must be punished
according to their degree of responsibility.

We welcome the 30 June announcement of the
establishment of the transitional Government of
national unity in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That is part of the commitment made to the
Security Council during its recent mission to Central
Africa. We believe that it can provide the beginning of
a return to unity, reconciliation and peace in the
country, which has suffered so much from years of
senseless war.

On the issue of impunity, which the entire
international community agrees must be put to an end,
practical measures must be taken. In that context, my
delegation believes, as Mr. Ramcharan has just said,
that the Council should give its full attention to the
swift establishment of the National Human Rights
Observatory and the National Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. The Governments of countries bordering
the Democratic Republic of the Congo also have an
important role to play, as they can exercise a positive
influence on the various armed movements and groups
that operate mainly in the north-eastern part of the
country.

My delegation is convinced that with the
establishment of the transitional Government of
national unity, all Congolese people without exception
will be able to overcome their differences in order to
reach the essential goals of re-establishing national
consensus, the return of peace and the development of
their country, which has been so generously endowed
with such great potential.

In conclusion, in connection with the question
asked by the delegation of Pakistan, I would like to ask
what practical medium- and long-term measures are
envisaged by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in order to contribute
to ensuring that there is no impunity for these
numerous human rights violations?

