Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this very important open debate on children and armed
conflict and for your submission of a concept paper on
this topic (S/2010/314). Let me also convey our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his report on
children and armed conflict (S/2010/181), which
reviews developments in a number of situations of
concern and stresses the progress made and the
remaining challenges. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict for her comprehensive
presentation, as well as the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations and the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF for their briefings on the matter.

Azerbaijan aligns itself with the statement
delivered today on behalf of the European Union by
the acting head of the European Union delegation to
the United Nations. I would like to make a few
additional remarks in my national capacity.

We reiterate our commitment to continuing to
contribute to the activities of existing United Nations
mechanisms and other relevant organizations and
agencies with the aim of ensuring more effective
protection of child rights and improving the situation
of children affected by armed conflict. We commend
the significant and successful work done under the
leadership of Ambassador Heller of Mexico as Chair of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Azerbaijan's interest in the topic under
consideration is obvious and stems from its practical
experience in addressing the impact on children of the
armed aggression against my country and in engaging
international efforts to ensure respect by the relevant
Member State of its obligations under the United
Nations Charter and international law.

The war unleashed against my country and its
consequences exert considerable influence, inter alia,
on the humanitarian aspect of the problem, and
primarily affect the most vulnerable groups. Azerbaijan
continues to suffer one of the highest proportions of
refugees and displaced persons in the world, large
numbers of whom are children. The most serious
international offences have been committed in the
course of the conflict. Even children have not been
spared. Of the more than 4,000 people reported missing
in connection with the conflict, 48 are children.

In recent years, the issue of children and armed
conflict has been inscribed firmly on the international
agenda and a solid body of international legal norms
and standards has been developed. Important steps
have been taken through the application and
enforcement of those norms and standards to achieve
accountability for grave child rights violations. Indeed,
the international community has taken some
unprecedented initiatives to address impunity.
Punishing crimes of international dimension
demonstrates how effective international justice can be
when there is political will to support it. The
engagement of the Security Council has increased the
general awareness of the need to protect children in
armed conflict, significantly advanced the scope of
action and created opportunities to improve common
approaches in this regard.

However, although progress has been made in a
number of situations of armed conflict, children are
still suffering in many places worldwide and continue
to be the primary victims of war. That bitter truth poses
a profound challenge to the international legal order,
and therefore requires the international community to
redouble its efforts to protect children and prevent
child rights violations.

With regard to the most serious international
crimes, more should be done to put an end to the
culture of impunity. Particular consideration should be
given to internally displaced children in the context of
ensuring their inalienable right to return, and to the
implications for the protection of child rights of illegal
policies and practices in situations of foreign
occupation.

Another challenging issue that requires urgent
action is that of children taken hostage and reported
missing in connection with armed conflict. Azerbaijan
is the main sponsor of the biennial resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Human Rights Council on
missing persons, as well as of those of the Commission
on the Status of Women on the release of women and
children taken hostage in armed conflicts, including
those subsequently imprisoned.

I would like to refer to the latest resolution of the
General Assembly on missing persons. Inter alia,
resolution 63/ 183 requests States to pay the utmost
attention to the problem of missing children and to take
appropriate measures to search for and identify such
children and reunite them with their families.
Meanwhile, at its fifty-fourth session, held in March,
the Commission on the Status of Women condemned
all violent acts against civilian populations and called
for an effective response to such acts, in particular the
immediate release of women and children taken
hostage in armed conflicts, including by strengthening
international cooperation to that end.

We look forward to the adoption of the draft
presidential statement before the Council, which will
continue to contribute to identifying long-term and
sustained solutions to this problem and to focus on the
ways and means by which the international community
can address existing challenges, including in particular
continued violations against children in situations of
armed conflict and measures aimed at bringing to
justice those responsible for such violations.

