Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Canada is pleased to participate in this meeting of the
Security Council in its consideration of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including the International Police Task Force (IPTF).

Canada is pleased to continue its support for and
contribution to the IPTF in Bosnia. The IPTF is the
largest international police mission ever fielded. Its
existence is an indication of the increasing importance of
the role of civilian police in peacekeeping operations.
Civilian police provide the transition from military to
civilian authority, from peacekeeping to peace-building.
In democratic societies, there is a security covenant
between the government and the people. This covenant is
still fragile in Bosnia, hence the role for the international
military and civilian police forces. The military provides
space between factions, and the police mission provides
monitoring and training for local forces, so that
democratic institutions can take root.

Democracy and national reconciliation depend on the
rule of law. The establishment of a capable, professional
and motivated multi-ethnic Bosnian police force is key to
achieving that goal.

Canada supported the call for a strengthened IPTF
for Bosnia at meetings held in October and December
1996 in Paris and London. That support was reinforced at
meetings of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council in Istanbul, Sintra, and, last
week, in Bonn. The IPTF has begun to show results.
Throughout Bosnia, it is carrying out rigorous weapons
inspections, reducing the number of illegal checkpoints
and applying pressure to ensure that joint police uniforms
and vehicles are used. It has also started a restructuring
and training programme with the Republika Srpska police.
However, it will take some time for training in the rule of
law and in democratic, community-based policing to have
some effect on ingrained attitudes.

 

(spoke in English)

Canada is pleased that the training component of the
IPTF's role is now expanding. This is all the more reason
for careful coordination between training agencies, the
United Nations Civilian Police (UNCIVPOL) and IPTF
contributors. We would welcome an update on the training
programme which discusses its effectiveness and future
plans.

The IPTF faces structural challenges inherent to any
large United Nations mission. It could be more effective if
there were better screening and training of international
police before deployment. Improved administration and a
clearer chain of command would also enhance the IPTF's
capabilities. In addition, it must work with small groups of
civilian police who arrive in Bosnia with different training
backgrounds and capabilities, and who are then placed in
mixed units in isolated police stations throughout the
country. Despite the evident difficulties, this approach
offers, of course, the opportunity for civilian police to
exchange training methods, and demonstrates to the local
population that multi-ethnic policing can be effective.

The IPTF's mandate, role and, indeed, its very
existence in training and monitoring are linked for the
foreseeable future to the continued presence of a military
stabilizing factor - currently the Stabilization Force
(SFOR), led by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) and authorized by the United Nations Security
Council. In order to gain the confidence of all parties, the
IPTF must be unarmed. However, the ability of the IPTF to
call on SFOR is equally important in carrying out its
operations. Recent successes with regard to investigations,
removal of roadblocks, weapons inspections and prison
monitoring would not have been possible without backing
from SFOR to enforce IPTF requirements.

Recently, some have suggested that there may be a
gap between the mandates of SFOR and the IPTF which
should be filled by armed police. This might be better
characterized as an attitude gap. SFOR and the IPTF have
unique and mutually supporting responsibilities for
establishing sustainable security and the transition to peace-
building in Bosnia. However, and this I emphasize, we
should not lose sight of our goal: reinforcement of the
capacity and willingness of the local police and
Government to fully assume their responsibilities within a
context of peace. These are their responsibilities, which we
urge them to assume and exercise. We, the international
community, must avoid the temptation of displacing these
authorities. This would send the wrong message, and the
underlying local conditions would remain unchanged.

In a related effort to empower Bosnian authorities,
the United Nations will shortly begin transferring the
authority of the Mine Action Centre to the local
government. This is a significant responsibility which
Bosnian leaders will need to address seriously. The
scourge of land mines is very real in Bosnia and will
require new leadership on the part of Bosnian politicians
from all sides. For its part, Canada provided the largest
in-kind contribution of demining experts of any
participating nation to the Mine Action Centre from April
to September 1997, and continued to provide personnel
until just recently. We expect we will also provide
personnel to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Mine Action
Centre next year.

In another related effort, as part of the international
community's drive for justice and peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Canada announced the day before yesterday
an additional financial contribution of $600,000 and five
additional crime analysts to the International War Crimes
Tribunal to support its work of exhuming mass graves in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Close cooperation between the IPTF and SFOR in
recent months has been effective in implementing the
Dayton peace agreements and in ensuring that local police
function effectively. SFOR and the IPTF must continue to
combine their efforts, taking action in a coordinated and
creative fashion, using their respective strengths as part of
a long-term commitment by the international community.

