Mr. O'Brien: On 15 April, the exhausted, oppressed
people of Syria suffered yet another horrendous attack.
Scared and starved, men, women and children from
the towns of Fo'ah and Kefraya were targeted by a car
bomb while stuck at a checkpoint in Rashidin. There
were 67 children among the 125 dead - such a terrible
price for those already robbed of so much.

Yet I do not raise the incident solely because of the
loss of life or depravity of the attackers. Rather, it was
the unity of the humanitarian response to the attack
that ought also to be in the headlines. Humanitarians
from all directions rushed in to save lives. Syrian
Arab Red Crescent workers, first responders, medical
staff of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
some 15 Syrian NGOs, along with countless civilians,
bound together to aid survivors as best they could.
Out of a deplorable terrorist act arose a testament to
the strength of the Syrian spirit - of ordinary civilian
Syrians coming together to help others, regardless of
their background.

All too sadly, such glimmers of humanity, acts
that we see everyday at a local level across Syria,
are overshadowed by the sheer number and ferocity
of attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure,
such as hospitals, schools and markets. The past
months have seen fighting continue to intensify on
numerous fronts. The Secretary-General has said
time and again that there will be no military end to
this conflict. Yet, military might continues to be used
against civilians in a way that defies all reason, let
alone morality or law. The use of abhorrent chemical
weapons on 4 April in Khan Shaykhun was yet another
horrific account of such brutality. I wish I could say
it was mindless brutality - but no, it was deliberate,
planned, predetermined by other humans against their
own fellow human beings, sheer unbridled cruelty by
leaders and commanders and we await the investigation
to confirm which ones.

Just a few days ago, two more hospitals were
rendered inoperable after reported air strikes that also
led to the deaths and injury of civilians, including
children. At least six hospitals and three schools have
reportedly been impacted in April alone. I echo the call
of our humanitarian coordinators that attacks against
medical facilities are completely unacceptable and
must stop. What purpose can the use of such military
tactics bring? Certainly, they do not bring peace or any
benefit to any Syrian. These gross tactics will cause
only further human suffering, human suffering borne
primarily by the civilian population - and for which
perpetrators must, and on this we are determined, be held
to account - if not now, in the nearest future possible.

Beyond these attacks that have so shocked the world,
as I said to the Council last month (see S/PV.7909), I am
also gravely concerned about the situation in besieged
eastern Ghouta, outside Damascus, where civilians
remain trapped amid reports of relentless shelling, air
strikes and ground fighting. The last informal access
routes have reportedly been closed, further restricting
movement for some 400,000 people who live in the
area, and whom the United Nations has been unable
to access since October last year. Increased fighting
has also resulted in displacement in northern Hama,
where some 20,000 people have been displaced in
recent days. In Idlib, air strikes and shelling continue
to kill civilians and damage civilian infrastructure.
Just this week, a medical facility in Shinan village was
reportedly struck by air strikes, and in Khan Shaykhun,
where the chemical attack occurred earlier in the
month, its market was taken out by aerial bombardment
that resulted in the deaths of seven civilians, including
a child, and the wounding of 30 more.
In Raqqa, ongoing fighting has also led to deaths,
injury and displacement. Some 39,000 newly displaced
people fled fighting to join the tens of thousands
already in camps outside Raqqa city, and more arrive
every day. The situation for those in the camps is
extremely difficult, with four out of five people lacking
appropriate shelter, and there are now reports of the
deaths of several children due to a lack of medical
care. The United Nations and our NGO partners are
responding from Qamishli, and there are plans to scale
up the response in the coming days.

While insecurity causes the humanitarian situation
to deteriorate for hundreds of thousands, access to
provide them with life-saving support is challenged
at every turn. I am concerned by the rise - I repeat
rise - in administrative and other bureaucratic
restrictions imposed by all parties. For example, in the
north-east of Syria, requirements for humanitarians
to register with local authorities have been in place
since March; these include provisions regarding
NGO recruitment policies and interference with
procurement processes, among others. Furthermore,
since 4 April local authorities have attempted to direct
where assistance could be delivered. Such directing of
assistance is contrary to the humanitarian principles.
These wrongful attempted coercions have resulted
in a pause in United Nations operations in Hasakah
governorate, affecting nearly 100,000 people. In Idlib,
similar restrictions - such as new registration demands
and requests for information on and interference in
the staffing, logistics and finances of NGOs - only
penalize those most in need.

I will not repeat again the bureaucratic delaying
tactics used by the Government of Syria to thwart
humanitarian assistance at every turn, beyond saying
that they continue to bring untold human suffering.
As a result of these tactics and the ongoing insecurity,
levels of access for inter-agency cross-line convoys are
no greater than they were at this time last year. Only
four convoys have deployed so far under the new two-
monthly April-May plan, reaching 157,500 people. None
of those convoys reached besieged areas due to a lack
of necessary authorizations. In fact, the only besieged
people reached this year by land were the 6,000 trapped
in Khan al-Shih and the 60,000 in the four towns of
Madaya, Zabadani, Fo'ah and Kefraya, who were
accessed separately through the objectionable, tit-for-
tat four towns agreement. Deir ez-Zor, besieged by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, continues to be
reached by airdrops. I have said publicly that the failure
to deliver is a stain on notjust the parties to the conflict,
but also on those in the international community,
including the Security Council, as well as the members
of the humanitarian task force of the International
Syria Support Group, who have committed themselves
to exercising their influence to improve humanitarian
access, particularly to besieged areas.

Despite this challenge, the United Nations
and humanitarian partners continue to relentlessly
negotiate access, as we have always done and wherever
it is possible. Real progress is needed now to stymie
the tide of death and suffering inflicted on people day
after day, month after month. For many, it is already too
late. Inaction has played a part in material changes to
the humanitarian landscape. As the noose has tightened
around eastern Ghouta, some 30,000 people in the
adjacent areas of Barza and Qabun have also come
under siege by the Government of Syria.

Significantly, however, we continue to see an
overall reduction in the number of people besieged due
to the starve-and-surrender tactics used primarily by
the Government of Syria. Among others, thousands
of people in Wadi Barada, Khan al-Shih, Al-Waer in
Homs city, and in the four towns referred to earlier have
now been displaced as part of local agreements, which
followed years of besiegement and intense air strikes,
shelling and sniping. Khan al-Shih and Zabadani have
now been removed from the list ofbesieged locations. In
fact, Zabadani is now devoid of its civilian population.
As a result of these changes, the number of people in
besieged areas now stands atjust over 620,000.

Although the overall number of those besieged
is falling, this process of evacuation must not be
misconstrued as a positive development. These
evacuations are not in line with humanitarian principles
and are not conducted in consultation with the people.
Let us not pretend that those who evacuate move
to a location of safety. Many of those who displace
to Idlib or northern Aleppo continue to live in areas
where civilian structures, including hospitals, come
under regular aerial bombardment, and their access to
basic goods such as food and shelter is limited. These
civilians may no longer be besieged, but they have been
forced to leave their homes and they continue to suffer.

Given the shifting front lines, all routes need to
remain open to allow people safe passage and for aid to
reach people in need throughout Syria through the most
direct routes via the brave humanitarian aid workers.
We have seen innovations of necessity successfully
implemented through air drops to Deir ez-Zor and the
air bridge to Qamishli. Now, with needs increasing
in north-east Syria and more traditional routes
inaccessible, an increasing number of United Nations
partners are looking for alternatives. The number of
international NGOs operating out of north-east Syria
has nearly quadrupled in the past year and is expected
to grow further as needs continue to outstrip the
assistance being provided. A land route from Aleppo
to Qamishli to provide support to Raqqa is also being
negotiated and explored.

I am sad to say that the humanitarian situation is
deteriorating, if that were possible, and the need for
the active engagement of members of the Council is
urgent. The core needs of the Syrian people from the
international community in general, and from those
Member States seated in the Council in particular,
remain largely unchanged. They include a consolidation
of the nationwide ceasefire, and in particular a pause in
fighting in eastern Ghouta, to enable the delivery of aid;
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure by
all parties to the conflict; and the lifting of arbitrary
and bureaucratic impediments by all parties throughout
Syria.

It is imperative that no country or group prevent
people from moving in safety or humanitarian
organizations from accessing people in need wherever
they are in Syria. A step change in access to besieged
and hard-to-reach locations is needed in order to ensure
full implementation of United Nations inter-agency
convoy plans, and to ensure delivery on the basis of
humanitarian needs assessments. There must also be an
end to the removal of medical items from convoys, and
immediate, unimpeded and sustained access to all in
need throughout Syria. In particular, there must be an
immediate lifting of all sieges.

Finally, there must be a political solution to the
conflict, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). As
long as military tactics are prioritized over political,
there can be no lasting peace, and it will be the civilian
population that is exposed to further needless suffering
as a result. I also wish to say that we need action now,
because now it is already too late for the more than
250,000 Syrians who have died over the course of this
atrocious war. I would therefore tell the members of the
Security Council that it is action today that is going
to count.

