Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Permit me, Sir, to congratulate your friendly
country and you personally on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I wish you every success in
conducting the Council's deliberations this month.

By the same token, I welcome the presence of
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Commissioner of the United
Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission (UNIIIC), to present his report. We take
note of the contents of the reports and its references to
Syria's efforts to cooperate with the Commission in the
period under review. I wish to reiterate the assurance of
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic that it
will continue its cooperation with the Investigation
Commission, since we are keen on revealing the truth
behind the crime of assassinating the late former Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri.

The report before the Council moves the
investigation of the criminal assassination of Mr. Hariri
to a new stage, and we hope that this phase will help
identify the parties responsible for that crime, as well
as for other crimes that occurred in Lebanon. In this
regard, we would like to reiterate what we have said on
previous occasions, that the most dangerous thing the
investigation has faced is the fact that some parties
have encroached upon the investigation with a view to
reaching preconceived, unsubstantiated evidence.

Permit me to touch briefly on the report before
the Council. I wish to make some general observations
on it, without delving into substantive details, so as to
avoid prejudicing the character of the investigation,
which we hope will be impartial, objective,
independent and free of political interference.

First, the report refers to the joint understandings
between Syria and the Investigation Commission on
the legal framework and practical cooperation
machinery between the two sides in the framework of
Syria's response to the Commission's requests for
assistance. We would like to stress that such joint
understandings take into consideration Syrian legal and
judiciary jurisdiction and observe the requirements of
national sovereignty.

Secondly, Syria has cooperated continuously and
completely with the Commission since it began its
work. In this connection, the Special Judiciary
Commission set up in Syria is ready to cooperate with
the International Commission and to respond to all
requests presented by it. Syria is of the view that the
ability of the Syrian Judiciary Commission to respond
to the requests for assistance depends to a great extent
on the clarity and accuracy of the requests from
UNIIIC and on the need for information relating to
some aspects of the investigation concerning Syria.

Thirdly, the report refers to cooperation between
Syria and the Commission in terms of Syria's response
to the requests made by the Commission in submitting
information and documents. We would like to
emphasize before this Council that Syria continues to
make efforts in this connection.

Fourthly, it has become clear that a number of
witnesses appearing before the Commission made false
allegations in order to mislead the investigation and to
lead it to conclusions based on known political biases.

We hope that the Commission will avoid any such
tendency under the new leadership.

Fifthly, we hope that the Commission will follow
the new leads referred to in the current report. We
would like to emphasize that Council resolution 1595
(2005) calls upon all States to cooperate with the
Commission to help identify the truth regarding the
assassination of the late Rafik Hariri.

Sixthly, we note with satisfaction that the
confidentiality of the investigation has been handled
very professionally. We welcome this, and we
emphasize the need for this professionalism to
continue.

In conclusion, we would like to draw the
attention of the Security Council to the gravity of
attempts by some circles to utilize the cooperation
between Syria and UNIIIC to abuse Syria's intentions
in order to achieve special goals. We would like to
state that our cooperation is based on revealing the
unassailable truth, this being part and parcel of our
interests.

