Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative, Mr. Ghassan Salame, for
his briefing and once again pay tribute to his tireless
efforts to move forward the political transition in Libya.
I would like here, on behalf of France, to reiterate to
him once again our full and unwavering support. My
thanks go also to the representative of Sweden for his
briefing on the work of the sanctions Committee.

The first point I wish to make pertains to political
stability and reconciliation in Libya. As the Special
Representative told us this morning, he is continuing
his consultations throughout the country as part of
the national conference process, which is aimed at
encouraging reconciliation and fulfilling the conditions
necessary for elections to take place.

We have kept a very close eye on the popular
consultations that have taken place in more than 20
Libyan cities as well as the different channels ofpolitical
and military dialogue that the Special Representative
is working to harmonize. We welcome this complex
and demanding undertaking, which is being carried
out throughout the country and makes it possible to
consult the Libyan people as to aspirations concerning
the future of the country. These efforts are vital for
reducing tensions and achieving an inclusive political
solution on the basis of the Skhirat Agreement.

Consensus has emerged in Libya on the need to
revive the process of democratic transition through
elections. Elections are the best way of creating
positive momentum in Libya. The popular enthusiasm
reflected in the registration of almost 2.5 million voters
is a positive sign. The holding of general, free, credible,
transparent and democratic elections in 2018 will
require the creation of an adequate political and security
environment and a commitment by all segments of
society to respecting the outcome. The holding of early
municipal elections in Zawiya on 12 May with a good
turnout rate of 62 per cent is very encouraging.

The status quo is unacceptable. It is now the
responsibility of all Libyan political stakeholders to
respect popular opinion, which is in favour of elections
being held.

The second point I wish to make concerns
developments in the security situation as well as the
terrorist situation, which remains a genuine threat
to Libya. As we are all aware, the security obstacles
in Libya are myriad and the situation on the ground
remains volatile, as demonstrated by the attack
carried out on 2 May against the High Commission for
National Elections in Tripoli, which we unequivocally
condemned. The situation remains tense in Sabha,
with clashes between the Tebu and Awlad Sulayman
communities. In Derna, it is of vital importance that
the civilian population be protected.

France condemns all terrorist acts perpetrated in
Libya, which are intended to destabilize the country.
We call on the Libyan people to join together to fight
that scourge. We must foster dialogue among the armed
forces in order to unify them under a single civilian
authority. Here I pay tribute to the Cairo efforts made
to that end, in support of the mediation efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

Only an inclusive political solution will allow
us to vanquish terrorism and ensure lasting security.
Such a solution must include national reconciliation,
institutional unity and the strengthening of the State,
which must be capable of exerting control over the
entirety of its territory.

My third point concerns the predatory economy,
a cancer afflicting that country that is eating it from
the inside. The many actors profiting from the situation
are promoting instability, and the various forms of
trafficking that abound in Libya fuel this predatory
economy, which entrenches the status quo and weakens
the State. We must collectively reflect on ways to break
this vicious circle once and for all. For the time being,
our efforts are focused on the European Union military
operation in the Southern Central Mediterranean,
Operation Sophia, which is aimed at combating
trafficking in migrants and violations of the arms
embargo. We are also taking action at the level of the
Security Council to combat the illicit export of crude
and refined oil, as well as arms trafficking. It is vital
also that the Libyan economic and financial institutions,
in particular the Central Bank and the National Oil
Corporation, be safeguarded, and the issue of the
Central Bank's governance clarified. We will remain
active within the Security Council to consider all ofthe
tools available to us to curb these illegal activities and
the resulting misappropriation of the country's wealth.

This brings me to my final point: the plight of
migrants who are transiting Libya. France's position is
clear: we believe that those responsible for trafficking
in human beings and the smuggling of migrants must be
subject to sanctions within the existing United Nations
sanctions regime. In that respect, France has worked
together with its European and American partners,
with the support of the Libyan Government, on the
adoption by the Security Council of sanctions targeting
migrant smugglers. We hope to soon be able to reach
a consensus and to ensure that a list in that respect is
adopted by the sanctions Committee.

We must join forces in the face of acts that are not
only repugnant but also deeply destabilizing for the
country and the region. I therefore appeal to all members
of the Security Council to shoulder their responsibility
on this key issue, which is a priority for France.

I should like also to commend the headway made
by the United Nations, European Union and African
Union task force, which meets regularly and is making
tangible progress on the implementation of the Abidjan
road map. We are continuing our dialogue with the
Libyan authorities to facilitate assisted voluntary
returns, overseen by the International Organization for
Migration, and to enhance cooperation with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

