Mr. Seyoum (Eritrea): I am grateful to you, Mr.
President, and to all the other members of the Security
Council for this opportunity for delegation to
participate in today's open discussion on the agenda
item before the Council, "The situation between Eritrea
and Ethiopia".

Today the Council is considering the report of the
Secretary-General dated 9 August 2000, document
S/2000/785. At the outset, my delegation wishes to
thank the Secretary-General for the meaningful report
that is before the Council. I wish also to seize the
occasion to thank him for his report of 30 June 2000,
document S/2000/643.
I am very grateful for the statements made by all
members of the Council, and by the representatives of
Japan and of Norway. My delegation has taken note of
all of them with great interest. My delegation assures
the Council that Eritrea will remain committed to all
agreements reached thus far and to those to come in the
future between my country, Eritrea, and Ethiopia.

The Council is considering the report of the
Secretary-General at a time when a vast portion of the
sovereign territory of the State of Eritrea has been
invaded and has been occupied by neighbouring
Ethiopia with impunity since last May. This act of
invasion in the pursuit of territorial claims is, of
course, a violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, of the charter of the Organization of African
Unity and of international law. The Council is meeting
today at a time when more than a million members of
Eritrea's population are internally displaced, and when
some 95,000 others have fled to neighbouring Sudan as
a result of Ethiopia's invasion, which was aimed at
destroying the small nation of Eritrea and the dignity of
its people.

Since the invasion, men, women and children
have been living in tents, caves and valleys; during the
coming rainy season, they will be exposed to illnesses
of all kinds. With reference to the return of refugees
from the Sudan, the report states that,

"even in the best-case scenario, immediate return
for many is impossible as a result of the
destruction of homes, basic infrastructure, loss of
crops and household assets, lack of social
services and the presence of landmines."
(S/2000/785, para. 6)

If we add the 71,000 persons who have been
inhumanely deported from Ethiopia, who are omitted
from the report, and the 335,000 drought-affected
people, whose poor living conditions have been
exacerbated by the war, we are looking at a serious
short-term and long-term humanitarian problem in a
country with a population of about 4 million.

As I speak, I know that so many children are
going to bed hungry. Therefore, I cannot help but bring
this to the attention of the Council. The Government
and the people of Eritrea are very grateful for the
assistance we have received thus far from the
international donor community, but this is far from
meeting our needs. We are particularly grateful to the
United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for making the Council aware of
the humanitarian situation from time to time, and for
its coordination with the World Food Programme in
reaching out to the needy with emergency food
supplies.

I should also add that the Council is meeting at a
time when a good number of the members of the
population of the Eritrean territories currently under
Ethiopian occupation are living in the worst imaginable
human-rights conditions. Rampant rape of under-age
girls and adult women, including women as old as 60
years of age; the abduction of boys; the separation and
disappearance of family members; and the stealing and
killing of livestock: these are everyday events in the
occupied territories. As the Council meets today, the
vandalism of hotels and other private business, the
robbing of priceless holy treasures from churches and
mosques and the destruction of buildings of public
institutions and other crucial infrastructure with
explosives continue unabated. The list of such crimes
is long, but I do not wish to go into details at this time,
because they will be adequately addressed in other
United Nations forums.

In view of what I have said, and in the interest of
genuine peace, my delegation, on behalf of the
Government and the people of Eritrea, welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General that is before the
Council today. I would be remiss if I did not use this
opportunity to thank the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, whose staff worked very hard to expedite
the production of the report. The Assistant Secretary-
General, Mr. Hedi Annabi, and his team in the Office
of Operations have done a commendable job in that
regard. We are grateful to Mr. Annabi for briefing my
delegation before the report was published.

While we do not have very much to comment on
in the report because of its being mostly of a technical
nature, I would like to say that my delegation would
have wished to see a balanced text on the humanitarian
developments described in section III. My delegation
has observed that the reporting is not parallel for the
two countries. We consider significant the report's
omission of mention of the 71,000 Eritreans and
Ethiopians of Eritrean origin that have been expelled
from Ethiopia, of civilian casualties and of the
deliberate destruction of economic and social
infrastructure by the Ethiopian army.

The Secretary-General has made a novel and
meaningful proposal to the Security Council in
paragraph 48 of his report. The Government and people
of Eritrea fully support the proposal. The expansion of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea (UNMEE), which I would be tempted to
call "you and me", is critical to the ongoing peace
process between Eritrea and Ethiopia. I therefore
appeal to the Council to adopt the report's proposals,
including the proposal contained in paragraph 48.

My delegation knows that the Secretary-General
is making serious efforts to bring lasting peace to our
troubled region. The peoples of Eritrea and Ethiopia
are now looking to the Security Council for a swift
decision and the effective and speedy implementation
of the Mission. I fervently hope that the Council will
not fail them.

In the fragile situation we now have, I cannot
emphasize enough the fact that speed is of paramount
importance. The implementation of phase three of
UNMEE, which is the deployment of the full
peacekeeping operation, ought to be expedited. The
Government and the people of Eritrea are grateful for
the Council's adoption of resolution 1312 (2000), of 31
July 2000, which led to the establishment of UNMEE.

In the same vein, our appreciation also goes to the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), President
Abdelaziz Bouteflika of Algeria, and OAU Secretary-
General Salim Ahmed Salim for their continued efforts
for peace in our region. We are also grateful for the
helping hands of the United States and the European
Union, working as partners in this venture.

In conclusion, I wish to say that the Government
and the people of Eritrea look forward to warmly
welcoming the members of UNMEE to Eritrea. On
behalf of my Government, I pledge full cooperation in
support of the success of UNMEE's expressed
objectives. I appeal once again for speedy adoption of
the proposals before us.

