Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to begin by
extending a very warm welcome to His Excellency
Prime Minister Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao of Timor-
Leste, as well as to thank him for his statement. I would
also like express our appreciation to Ms. Ameerah Haq
for her briefing to the Council in her capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

Japan highly commends the po sitive
developments in Timor-Leste in the past year. As the
Secretary-General's report (S/2011/32) states, the
situation remains calm, almost all internally displaced
persons have returned to their home towns and, most
significant, the Government has made notable progress
in the area of security sector reform, by passing
relevant laws well in advance of receiving the support
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) for its comprehensive review.

We may say that Timor-Leste is at a critical
juncture on the path to becoming a prosperous,
responsible nation. In particular, the presidential and
parliamentary elections scheduled for the first half of
2012 will be of great importance. We look forward to
seeing transparent and democratic elections conducted
proudly by the Timorese people. To achieve that goal,
it is critically important to have not only adequate
logistical and administrative capacity but also adequate
security. In order to achieve the successful conduct of
the elections, Japan stands ready to assist Timor-Leste,
working with UNMIT in the area of electoral support,
as required and requested.

We highly commend the national police's
successful resumption of policing responsibility in
most districts. We have seen the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) and the United Nations police
work together in the districts where policing
responsibility has now been handed over. But what is
more urgently needed, in accordance with the Special
Representative's plan, is to build more substantial
capacities within the PNTL in order for it to actively
engage in the preventive activities usually described as
community policing. Although such low-profile
activities often get less attention from the public, they
contribute to better security in the longer term. Japan
therefore believes that the Government of Timor-Leste
should increase its commitment in this area.

As for the issue of the certification of PNTL
officers, I trust that the Government will find no reason
to exempt the 52 officers who face serious disciplinary
and criminal charges from further criminal and
disciplinary proceedings. Japan acknowledges the
strong willingness and commitment of the Government
to expedite the resumption of the process to enable
PNTL officers to gain as much experience as possible
ahead of the critical elections in 2012 and the period
beyond. However, the lack of capacity in the judicial
sector should also be acknowledged as a source of
concern. In that regard, I concur with the Special
Representative, who has urged the Government and
judicial authorities to take all measures necessary to
ensure the national police's integrity. The international
community stands ready to support this endeavour as
well.

We recently saw that the Timorese budget has
exceeded $1 billion and the country's population has
surpassed 1 million people. Such rapid expansion gives
this young country great potential, as well as posing
socio-economic challenges. While we commend the
Government's work, it is worrisome to note that many
young people remain unemployed and that large
numbers of youth are joining the labour market every
year with limited opportunities for employment. Japan
would therefore like to encourage the Government to
put more emphasis on formulating policies for job
creation and rural development.

Against this background, Japan strongly believes
that UNMIT's presence and support are critical,
especially in assisting the Government in the
successful conduct of the important elections in 2012.
From that point of view, Japan strongly supports the
extension of UNMIT's mandate for another year, at the
strength proposed in the Secretary-General's report. At
the same time, Japan encourages not only the
Government and UNMIT, but also the Security Council
and all interested stakeholders, to engage actively in
the discussions as to the type of international support
and commitment that is most needed and most suitable
for Timor-Leste. I affirm Japan's commitment to
leading those efforts.

It was regrettable that the Security Council
mission to Timor-Leste that Japan organized as lead
country last October had to be postponed just before
the planned departure. But we sincerely hope that the
new members of the Council will undertake to
reschedule the mission prior to the critical year of
2012.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan's
continued commitment to strengthening the friendship
between our countries and cooperating with the
Timorese people to support their nation-building
efforts.

