Thailand welcomes the annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525), which provides strategic guidance to Member States on how to strengthen child protection. We further note with appreciation the hard work and dedication of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict on this issue. Thailand also calls on all parties to adhere to the Secretary-General's appeal for an immediate global ceasefire, and to prioritize humanitarian access to children and the most vulnerable in situations of armed conflict. Thailand wishes to highlight the elements we believe deserve special emphasis in today's discussion. First, we need to form a stronger partnership, especially among States, United Nations agencies and civil society. Thailand welcomes the continued engagement of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General with States. Beyond that, all stakeholders, including civil society, must work closely together to address various emerging issues such as the evolving tactics used to recruit children, including through online and social media platforms. In addition to law enforcement, strong community advocacy and education can provide the best defence for children against falling prey to recruitment. Thailand also commends the global ACT to Protect Children Affected by Conflict campaign, which is aimed at generating greater awareness and action to protect children affected by war. Secondly, we have to synergize various international efforts in child protection for the best interests of the child. This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. Thailand reaffirms its firm commitment to the Convention and its Optional Protocol and is ready to support fellow States parties in fulfilling their obligations wherever appropriate. Thailand joins the international community in viewing with concern the plight of children affected by armed conflict. Thailand condemns all violations and crimes against children in situations of armed conflict and supports the effective implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions on this issue. We fully support the launch of the new Practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict. In our view, not only should we promote children's participation in a meaningful and sustainable manner, but their voices and needs must be taken into account in any effort to resolve conflict at any phase, while ensuring the best interests of the child. Looking ahead, relevant bodies within the United Nations system should work in a more coordinated and integrated manner so that their actions are mutually reinforcing. Thirdly, we need a comprehensive approach to the protection of children in armed conflict, from prevention through to post-conflict management and the social reintegration of affected children. Thailand stresses the importance of ensuring that the rights of children are protected, and that the legal infrastructure is in place to enable their active participation in society. In this regard, we stress the importance of resolution 2427 (2018), which underlines the need to prevent violations against children in countries affected by armed conflict and in their immediately surrounding regions. We therefore encourage further regional engagement on this issue. It is equally imperative that we create an environment conducive to the reintegration of children associated with, or having fallen victim to recruitment by, armed forces and armed groups. Access to quality education for children, for instance, is one of the key factors in enhancing children's capacities and participation in both prevention and reintegration processes. To put an end to any conflict and ensure sustainable peace, Thailand urges all stakeholders to ingrain a sustainability mindset, together with development approaches, into efforts to address the root causes of armed conflict, such as limited access to quality education and health services; poverty; discrimination; gender inequality; social injustice; and economic and social exclusion of persons and communities vulnerable to and at risk of radicalization, violent extremism and terrorism. Fourthly, mainstreaming child protection into relevant United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding and political missions is vital. And, in this connection, fifthly, training and capacity-building, including training of trainers, should be accorded priority. In armed conflict situations, peacekeepers are often at the forefront of protecting civilians, including children. As part of the task of early peacebuilding, our peacekeepers have been providing a safe learning environment for local children, with basic education and development learning centres, in their assigned United Nations peacekeeping missions. Our female peacekeepers also play a vital role in building trust and ensuring a protective environment for vulnerable groups, including children. We underscore the importance of having clear mandates and guidelines for effective operations and for smooth transitions from peacekeeping to post-conflict development. Peacekeepers and peacebuilders also need specific predeployment and in-mission training on issues concerning children affected by armed conflict. For our part, Thai peacekeepers are trained as a standard procedure to assist the local population in their efforts to prevent a relapse into armed conflict and to ensure sustainable development. Training elements include international law, child protection, gender-based issues, protection of civilians, conflict-related sexual violence and cultural sensitivity. We also stress the importance of sharing knowledge, best practices and lessons learned. Thailand is therefore committed to further collaboration, including by working to become a regional centre of excellence on the issue of children and armed conflict. Last but not least, mainstreaming child protection into relevant United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding and political missions 1s particularly critical in helping local communities address the impacts and challenges of the coronavirus disease, especially against the risk of children becoming victims of trafficking and all forms of violence, as well as recruitment as child soldiers. The international community must exert all efforts to put an end to the suffering of children in armed conflict. Thailand endeavours to do our part and looks forward to working with others to amplify our efforts.
