Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing,
which, as usual, has been very useful. We also thank
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General for their assessment report
(S/2018/12) on phase one of the reconfiguration of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

We are very encouraged that the security situation
in Darfur continues to show marked progress and that
the Government is consolidating State authority across
Darfur. We commend the Government for extending
the unilateral ceasefire and for the fact that there has
been no fighting with one of the rebel groups since
around the beginning of 2015 and with a second rebel
group since the beginning of2016. Humanitarian access
has continued to improve in Darfur and the operating
environment for the movement of humanitarian
personnel across Darfur has been reliable and open
since December 2016.

We are particularly pleased to learn that the weapons-
collection campaign launched by the Government is
helping to consolidate the prevailing relative peace
and stability in Darfur, including its contribution to
the significant decrease in intercommunal conflicts,
especially given the valid concerns raised during the
launch of the campaign. It is also encouraging to note
that the collection process has been without incident in
the internally displaced persons (IDPs) camps and that
an agreement has been reached to establish a trilateral
committee, with the participation of UNAMID, the
Government and representatives of IDPs, to conduct
the collection of weapons in Kalma camp. It is our hope
that the weapons campaign will contribute to further
reducing the level of armed violence and to improving
the conditions necessary for the return of IDPs to their
original homes.

Although we are pleased that no new displacements
occurred in the reporting period, the high number of
IDPs remains one of the greatest challenges to the 10
months of sustainable peace in Darfur. However, the
Government has limited capacity to fully address that
enormous challenge and therefore needs the support of
the international community.

Of course, we are disappointed that progress
towards achieving a negotiated political settlement has
remained difficult so far. As the Panel of Experts on the
Sudan established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
explained in its final report (see S/2017/1125), the core
problem is the unrealistic expectations of the rebel
groups. It is difficult to assume that the rebel groups
are ready to engage with the Government in good
faith or, indeed, to consider the interests of the people
a priority. What their acts show is that they have been
involved in criminal activities, including in Libya and
South Sudan. As the report of the Secretary-General
indicates, and as Under-Secretary-General Lacroix just
stressed, whatever rebel activities there may be are
limited to pockets of Jebel Marra and have descended
to involvement in acts of banditry. That is why we are
reiterating our call to the Council to put pressure on the
rebel groups to participate meaningfully in the peace
process or face the consequences.

We are also concerned about the slow progress of
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. As the Secretary-General has said, the Doha
Document represents a comprehensive framework
for a political solution, and we urge all armed groups
to lay down their weapons and join it without delay.
We are encouraged by the Government's expressed
commitment to the Doha Document's implementation
and the recent action that has been taken in that
direction. It must be understood that the Government
is making these efforts in spite of the difficult regional
security dynamics and the hostile actions of other
external actors, aimed at fomenting more trouble in the
Sudan and the region by supporting some of the armed
opposition groups, as is highlighted in the report of the
Panel of Experts (S/2017/ll25).

We are also pleased to note the successful
completion of phase 1 of the drawdown and
reconfiguration of UNAMID, and the Government's
commendable cooperation in that regard. Furthermore,
we are pleased that no serious adverse impact has been
noted following the closure of team sites as part of the
reconfiguration process. We believe that the situation
in Darfur is conducive to proceeding to phase 2. This
time, a great deal of emphasis should be placed on
peacebuilding efforts, and that is the universal request
being made to the assessment team - for development
projects to support peace in Darfur. That will require
enhancing the financial and human resources of the
United Nations country team.

It will also be very important not to overlook the
humanitarian challenges in the region. The report
shows that the number of refugees entering Darfur from
South Sudan now totals 192,826, with 89,000 of those
having arrived in 2017 alone. The Sudan obviously
need support for this, including considering the fact
that it has also been contributing to peace and stability
in the region, as can be seen from President Salva Kiir's
visit to the Sudan on 1 and 2 November and President
Al-Bashir's visits to Uganda on 13 and 14 October
and Chad on 1 and 2 December. In that context,
we support the efforts of UNAMID and the United
Nations country team to develop a joint fund-raising
strategy for implementing the Integrated Strategic
Framework for Darfur for the period from 2017 to
2019. The international community should also provide
all necessary support to the peacebuilding efforts in
Darfur. We appreciate the fact that the Government
has allocated land for a temporary operating base for
the Jebel Marra task force in G010. That will no doubt
greatly facilitate UNAMID's anticipated traditional
peacekeeping role in the Jebel Marra area.
Lastly, we support the outcome of the assessment
and recommendations made by the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and the Secretary-
General regarding the way forward. We look forward
to the conduct of the joint review by the African Union
and the United Nations, in close consultation with
the Government, before the renewal of UNAMID's
mandate in June.

