Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Joanna Wronecka for her briefing today on the
important work undertaken by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, and for her commitment
to the work of the Committee. As always, she has our
continued support.

The 24 October briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, to the Sudan
Sanctions Committee underscored the ongoing problem
of sexual violence by State and non-State actors in
the Sudan and the continuing need for international
attention on the issue. The Special Representative's
reporting that perpetrators of sexual violence include
members of the Sudanese armed forces and police as
well as armed non-Government militias is alarming.
It is imperative that the Government of the Sudan
investigate and hold accountable those responsible for
such crimes.

The Sudan sanctions regime allows for the
designation of individuals who commit violations of
international humanitarian law or international human
rights law, or other atrocities. As Special Representative
Patten recommended, the Panel of Experts on the Sudan
should be provided more resources to investigate crimes
of sexual violence and tasked to do so in the areas of
Jebel Marra, including Nertiti, where several incidents
were recently reported. While significant work remains
to address this ongoing problem, we appreciate the
Sudanese Government's engagement with the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we
urge the Government to continue cooperating with her
in future.

Enhancing human rights protections and practices
is one of the six key areas of mutual concern prioritized
in the phase II framework for bilateral engagement
between the United States and the Sudan, which was
agreed to last year. We welcome the commitment ofthe
Sudan to making progress on that issue, among others.
In that regard, we note our deep concerns about the
Sudanese Government's response to the recent protests
in the Sudan, which resulted in a significant number
of deaths and serious injuries as well as the arbitrary
detention without charge or trial of a number of political
activists and protesters. We urge the Government to
fully respect the rights to freedom of association and
peaceful assembly and release all journalists, political
opposition leaders, activists and any other protesters
arbitrarily detained. We also urge the Government
to ensure that a fully independent and transparent
investigation into the deaths of protesters take place
as soon as possible, followed by accountability for any
excessive use of force.

With regard to the report of the Panel of Experts
(see S/2019/34), we note with concern the continued
clashes between the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid faction (SLA/AW) and Sudanese Government
forces. We are most concerned with the Sudanese
armed forces response to the SLA/AW hit-and-run
attacks with large-scale military operations aimed at
driving the group out of the area. That fighting has
resulted in a significant number of causalities on both
sides, as well as new displacement, humanitarian crisis
and human rights abuses. And across Darfur, women
and girls continue to be subjected to conflict-related
sexual violence. The resulting human rights violations
and abuses, indiscriminate shootings, looting and
destruction of property are unacceptable, and we call
upon all parties to cease hostilities.

While the decreasing financial and logistical
support from South Sudan to Darfuri rebels is
encouraging, we are concerned by reports of growing
support from Libyan groups to Darfuri armed groups.
Furthermore, reported acts in defiance of the arms
embargo by all armed groups and the Government of
the Sudan serve to underscore the need for greater
attention to the implementation of the sanction regime's
arms embargo.

The United States is concerned by Panel reporting
that the Government of the Sudan is interfering with the
independence of the Panel by mandating Government
participation in Panel meetings with non-Government
interlocutors. We fully support the independence
of the Panel and call upon the Government of the
Sudan to cooperate in this respect. The United States
encourages all Member States to cooperate with the
Panel of Experts on the Sudan and fully implement
our obligations pursuant to the arms embargo, asset
freeze and travel ban measures. We also call upon
Libyan warring factions to cease their cooperation with
Darfuri armed groups.

We will continue to encourage the Government
of the Sudan, the Justice and Equality Movement and
the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction
to build upon the recent agreement on a negotiations
framework and to make progress towards a cessation of
hostilities and a political agreement. We also call on the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction to engage
with the joint chief mediator and to engage within a
peace process.

