Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First, allow me to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, for her briefing on her thirtieth report on the
activities of the Court carried out during the reporting
period, in accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution
1593 (2005).

As the report states, the new Administration in
Darfur has taken significant steps to ensure peace,
security and stability in the country. That fact deserves
recognition and praise from all parties, given the
significant political advances that have been made in
Darfur. In that connection, we welcome the signing
of the Juba Declaration for Confidence-building
Procedures and the Preparation for Negotiation, signed
on 11 September by the Sovereign Council and a
coalition of armed groups across the Sudan, including
in Darfur. We hope that the road map set out in the
declaration can be implemented and that the people
of the Sudan will see the signing of the long-awaited
peace agreement that they deserve.

As far as the Court is concerned, it bears
remembering that it was established for a reason,
and we expect it to fulfil its mandate efficiently,
impartially and transparently in the Sudan. All the
Darfur victims deserve justice, and accountability is
fundamental to achieving stable and lasting peace in
Darfur. All the perpetrators of crimes against humanity
and genocide must therefore be brought to justice.
However, we continued to see slow or limited progress
on judicial activities, including on investigations by
the International Criminal Court during the reporting
period. We also note that, despite the activities that the
Court has undertaken to fulfil its mandate, there is a
persistent lack of cooperation with the Court from some
States, even some that are Parties to the Rome Statute.
That is why, as a country that is not a party to the
Statute, we hope that the International Criminal
Court will continue to act solely as a complementary
institution, prioritizing Sudanese jurisprudence and
thereby joining the regional and international efforts
to strengthen the Sudan's capacity to promote the
rule of law and safeguard human rights, as we believe
that it is only joint efforts and mutual trust among the
parties and institutions that will enable the Sudan to
be stable, peaceful and prosperous. In that process, the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan must
be respected.

In conclusion, the position of Equatorial Guinea on
the Court is well known. For that reason, any comments
by my country's delegation with regard to any of the
activities of the International Criminal Court should
never be interpreted as a recognition of its jurisdiction,
which we reject.

