Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), Ambassador Inocencio Arias, for submitting
the Committee's programme of work for the tenth 90-
day period (S/2004/32, annex) and particularly for his
effective leadership of that important body. My
delegation aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the representative of Argentina on behalf of the Rio
Group; we shall now make a few observations in our
national capacity.

My country places priority on the global fight
against terrorism and resolutely supports the activities
being carried out by the CTC in its work to verify the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We
welcome the fact that the Committee has continued to
broaden its contacts and its cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
We believe that that line of action is an important
component of the fight against terrorism.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Al
Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee - which I
have the honour to chair - have appeared in various
international forums, as powerful instruments of the
Organization in the global fight against terrorism. A
recent opportunity was the presence of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) at the
Bali Regional Ministerial Meeting on Counter-
Terrorism, held on 4 and 5 February and organized
jointly by the Governments of Indonesia and Australia.

Technical assistance for those States that need it
must continue to be one of the Committee's priorities.
We take note of the progress achieved in that area,
particularly the preparation of a valuable guide to
information and sources of assistance for the fight
against terrorism, which is available on the Internet.

The report on revitalization of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (S/2004/124, annex), which we
are considering today, contains concrete proposals to
improve the Committee's structure and procedures in
order to respond more effectively to the mandate
conferred on it by resolution 1373 (2001). The
proposals are intended to strengthen technical
assistance and dialogue with States, to increase
contacts with the relevant international organizations in
the fight against terrorism and, in general, to provide
better tools and capacity to the Committee in carrying
out its mandate. That is why we support them.

I should like to emphasize that the report
adequately addresses a concern of my delegation that
was raised in resolution 1456 (2003): the obligation of
States to ensure that the anti-terrorism measures they
adopt meet all their obligations under international law,
particularly norms related to human rights, to refugees
and to humanitarian law. We are pleased to see that the
restructured Committee will maintain regular contacts
with the United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and with other human
rights organizations.

I should like to refer briefly to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee's relationship with the Al Qaeda
and Taliban sanctions Committee from the perspective
of its future work. Since I assumed the chairmanship of
the Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee, we
have maintained close ties with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee through periodic meetings with its
Chairman and through contacts between our respective
panels of experts. That approach should continue, as
envisaged in resolution 1526 (2004), adopted recently
by the Security Council, which reaffirms the need to
establish close coordination and a concrete exchange of
information between the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee.

I should like to conclude by reaffirming our
country's support for the report on revitalization of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, adding that it would be
naive to think that we have won the fight against
terrorism. I fear that we will see many more terrorist
acts in various parts of the world. But, for countries to
gain ground in the fight against terrorism, the CTC's
contribution is of the utmost importance. We believe
that, with the proposed changes to the Committee and
with the will of Member States, the international
community will be able to make decisive progress in
the fight against the scourge of terrorism.

