The President (interpretation from French): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of September, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Tono Eitel, Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of August 1996. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Eitel for the
great diplomatic skill and unfailing courtesy with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan
border

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Tajikistan (S/1996/754)

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan,
document S/1996/754.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1996/638,
letter dated 8 August 1996 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General;
and S/1996/640, letter dated 9 August 1996 from the
Permanent Representative of Tajikistan to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan
of 13 September 1996 (S/1996/754).
 

"The Security Council expresses its concern at
the deterioration of the situation in Tajikistan and at
the increasing tension along the Tajik-Afghan
border. It reaffirms its commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Tajikistan and to the inviolability of its borders.

"The Security Council is also concerned about
the violations of the Tehran cease-fire agreement of
17 September 1994 (S/1994/1102, annex I) and
about the failure of both parties to implement the
Ashgabat agreements. It is, in particular, concerned
about the ongoing fighting in the Tavildara region
and the seizure of the towns of Jirgatal and
Tajikabad by the opposition. The Council demands
the immediate cessation of all hostilities and acts of
violence.

"The Security Council recalls the commitments
made by the Government of Tajikistan and by the
leadership of the United Tajik Opposition (UTO) to
resolve the conflict and to achieve national
reconciliation through peaceful means. It regrets that
these commitments have not so far been honoured.

"The Security Council commends the efforts of
the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) and urgently calls upon the
parties to cooperate fully with UNMOT and to
ensure the safety of the personnel of the United
Nations and other international organizations and
also calls on them to lift all restrictions on the
freedom of movement of UNMOT personnel. In this
connection it is concerned about the large-scale use
of landmines due to the threat it creates for the
population and UNMOT personnel.

"The Security Council welcomes the initiative
of the Secretary-General to arrange for an inter-
agency mission to Tajikistan to determine how to
respond most effectively to the humanitarian
situation.

"The Security Council welcomes the renewed
work of the Joint Commission and the results of
their efforts in reducing tensions in the Garm region
and in the Karategin valley.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the
primary responsibility rests with the Tajik parties
themselves in resolving their differences. It recalls

 
paragraphs 3 and 4 of its resolution 1061 (1996) of
14 June 1996.

"The Security Council commends the efforts of
the Secretary-General's Special Representative and
calls upon the parties to cooperate fully with him in
resuming the inter-Tajik talks. The Council reiterates
the importance of the continuation of direct political
dialogue between the President of the Republic of
Tajikistan and the leader of the UTO for the peace

 

process and encourages them to hold their next
meeting as soon as possible."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/38.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.40 pm.

