Mr. Maitland (South Africa): At the outset, I
would like to extend my delegation's congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July.
We would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, for his briefing. We also extend our
gratitude to Mr. Javier Solana for his briefing on the
European Union's efforts to support the peace process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I wish
further to convey South Africa's profound gratitude to
Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi, the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for his dedicated
leadership of the work of the United Nations in that
country.

This meeting is indeed timely, as it coincides with
important developments in the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard,
South Africa congratulates the Congolese parties on
their efforts to implement the Global and All-inclusive
Agreement, and in particular on the establishment of
the transitional institutions. We welcome the formation
of the Transitional Government, which we view as a
crucial first step towards achieving lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. South Africa is
honoured to have been able to assist in that process,
and it remains ready to continue to do so. We urge all
stakeholders in the peace process to continue to
observe and implement the agreements they have
signed. There is no turning back. The strategy of
talking peace and waging war at the same time must be
abandoned.

Today's public meeting also coincides with the
Council's ongoing discussions on strengthening and
adjusting the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) in the light of new
developments. Indeed, the grave security and
humanitarian situation in Ituri province obliges the
Security Council to give serious consideration to
proposals to strengthen MONUC's military presence in
that part of the country. In addition to strengthening the
numbers and capabilities of MONUC's forces, South
Africa believes that the operation should be equipped
with a Chapter VII mandate so that it can effectively
carry out the tasks assigned to it. In that regard, the
protection of civilians under imminent threat of armed
attack should receive special emphasis.

As the report of the Council's recent mission to
Central Africa (5/2003/653) correctly points out, the
departure of the Interim Emergency Multinational
Force, which was dispatched under Chapter VII of the
Charter, and the imminent deployment of MONUC's
second task force to Ituri raise important questions
with respect to the congruence of their two mandates.
We hope that the Security Council will take a decision
on this matter as soon as possible, in order to allow
potential troop-contributing countries sufficient time to
prepare their forces for the tasks at hand.

While promoting a more robust mandate for
MONUC, we would be remiss not to stress the
responsibility of all Congolese stakeholders to ensure
the protection and promotion of human rights in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is essential to
creating an environment conducive to the establishment
of lasting peace and reconciliation.

We concur with the Secretary-General's
assessment that there is a need to examine the role of
MONUC and other United Nations system partners in
the light of the new political developments. South
Africa therefore welcomes the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's second special
report (S/2003/566), which proposes a more
comprehensive approach to support the transitional
phase in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Of particular importance to South Africa is the
need to support the security arrangements for the
Transitional Government in Kinshasa, as well as the
work of the Ituri interim administration. The new
political developments afford all stakeholders the
opportunity to rejuvenate the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate South
Africa's commitment to stay the course with the
Congolese people as they work to implement all
agreements. Accordingly, our engagement with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo did not end with the
signing of the Final Act at Sun City. The recent success
in the peace process provides real opportunities to
commence the urgent task of economic reconstruction
in the country. The support of the international
community in that task is of critical importance. South
Africa stands ready to make its contribution to the
efforts of the Congolese people to achieve peace and
prosperity in their country.

