Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I begin my statement by expressing our
solidarity and that of our Government to the Government
and the people of the United States of America and the
families of those who heroically died as a result of the
barbaric terrorist attacks on the Twin Towers and other
sites in the country, which we are commemorating on
today's anniversary. We convey to you, Ambassador
Haley, our most sincere sympathy.

My delegation is grateful for the convening of
this meeting, justified by the intense international
attention that Idlib has drawn and the urgent need for a
coordinated response so as to avoid an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis. We are grateful to the Russian
Federation for its briefing and to the three Astana
guarantors who, in holding the third trilateral summit in
Tehran, have become key actors in coordination efforts
and political and security cooperation at the regional
and international levels. The Government of Equatorial
Guinea has taken note of the joint statement issued
following the summit in Tehran, in the light ofwhich my
delegation would like to make the following comments.

We gratefully welcome the commitment of the
Astana guarantors to continue cooperating to eradicate
all persons, groups, enterprises and entities designated
as terrorists in Syria by the Security Council. That
position fully corresponds to that of the Government
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, which is firmly
opposed to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Moreover, the resolve and commitment of the
guarantors to not prioritize a military solution to the
conflict and advocate for a negotiated political process
is to be commended. We believe that it is essential
that those two key provisions of the joint statement be
ensured and realized on the ground. That is predicated
upon all national and international parties abstaining
from military operations, which could transform Idlib
governorate into the target of intense bombings. At this
past Friday's briefing (see S/PV.8345), we all were in
agreement in stressing the grave consequences that a
fierce military offensive would have for that area.

It is true that we must combat active terrorists in
order to restore peace and stability to Syria. As the
Iranian Chair pointed out at the summit, however, that
must be done without causing suffering for the civilian
population with a scorched-earth policy. While there
seems to be no obvious military solution to neutralize
the Idlib jihadists, it is also clear that a destructive
offensive should not be considered as the appropriate
response. Even if such an offensive succeeded in
defeating those groups on the battlefield, the jihadist
threat would remain. We saw that scenario play out
last year in the Euphrates Valley region following
the territorial victory over and retaking of the city of
Deir ez-Zor by the Syrian army from militias from the
Islamic State. Remaining elements ofjihadist militias
can continue waging an asymmetrical war in Syria and
beyond its borders in areas not under the control of the
region's Governments. I therefore echo the words of
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, who stated recently:

"Let us try to avoid that the last, probably major,
battle of the Syrian territorial conflict end in a
bloodbath. We ask all countries to maintain moral
pressure to avoid a drastic military option in Idlib
and provide additional time for negotiations".

In that regard, we express our optimism regarding the
meetings that the Special Envoy held yesterday and
today with representatives of the Astana guarantors
with a view towards negotiations to pave the way
towards peace and the possibility of finding alternative
solutions for ending the impasse and the armed conflict
in Syria through the implementation of a Syrian-led,
inclusive constitutional committee.

While plans to combat armed and terrorist factions
in Idlib remain on the drawing table, the priority of
the Security Council must continue to focus on the
protection of the civilian population, of which almost
3 million people are already displaced and have no
place to go.

