Mr. Elaraby: For me also, sitting here today after
four years' absence from the Security Council was
definitely educational. We all heard comments and
assurances from States members of the Council
regarding the need to improve and enhance the
Council's capacity in the area of the pacific settlement
of disputes. The first step towards improvement is to
recognize that every system has its defects. Many
proposals were made here today, and the overall
approach was that members must dedicate themselves
to emphasizing their commitment to strengthening the
Council. That is a point that should be regarded as very
positive.

In the area of preventive diplomacy, it was made
very clear this morning by many, quoting the
Secretary-General, that we must move from a culture
of reaction to a culture of prevention. Here, of course,
the Secretary-General's role is very important. His
office holds endless potential in the area of the
peaceful settlement of disputes; it has definitely
surpassed the expectations of those who drafted the
Charter in 1945 . One can now say that the office of the
Secretary-General symbolizes one of the basic
purposes of the Charter: to be a centre for harmonizing
the actions of nations in the attainment of the common
objectives of the United Nations.

This morning, the representative of Germany, in
referring to the settlement of disputes and their referral
to the International Court of Justice, mentioned my
name, saying that perhaps I should like to elaborate on
that. So I shall do so very, very briefly.

There are three areas here: the first is wider
acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice - as I said, to date, only
63 out of 190 States have accepted its jurisdiction; the
second is more referrals of disputes to the Court by the
Security Council, in accordance with paragraph 3 of
Article 36 of the Charter; the third is the question of
requests for advisory opinions. But if one looks at
those three different approaches, one sees that the
problem really is that disputes are not taken voluntarily
to the International Court of Justice by the parties or
through the Council, through the General Assembly or
through the Secretary-General. By "through the
Secretary-General", I mean that he can call upon the
parties; he still does not have any authority to ask for
an advisory opinion.

Many have said that disputes may be politically
inspired or politically motivated. Even before the
present International Court, the Permanent Court of
International Justice tried to clarify that point by saying
that a dispute is a disagreement on a point of law or of
fact. The present Court has made it very clear that it is
aware that political aspects may be present in any legal
dispute before it:

"The Court, as a judicial organ, is however only
concerned to establish, first, that the dispute
before it is a legal dispute, in the sense of a
dispute capable of being settled by the application
of principles and rules of international law, and
secondly, that the Court has jurisdiction to deal
with it, and that that jurisdiction is not fettered by
any circumstance rendering the application
inadmissible." (Border and Transborder Armed Actions (Nicaragua v. Honduras), Jurisdiction
and Admissibility, Judgment, International Court
ofJustice Reports 1988, p. 91, para. 52)

So the question of the political aspects of disputes
should not really prevent the referral of disputes to the
International Court of Justice.

Today, the Security Council made very important
and relevant proposals to enhance its role in the pacific
settlement of disputes. In fact, a wealth of relevant
material exists in the archives of the United Nations.
The worthy exercise initiated by you, Mr. President, in
holding this special meeting should be pursued
vigorously in order to translate existing ideas and
proposals into agreed practice.

In that context, I believe that the Security Council
may find it appropriate to proceed on three parallel
tracks. The first track is early involvement in disputes
and active exercise of preventive diplomacy. I think
there is general agreement on that; the main thing is to
increase such involvement. The second track is always
seeking to clarify legal matters. The third track is
actively and genuinely reviewing the Council's
working methods. Such internal reflection is needed to
provide the Council with appropriate tools to carry out
its responsibilities. It is time to embark on an action-
oriented effort to gain common ground for internal
reform.

In conclusion, I should like to express my thanks,
appreciation and gratitude to you, Ambassador Akram,
and to the Mission of Pakistan. I hope that the process
that you initiated will be a successful one.

