Ms. Sellassie: On the first question - whether
partners working in the Sahel have managed to break
down institutional barriers and are working together- in
my briefing today I highlighted a few examples ofjoint
programmingandpartnershipintheSahelzthepartnership
between the World Bank and the United Nations,
the partnership between the United Nations and the
European Union and the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. Of course, as
we strengthen our coordination mechanism, as was
the case in November during the last meeting of the
Ministerial Coordinating Platform, we hope that it will
yield more partnerships among the partners.

On the question on how the mandate of my Office
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Sahel is demarcated from that of United Nations
Office for West Africa (UNOWA), my Office has been
mandated to facilitate the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, which is a tool
put in place to address the root, structural and systemic
causes of instability in the Sahel. That is expected to
be done through regional analysis and programming.
I coordinate the efforts of the whole United Nations
family in the Sahel. UNOWA is the United Nations
response to crisis and to preventive diplomacy. We
in my Office have been tasked to address root causes
through medium- and long-term programming. The
geographical area is also slightly different: the Sahel
includes part of West Africa, but it goes beyond that
region. I have just given Council members a few
highlights of the different roles we have.

(spoke in French)

On the question as to what extent bringing together
the Ministerial Coordination Platform and the Group
of Five Sahel could help face the challenges in the
Sahel, during the second meeting of the Platform, Mali
was asked by the participants to engage the members
of the Group of Five Sahel and to invite them to the
third meeting. The reason was because they needed
greater clarity on the role of those two mechanisms. It
is now clear to everyone, especially following the third
meeting of the Ministerial Coordination Platform, held
in Bamako last month, which included the participation
of the interim Permanent Secretary of the Group of Five
Sahel, that the role of the Group is in fact an initiative
of the five priority countries of the region. It is an
initiative for national ownership of their future, and
also a mechanism for cooperation to assess and develop
common programmes. The roles are therefore clear.
The Coordination Platform coordinates the efforts of
all partners and brings together partners and countries
of the region, not just countries of the Sahel but of the
Maghreb as well as some countries of Central Africa
and West Africa. That coming together, along with the
fact that Group of Five Sahel is now a member of the
Platform, has served to clarify the roles. I think the
clarification of roles will facilitate work on the ground.

(spoke in English)

On the last question - how my Office can enhance
regional cooperation given the deteriorating security
situation - that is in fact the purpose of my Office. As
members have seen, what we have been attempting to do
since the beginning is to enhance coordination among
partners and between countries of the region. That will
be a tactic that we will pursue in the coming months.
But it also our duty to highlight to all concerned that
a situation that is not given enough attention, like the
one in Libya or the regionalization of the Boko Haram
phenomenon, has an impacting on the Sahel. I therefore
think that advocacy and programming will help to
operationalize regional cooperation in the Sahel.

