Mr. Straw (United Kingdom): May I, as the
Foreign Minister of China has done, congratulate
Germany on taking over the presidency of the Security
Council and congratulate you personally on assuming
the Chair this morning.

We have just heard a most powerful and
authoritative case against the Iraqi regime set out by
United States Secretary of State Powell. The
international community owes him its thanks for laying
bare the deceit practised by the regime of Saddam
Hussain - and worse, the very great danger which that
regime represents.

Three months ago we united to send Iraq an
uncompromising message: cooperate fully with
weapons inspectors, or face disarmament by force.
After years of Iraqi deception, when resolutions were
consistently flouted, resolution 1441 (2002) was a
powerful reminder of the importance of international
law and of the authority of the Security Council itself.

United and determined, we gave Iraq a final
opportunity to rid itself of its weapons of mass terror,
of gases which can poison thousands in one go; of
bacilli and viruses like anthrax and smallpox, which
can disable and kill by the tens of thousands; of the
means to make nuclear weapons, which can kill by the
million.

By resolution 1441 (2002), we strengthened
inspections massively. The only missing ingredient was
full Iraqi compliance - immediate, full and active
cooperation. But the truth is - and we all know this -
without that full and active cooperation, however
strong the inspectors' powers, however good the
inspectors, inspections in a country as huge as Iraq
could never be sure of finding all Iraqi weapons of
mass destruction.

Sadly, the inspectors' reports last week, and
Secretary Powell's presentation today, can leave us
under no illusions about Saddam Hussain's response.
Saddam Hussain holds United Nations Security
Council resolution 1441 (2002) in the same contempt
as all previous resolutions in respect of Iraq. Let us
reflect on what that means: Saddam is defying every
one of us, every nation here represented. He questions
our resolve and is gambling that we will lose our nerve
rather than enforce our will.

Paragraph 1 of resolution 1441 (2002) said that
Saddam was and remained in "material breach" of
Security Council resolutions. Paragraph 4 of that same
resolution then set two clear tests for a further material
breach by Iraq. The first test was that Iraq must not
make "false statements" or "omissions" in its
declaration. But the Iraqi document submitted to us on
7 December, as we have heard from Secretary Powell,
was long on repetition but short on fact. It was not full,
nor accurate, nor complete. By anyone's definition, it
was a "false statement". Its central premise - that Iraq
possesses no weapons of mass destruction - is a lie.
This outright lie was repeated yesterday on television
by Saddam Hussain.

The declaration also has obvious omissions, not
least in a failure to explain what has happened to the
large quantities of chemical and biological weapons
materiel and munitions unaccounted for by United
Nations weapons inspectors in 1998. And there is no
admission of Iraq's extensive efforts to develop
weapons of mass destruction since the last round of
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
inspections ended in December 1998.

Paragraph 4 goes on to set a second test for a
further material breach - namely, a "failure by Iraq at
any time to comply with, and cooperate fully in the
implementation of" resolution 1441 (2002). Following
the presentation by the inspectors last week, and
today's briefing by Secretary Powell, it is clear that
Iraq has failed this test. These briefings have confirmed
our worst fears, that Iraq has no intention of
relinquishing its weapons of mass destruction, no
intention of following the path of peaceful
disarmament set out in Security Council resolution
1441 (2002). Instead of open admissions and
transparency, we have a Charade, where a veneer of
superficial cooperation masks wilful concealment, the
extent of which has been devastatingly revealed this
morning by Secretary Powell.

In his report last week, Mr. Blix set out a number
of instances in which Iraqi behaviour reveals a
determination to avoid compliance. Why is Iraq
refusing to allow the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
to use a U-2 plane to conduct aerial imagery and
surveillance operations? When will Iraq account for the
6,500 bombs that could carry up to 1,000 tonnes of
chemical agent? How will Iraq justify having a
prohibited chemical precursor for mustard gas? And
how will Iraq explain the concealment of nuclear
documents and the development of a missile
programme in clear contravention of United Nations
resolutions?

There is only one possible conclusion from all of
this, which is that Iraq is in further material breach, as
set out in United Nations Security Council resolution
1441 (2002). I believe that all colleagues here, all
members, will share our deep sense of frustration that
Iraq is choosing to Spurn this final opportunity to
achieve a peaceful outcome.

Given what has to follow, and the difficult choice
now facing us, it would be easy to turn a blind eye to
the wording of resolution 1441 (2002) and hope for a
change of heart by Iraq. Easy, but wrong, because if we
did so we would be repeating the mistakes of the past
12 years and empowering a dictator who believes that
his diseases and poison gases are essential weapons to
suppress his own people and to threaten his neighbours,
and that by defiance of the United Nations he can
indefinitely hoodwink the world.

Under the French presidency two weeks ago, we
had a special meeting on the dangers of international
terrorism - a meeting which I greatly welcomed -
and the grave danger to the world of terrorists
acquiring weapons of mass destruction through the
connivance of rogue States. Secretary Powell has today
set out deeply worrying reports about the presence in
Iraq of one of Osama bin Laden's lieutenants, Al-
Zarqawi, and other members of Al Qaeda and their
efforts to develop poisons.

It defies the imagination that all of this could be
going on without the knowledge of Saddam Hussain.
The recent discovery of the poison ricin in London has
underlined again that this is a threat which all of us
face.

Saddam must be left in no doubt as to the serious
consequences and the serious situation which he now
faces. The United Kingdom does not want war. What
we want is for the United Nations system to be upheld.
But the logic of resolution 1441 (2002) is inescapable.
Time is now very short. The Council will have further
reports from the inspectors on Friday week, 14
February. If non-cooperation continues, the Council
must meet its responsibilities.

Our world faces many threats, from poverty and
disease to civil war and terrorism. Working through
this great institution, we have the capacity to tackle
these challenges together. But if we are to do so, then
the decisions we have to take must have a force beyond
mere words.

This is a moment of choice for Saddam and for
the Iraqi regime. But it is also a moment of choice for
this institution, the United Nations. The pre-war
predecessor of the United Nations - the League of
Nations - had the same fine ideals as the United
Nations. But the League failed because it could not
create actions from its words. It could not back
diplomacy with a credible threat and, where necessary,
the use of force, so small evils went unchecked.
Tyrants became emboldened, and then greater evils
were unleashed.

At each stage, good men said, "Wait. The evil is
not big enough to challenge". Then, before their eyes,
the evil became too big to challenge. We slipped slowly
down a slope, never noticing how far we had gone until
it was too late.

We owe it to our history, as well as to our future,
not to make the same mistake again.

