Mr. Park Chull-Joo (Republic of Korea): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for convening
today's open debate. I also thank the four briefers for
their briefings. Regarding today's topic of debate, the
Republic of Korea would like to highlight the following
three points.

First, it is crucial for the Security Council to
comprehend the security implications of climate
change in a systematic fashion and in line with our
efforts to strengthen preventive diplomacy. Indeed, a
comprehensive approach to the fundamental causes of
conflicts lies at the very centre of preventive diplomacy.
In countries such as small island developing States
climate change itself poses the most significant threat
to security. Elsewhere, it is becoming increasingly clear
that climate change, interacting with other factors,
is creating and pushing regional instability into full-
blown conflicts and humanitarian crises, as has been
reported in situations such as those in the Lake Chad
basin and the Sahel. In many cases, there are limits
to devising fundamental solutions to such situations
without considering the security implications of
climate change.

Secondly, in order to stop climate change from
further escalating into security challenges, we need
a comprehensive response from the United Nations
system as a whole. Climate change is the fundamental
cross-cutting issue of our time. However, the current
United Nations system is fragmented. As such, there is
a need for the United Nations to deepen collaboration
and coordination in responding to the multifaceted
security aspects of climate change. Last week, in
his briefing to the General Assembly in an informal
session, Secretary-General Guterres rightly pointed
out that climate change is one of the United Nations
foremost priorities this year. The Security Council
should be no exception to this system-wide effort. My
delegation is of the View that the joint meeting of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Economic and
Social Council last year concerning climate change's
impact on the security and humanitarian situation in
the Sahel region was a meaningful effort in that regard.
The Republic of Korea, as the current President of the
Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Population Fund
and the United Nations Office for Project Services,
will endeavour to strengthen cooperation with other
actors in order to facilitate integrated discussions on
the humanitarian-development-peace nexus. In that
regard, this week at the Executive Board we held an
in-depth interactive dialogue on poverty eradication,
including climate-related poverty, and approaches
to strengthening ties between development and
humanitarian assistance.

Thirdly, the relevant Security Council's discussions
should lead to tangible results. We note presidential
statement S/PRST/2011/15, of 2011, which requests the
Secretary-General to include information on the security
implications of climate change in his reports to the
Security Council. We also draw the Council's attention
to last year's presidential statement S/PRST/2018/3,
which emphasizes the need for climate-risk analysis
and a management strategy for such risks in the Sahel
region. We hope to continue discussions on concrete
ways to see follow-up measures.

In order to prevent climate crises from further
spiralling into threats to peace and security,
international cooperation and support for vulnerable
countries are crucial. It is necessary to simultaneously
provide support for both development and governance
capabilities, alongside support for climate adaptation.
To that end, the Republic of Korea will continue to
actively participate in international cooperation and
support efforts.

