Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this
opportunity. I thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-
General for Peace Operations, for his briefing. I also
welcome Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa. I would like
to express my country's appreciation for his work, and
we stand ready to cooperate and coordinate with him.

At the outset, I reaffirm that my country's
Government is committed to all agreements signed with
the sisterly Republic of South Sudan, foremost among
which is the Agreement between the Government of the
Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei Area, signed on 20 June 2011, and
the Cooperation Agreement between the Republic of
the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan, signed on
27 September 2012.

I take this opportunity to emphasize the importance
of the 2011 agreement, which is the cornerstone of all
arrangements related to the issue of Abyei, including
the deployment of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA). The two parties to the
agreement agreed that the 2011 agreement would
remain in force until the final status of Abyei had been
settled. Both parties also agreed to refrain from making
any amendment to the UNISFA mandate without the
approval of the three parties, namely, the Sudan,
South Sudan and Ethiopia, the only troop-contributing
country to UNISFA.

I also reaffirm that the issue of Abyei should be
considered in the overall framework of the relations
between the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan. In
that regard, my delegation refers to the progress made
recently in the relations between the two countries,
especially after the Sudan hosted the peace negotiations
on South Sudan. That has led, as the Council knows,
to the signing in September 2018 of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, which has contributed to
improving cooperation and coordination between
the two countries and to the implementation of the
provisions of the UNISFA mandate.

We hope that such cooperation will continue,
since on 11 April the Sudan embarked on a new era in
order to implement all the provisions of the June 2011
agreement, which is the principal agreement leading to
the final status ofAbyei. It sets up the Abyei institutions,
namely, the joint administration for Abyei, the joint
legislative council and the joint police force, I am sure
that Council members will agree that those institutions
are indispensable in order to manage the region, provide
the services that the people need, promote peaceful
coexistence among the various elements of society and
ensure the proper conditions for settling the final status
of Abyei in a manner that meets the aspirations of all
stakeholders and is acceptable to all parties.

It goes without saying that the Abyei Protocol,
which is an integral part of the 2005 Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, is the bedrock foundation recognized
by the Security Council. The Protocol explicitly
stipulates that Abyei is an integral part of the territory
of the Sudan. That is a historical fact. It is therefore
impossible to review the arrangements that are based
on the Comprehensive Peace Agreement without
completely recognizing that fact.

In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
and express my gratitude to all our partners, friends
and brothers in the Republic of South Sudan, who have
worked in good faith to strengthen peace and stability.

We would also like to thank those who strive
to facilitate the work of UNISFA, in particular the
Government and the people of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia. We also thank all the staff of
UNISFA. We reiterate the Sudan's determination to
continue working with UNISFA in order to ensure that
it can discharge all its tasks in a smooth way.

