Ms. Treppel (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States (OAS), Mr. Luis Almagro, allow me to express
our gratitude for the invitation to participate in this
necessary and timely debate. On behalf of the General
Secretariat of the OAS, I would like to congratulate the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, on his appointment and to wish him every
success in promoting peace, the rule of law, sustainable
development, human rights and dignity for the millions
of people around the world who demand it. The OAS
can be counted on to shoulder that shared responsibility.

The OAS has the clear conviction that sustainable
peace cannot be the exclusive result of military or other
measures that exclude the communities in which they
take place. We believe that sustainable peace is possible
only as part of a multidimensional vision, with marked
political sense and commitment, and inclusion and
social cohesion.

We have worked hard in our region to free ourselves
from this scourge. We are celebrating the recent signing
of a peace agreement between the Government of
Colombia, led by its President and Nobel Peace Prize
laureate Juan Manuel Santos, and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), which ended
the longest internal armed conflict in the history of the
Western Hemisphere. Dialogue, mutual understanding
and the good offices of different actors, including the
OAS, made that possible.

Regional bodies act as facilitators for the realization
of consensual solutions and as promoters of measures
based on international cooperation and multilateralism.
In that regard, we echo the need to strengthen and
improve dialogue between regional organizations and
United Nations bodies. We at the OAS have promoted
dialogue based on stakeholder consensus, with a high
degree of national ownership and leadership. The
Americas have many cases of success, thanks to the
implementation of mechanisms to resolve disputes
in a peaceful manner and to prevent the escalation of
violence. The Peace Fund, the consultative meetings of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, and the forums on
confidence- and security-building measures are part
of the framework of the organization. The deployment
of civilian missions with specific mandates has also
yielded satisfactory results. Such missions include the
mission to support the peace process in Colombia, the
mission to support the fight against corruption and
impunity in Honduras and the special mission in Haiti.

We know that the deep inequalities and poverty
that afflict several countries in the region, as well as the
marginalization and the forced migration of hundreds
of thousands of people as the only option in the face
of violence, serve as a haven for crime. We are aware
that Governments and societies face many challenges
in their efforts to achieve sustainable peace, but they
are not insurmountable. We can achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, including sustainable peace, only
by working together, by putting aside rhetoric and
by taking concrete action using a multidimensional
approach to governance and security that includes the
resolve to include women and to ensure more rights for
more people.

I reiterate the support and commitment of the
OAS to build a world endowed with the security and
development that millions of people today lack. I
conclude by citing Rigoberta Menchu, an indigenous
Guatemalan woman, a social advocate and a Nobel
Peace Prize winner, who said that peace is not only
the absence of war; as long as there is poverty, racism,
segregation and exclusion, we can hardly achieve a
world of peace.

