Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my sincere appreciation to the Chairs of the
Council's three counter-terrorism-related Committees
for their respective briefings.

The Committees were established nearly a decade
ago in response to the serious terrorism conditions
at that time and have carried out dedicated efforts in
the fight against terrorism. We believe that the many
kinds of practical measures taken by the international
community in that regard have made a substantial
difference.

At the same time, we have to admit that we are still
living in a reality that includes the threat of terrorism.
The tragedy in Kenya and the terrorist attack in In
Amenas, Algeria, in which 40 citizens, including
10 Japanese nationals, were killed, are still vivid in
our memory. It is obvious that many challenges remain
and that the international community must reinforce
its efforts with a particular focus on the threats on the
African continent.

Based on such recognition, Japan recently
announced a pledge of $16 million to support capacity-
building in the States of North Africa and the Sahel.
At the fifth Tokyo International Conference on African
Development in June, Japan also committed to providing
$1 billion in humanitarian and development assistance
over the next five years and extending assistance to
foster human resources in the field of counter-terrorism
in the region.

Despite our collective efforts towards international
cooperation, it is undeniable that there is a limit to the
resources available for the fight against terrorism. We
believe that it is crucial for all relevant United Nations
agencies to act effectively and efficiently. At the same
time, it is also necessary for us to promote more positive
counter-terrorism activities within the United Nations
and outside it so as to maximize the effect of measures
taken by the international community as a whole. In
that context, Japan welcomes the recent initiative of the
Chairmen of the Committees to invite the President of
the Financial Action Task Force to the United Nations.

From that perspective, we believe that there may
be some room for improvement in order to avoid
duplication with respect to counter-terrorism measures
taken by the United Nations. We have seen several
United Nations agencies conduct various programmes,
sometimes alone and sometimes in cooperation with
each other. We would like to stress the importance of
avoiding unnecessary duplication, and expect those
agencies to make a special effort in that regard.

We believe that the role of each primary counter-
terrorism entity - namely, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, (CTED) the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime - must be
clear. At the same time, it is necessary to strengthen
the mechanism for ensuring the overall coordination
and coherence of the programmes conducted by those
entities and by Member States. As the next Security
Council resolution expanding the mandate of CTED
will be adopted soon, we expect a practical and fruitful
discussion in that regard.

In addition, concerning the creation of a post of
United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator, we
understand the need for such a post on the grounds that
it would enhance coordination of all efforts in the field
of counter-terrorism at the United Nations. We believe
that we need to clarify the actual role of the post in
order not to end up increasing the number of relevant
posts with little substantive added value.

For its part, Japan has made efforts for the sake
of effectiveness and efficiency in the fight against
terrorism. In May, Japan received a focused visit by
CTED, conducted on behalf of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism. During that visit, we widely shared our
best practices and latest measures in such fields as the
financing of terrorism, law enforcement mechanisms
and border control. We believe that Japan's cooperation
with CTED during its visit contributed to making the
future activities of CTED more effective, and strongly
expect CTED to put the fruits of its visit to practical
use.

Japan continues to attach great importance to
preventing the proliferation of goods and technologies
related to weapons of mass destruction (WMD). We have
been working closely with the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to strengthen
regional and global efforts to better regulate the
export and border control of WMD-related materials.
In addition to regional seminars in Tokyo, Japan has
been organizing seminars on non-proliferation and
disarmament here in New York as well, partnering with
the Missions of Poland and Turkey. We believe that this
endeavour, which we will continue in the future, has
helped to nourish ties between Member States and the
Committee.

Japan expects that the three Committees will
continue to carry out their roles and fully cooperate with
each other, and we will continue to cooperate positively
in the efforts and activities of the three committees.

