Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The initiative
to request today's debate originated with the
Accountability, Coherence, Transparency Group
(ACT), which is dedicated to enhancing the Security
Council's working methods. While we appreciate this
opportunity to speak, we find it unfortunate that Council
was not able to accede to the request of 17 States to
hold this important discussion in the context of an open
debate, especially given the twentieth anniversary,
in late May, of the establishment of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
This is a good opportunity to reflect on the work and
impact of the ICTY, on the Council's future work on
accountability and on the lessons that the experience
with the ad hoc Tribunals has taught us.

I have the honour to speak today on behalf of
Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Estonia, Finland, Hungary,
Ireland, Jordan, Montenegro, the Netherlands,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Slovenia, Sweden,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste and Uruguay, as well as my
own country, Liechtenstein.

The establishment of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
was a milestone in the history ofinternational criminal
justice. In that way, the Council acknowledged for
the first time that accountability for the most serious
crimes under international law is an integral part of the
maintenance of international peace and security. In so
doing, it asserted itself as the key player it is today in
the area of accountability, including through its referral
power under the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The ad hoc Tribunals, in turn,
made history through their judicial work, for example,
with the first trial against a former head of State before
an international tribunal, as well as through ground-
breaking cases such as the Akayesu verdict, which
established sexual violence as a form of genocide. The
Tribunals have also been important for victims, whose
sufferings have been acknowledged and whose dignity
has, in some measure, been restored. The International
Criminal Court built on that experience and enhanced
the capacity of the Court by ensuring victims a
participatory role in its proceedings.

Without any doubt, the experiences and lessons
learned from the ad hoc Tribunals are of great
significance to the work of other international
tribunals, as in the case of the ICC. However, it is
too early to assess the full legacy of either Tribunal,
given that some of the most prominent cases are still in
the trial phase. At the same time, especially in recent
months, their work reminds us that the worst crimes
under international law are difficult to prove beyond
a reasonable doubt, and that every defendant has the
right to due process. If some aspects of the work of the
Tribunals continue to be the subject of controversy, that
should not cloud our overall judgement or diminish
their historical importance.

We firmly believe that the Council should continue
to be a key player in ensuring accountability for the
most serious crimes under international law. Part of
that work will be carried out pursuant to the Council's
referral power under the Rome Statute, but there are
many other ways in which it - and, indeed, other
United Nations organs - can work effectively to
ensure accountability, particularly by enhancing the
capacity of States that are willing to fight impunity
through their national judiciaries. It is very likely, and
in our View desirable, that the era of ad hoc Tribunals
will soon come to an end. The Council has moved on
to different types of accountability work and should
continue on that path. But it is essential that we draw
some key conclusions from the chapter written by the
ad hoc Tribunals.

First, international criminal justice requires
diplomatic support and follow-up on the part of the
relevant States and institutions. That is particularly
important where arrests of indictees are concerned,
since they can be carried out only by Member States
and will not happen unless States muster the political
will and join forces to do so. The history of the ICTY
illustrates very clearly that arrests do not happen unless
States decide to put their political weight behind the
enforcement of arrest warrants. With regard to the
International Criminal Court, the Council acknowledged
this in adopting its most recent presidential statement on
the protection of civilians (S/PRST/2013/2). In concrete
cases, however, such follow-up is still often insufficient
or lacking altogether.

Secondly, there must be a solid financial basis for
international criminal justice mechanisms. The fact that
all States Members of the United Nations were obliged
to fund the ad hoc Tribunals, for which we have all paid
just about $4 billion, was an indispensable part of their
functioning. The experience with other international
criminal justice mechanisms clearly shows that
voluntary funding models do not work. Not only are
such tribunals pretty much constantly in financial
difficulties, which can delay judicial work, but the
voluntary funding can also lead to questions concerning
their judicial independence. Any serious accountability
work undertaken by the Council in the future should
therefore have a solid financial foundation. That
means in particular that future ICC referrals should be
financed by the United Nations membership as a whole,
especially given that those costs are significantly lower
than they would be under any new ad hoc mechanism.

Thirdly, for international criminal justice to be
effective, there must be ownership in the affected
countries. The best way of achieving that is to
strengthen national capacities where countries are
willing to fight impunity themselves, but lack the
means to do so. The experience of the past 20 years has
shown that the international community has numerous
possible ways to help national justice processes in
countries seeking to come to terms with past crimes.
They range from hybrid tribunals of the sort employed
in Sierra Leone and Cambodia to entities that work
entirely within the affected country's legal system,
such as Guatemala's Commission against Impunity and
the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. If a permanent
effect is intended, as it should be, investing in national
mechanisms also gives the best return for the money
invested. International justice and local solutions are
not mutually exclusive. Indeed, given the principle of
complementarity, such solutions can even be used in
conjunction with an ICC referral or in cases where the
Court already has jurisdiction, to the benefit of both
the ICC and the national processes. This would allow
the Court to step in should the local or hybrid solution
prove to be unsatisfactory, or indeed unavailable.

Finally, from the perspective of the Council's
working methods, the existence of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals is noteworthy. It is
an important space in which to discuss the interaction
between the Council and the international justice
mechanisms it has created. We believe, however, that
the Security Council should take a broader approach
and establish ways of discussing other accountability
issues, be they in a purpose-designed working group
or in the framework of the Informal Working Group
on Tribunals, not least in the light of the institutional
linkages between the Council and the ICC. Given the
high importance that the Council appears to attach to
issues of accountability, they should also be reflected
more prominently in the mechanisms through which it
communicates with the public, in particular its annual
report, the most important tool in that respect. A better
reflection on the website would also be helpful. Having
the necessary mechanisms in place is one prerequisite
for the Council to continue effective accountability
work - political will, of course, is another.

The creation of the ICTY 20 years ago was the
dawn of the age of accountability. At the heart of this
age of accountability is also a realization that issues are
intricately linked with international peace and security.
We therefore hope that the Security Council will
draw the necessary lessons from the past 20 years and
continue to make accountability for the worst crimes
under international law a priority in its work.

