The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Bolivia commends and thanks the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary- General on the situation in Mali (S/20l7/478).
I would also like to warmly welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and African
Integration of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop, to today's meeting.

Bolivia commends the efforts made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali and
Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to promote
lasting peace and security in this brotherly country. We
also laud commend the cooperation among countries
that contribute to MINUSMA by sending military and
police contingents. We thank the staff of peacekeeping
operations, who risk their lives, and we pay tribute to
those who have died in the line of duty.

We are concerned about MINUSMA's lack of
capacity and resources, which are required to enable it
to effectively and efficiently carry out its mandate in a
volatile and complex environment with asymmetrical
threats that threaten the political peace process, the
members of the Mission and Mali's civilian population.
We recognize that the challenges that MINUSMA is
facing have evolved since it first deployed, in 2013. It is
dealing not only with violence from armed groups but
with increasing threats from terrorist groups. According
to the Secretary-General's latest report, since June 2016
there have been 105 attacks by violent extremists and
terrorists on the Malian defence and security forces, 76
on MINUSMA and 20 on French forces. It reports that
during the same period, eight peacekeepers and 131
members ofthe Malian forces have been killed, and 176
injured, in attacks. The numbers of asymmetric attacks
have grown and involve increasingly sophisticated
and complex methods of war, such as improvised
explosive devices, anti-personnel mines, mortars and
rockets, showing that MINUSMA needs to adjust if it
is to deal with such difficult challenges. Furthermore,
the humanitarian situation in the central and northern
regions of Mali has continued to deteriorate, with
3.8 million people at risk of food insecurity owing to the
drought and the constant violence. Around 1.2 million
people have been identified as having limited access
to water and basic services, and the number of people
who are internally displaced owing to insecurity has
increased from approximately 45,800 to about 59,000
persons.

Two years after the signing of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, we acknowledge the
progress that has been made in the work of building
stability through an inclusive political dialogue. The
Conference for National Harmony, held in Bamako
between 27 March and 2 April, was a clear example of
that, bringing together more than 1,000 representatives
of civil society, including women and young people, as
well as of political parties and armed groups.

We appreciate all the Government of Mali's efforts
to take steps to stabilize the country, such as encouraging
former combatants to join the national armed forces,
designating interim administrations where the State
presence is weak, appointing a new Prime Minister,
creating a new and more inclusive cabinet, some
of whose members are women, and updating the
electoral rolls for as part of the preparations for future
presidential, district, regional and legislative elections.
Such efforts are consonant with the commendable
initiatives undertaken by regional organizations under
the leadership of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union.

Among those, we would like to highlight the
strategic concept of operations for the joint force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which
in accordance with the Nouakchott Process will be
deploying a joint force with the goal of tackling the
effects of terrorism and transnational organized crime
along border areas with full respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the countries
in the G-5 Sahel. We believe that the Security Council
should cooperate actively not only with MINUSMA but
with all regional and subregional initiatives aimed at
helping to stabilize Mali, by encouraging all the parties'
compliance with the agreements through mediation,
preventive diplomacy and similar measures recognized
by the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we encourage the parties involved,
and the international community as a whole, to continue
to give technical support and economic and humanitarian
cooperation aimed at arriving at a definitive peace
in Mali through a process of disarmament, dialogue,
reconciliation and reintegration.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and African Integration
of Mali.

