Mr. Li Junhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes for his briefing. The Chinese delegation
appreciates all his efforts and the work he has done on
the ground since taking office. I also wish to pay
tribute to the relevant United Nations agencies for their
efforts in protecting civilians in armed conflict and in
providing other humanitarian relief.

The item on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict has been on the agenda of the Security Council
for many years, during which numerous resolutions,
including resolution 1674 (2006), and presidential
statements were adopted. However, in almost every
conflict situation, the circumstances of civilians have
not been greatly improved. Some conflicts have eluded
solution for too long or have escalated, leading to
continuous deterioration of the humanitarian situation
and consequently affecting additional civilians.
Refugees and displaced persons have no access to
essential relief. Therefore, while it is necessary for the
Security Council to respond to a crisis in an integrated
manner, addressing legal and political issues, it should
also take a tailored approach when addressing a
particular situation involving specific issues.

First, the Security Council should faithfully carry
out its sacred duty, as provided for by the Charter of
the United Nations, by stepping up efforts to prevent
and resolve conflicts. Civilians are the most vulnerable
group in armed conflict and no remedial measure can
save them from harm when they are caught in an armed
conflict. Efforts to prevent or deal with crises will
effectively contribute to alleviating the suffering of
civilians. Efforts to prevent and reduce conflicts are the
best protection for civilians. Meanwhile, together with
other relevant bodies, the Security Council should
identify and remove the root causes of conflicts so that
both the symptoms and the causes of the problem can
be addressed.

Secondly, the role of Governments should be
given its place in the protection of civilians and should
be respected. The Charter of the United Nations,
international humanitarian law and resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly all require
that Governments bear the primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians. The international
community and external players have a role to play in
resolving crises by providing help and support. But
external assistance should be provided with the
prerequisite that the will of the Government concerned
must be respected and its sovereignty and territorial
integrity preserved, and that no arbitrary intervention
should be imposed on the Government concerned over
its objection.

Thirdly, the concept of the responsibility to
protect should be understood and applied correctly. The
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) devoted a large section to
comprehensively setting out the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity, and requested
the General Assembly to continue its consideration and
enrichment of the concept. At present, there are still
differing understandings and interpretations of this
concept among Member States. The Security Council
should therefore refrain from invoking the concept of
the responsibility to protect. Still less should that
concept be misused. The Security Council should
respect and support the General Assembly in
continuing to discuss the concept in order to reach
broad consensus.

Fourthly, the effectiveness and credibility of
humanitarian relief efforts should be improved. The
parties concerned should collaborate in compliance
with international humanitarian law. Humanitarian
relief efforts are indispensable for minimizing losses
and helping civilians overcome difficulty in the
aftermath of a crisis. Over the years, humanitarian
relief agencies have done a great deal of work in
dangerous circumstances to provide relief to civilians
in distress. They deserve our appreciation and
acknowledgement. But even though the causes of
conflicts are complex and sensitive, humanitarian relief
efforts should strictly abide by the principle of fairness,
neutrality, objectivity and independence, thereby
safeguarding the humanitarian nature and credibility of
the activities.

