Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October and to say how honoured we
are to see the friendly country of the Republic of South
Africa leading our deliberations today. I also want
to thank you for taking the initiative to organize this
meeting, focusing on the situation in the Great Lakes
region in general and on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region in
particular. I would also like to thank all the members
of the Security Council for the kind attention and
willingness that they have always shown whenever
they are called on to address the situation concerning
my country.

My delegation appreciates the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/783) on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, which
Ambassador Huang Xia, Special Envoy ofthe Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes region, just presented to
us, and I welcome his presence in this Chamber. It is
regrettable, however, that the report was made available
only late yesterday evening.

Before I come back to that, I have taken it upon
myself to convey to the Council the vision of my
President, Mr. Fe'lix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi, of
how he intends to resolve the situation in the Great Lakes
region and more particularly in the eastern part of our
country. Since taking office, as he underscored at the
high-level meeting on the Framework agreement held on
the sidelines of the general debate of the seventy-fourth
session of the General Assembly, he has been taking
stock of the challenges to peace and security in our
country and the stability of the region. To that end, he
has been working tirelessly to find a permanent solution
to the worrying security situation in our eastern areas.
In the light ofthe importance of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region, which is seen as an agreement
for hope and the right instrument for regional stability,
he has decided to revitalize its national monitoring
mechanism. In that context, an evaluation is being done
to draw up a non-compliance assessment of the level
of implementation of our country's commitments. The
President has now mobilized a new effort in our quest for
peace and security. The recommended strategy consists
of three components - strengthening the capacities of
the defence and security services, promoting national
reconciliation and activating regional diplomacy.

With respect to the capacity-building of the
defence and security services, he has launched military
operations that are ongoing, including in Ituri and North
Kivu provinces, in order to disrupt the negative forces
that continue to hamper peace and security in that part
of the country. With regard to national reconciliation,
that process is aimed at promoting peaceful coexistence
among the local communities. With that in mind, the
forums will be organized with a view to strengthening
national cohesion. Lastly, with regard to regional
diplomacy, he has undertaken tours to several countries
of the region with a view to restoring, together with his
counterparts, the trust needed for regional cooperation
and integration.

That is the context in which we should consider the
rapprochement and dialogue that began in Kinshasa in
May with the summit that brought together his peers
from Angola and Rwanda, followed by a summit in
Luanda with the Heads of State of Angola, Uganda
and Rwanda, and, lastly, a third summit, held once
again in Luanda, in August, which was also attended
by the President of the Republic of the Congo and was
sanctioned by a memorandum of understanding between
Presidents Kagame and Museveni. All those meetings
are an important step forward in the determination of
the region's leaders to work together for peace, security
and stability in the region.

With regard to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), as he also emphasized in
his address to the General Assembly (see A/74/PV.7),
President Tshisekedi stated that he is in favour of
keeping MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as long as it is streamlined, well equipped,
strong and with a mandate adapted to the realities on
the ground, similar to the Force Intervention Brigade.
As he himself stressed, it continues to be his dream to
make the Democratic Republic of the Congo a country
that exports peace.

To get back to the report under consideration, we
should say that we do not have any particular comments
to make about it on the whole. However, we do think that
a brief comment with respect to the security situation
would be useful. The report highlights the efforts of
the Forces arme'es de la Republique democratique du
Congo, in collaboration with MONUSCO, to neutralize
the foreign and national armed groups that are active in
our eastern regions. As we have always said, we want to
assure the Council that those efforts will continue until
the groups are totally eradicated. In that context, we are
pleased to be able to point out that the elements from
the Forces democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda who
surrendered voluntarily a few years ago, along with
their dependants, and who were cantoned in Orientale
province, have finally been repatriated to Rwanda with
the assistance of MONUSCO.

Moreover, based on the new dynamic in relations
with the various surrendering groups that we have
seen since our new Head of State came to power, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
reaffirms its determination to fulfil the commitments
that it has undertaken under the terms of the Addis
Ababa Framework agreement. In that regard, we are
asking that the former members of the Mouvement du
23 mars return to the country and make themselves
available to the new authorities. My country calls once
again for the involvement of the countries of the region
and the Security Council in order for this situation to be
definitively resolved.
As the Council will have noted, a new wind of
hope and confidence is blowing across the Great Lakes
region today. My delegation believes that the region
should seize this opportunity to restore trust among
its leaders, who must now face in the same direction
and work together to promote regional cooperation
and integration as a means of establishing the peace
and stability that the region desperately needs for its
development. In that regard, the positive developments
in the region should be encouraged. That is why my
country calls on the United Nations and the international
community as a whole to support the efforts of our
leaders to ensure that peace, which some still consider
to be a dream, may become a reality for all of the
peoples of the region.

I cannot end my speech without thanking
Ambassador Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, for his
ongoing efforts within the framework of his mandate to
restore peace throughout the entire Great Lakes region
and in my country in particular. I wish to reiterate the
gratitude of the Congolese people and our Government
to all members of the Security Council for their
dedication and commitment to our country's cause.

