Ms. Afghani: I am Jamila Afghani, President of
the Afghanistan section of the Women's International
League for Peace and Freedom, a feminist and pacifist
organization working for peace through equality, justice
and demilitarization. I also serve as Executive Director
of Medica Afghanistan, which provides psychosocial
and legal services to approximately 2,000 victims of
sexual and gender-based violence per year.

In my 22 years as a feminist religious leader, I
have trained as human rights defenders and advocates
more than 6,000 imams and 10,000 women activists,
focusing on the principles of moderation, social justice,
tolerance, gender equality and social participation.
My statement today will focus on three key issues: the
gendered impact of the conflict, the importance of free
and fair elections and the need for Afghan women's
meaningful participation in the current peace talks.

The conflict in Afghanistan has resulted in civilian
deaths, casualties and displacement, with more than
2 million refugees living outside the country. In the first
quarter of 2019 alone, 110,000 people were reported
newly displaced. Undoubtedly, the humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan remains serious and requires
immediate attention.

Women are also adversely impacted by gender-
based violence, armed violence, and unequal access to
education and poverty alleviation. Women live under
the constant threat of insecurity, with profound limits
on their political, civil, social and cultural rights. Their
ability to freely access education and work - to safely
travel to school and jobs - is affected by attacks on
schools and places of work. The situation is worse for
women and girls in rural areas.

Gender-based violence against women and girls
by State and non-State actors continues. More than
60 per cent of women have experienced violence. The
targeting of schools and education personnel, night
raids on households, the abduction and recruitment
of boys for armed violence, acts of violence against
journalists, media workers and health-care facilities,
torture of conflict-related detainees, the abduction
and assassination of religious leaders, and sexual
and gender-based Violence against women and girls
continue to characterize the human rights situation
in Afghanistan.

Yet despite the fact that women are affected by the
conflict, and even though women and youth comprise
the majority of the Afghan population, they are minor
players in political life and the economy. Women remain
sidelined in the current peace talks.

After four decades ofwar, Afghanistan is today at a
critical juncture. Two important tasks lie ahead of us: the
peace process and the upcoming presidential elections,

Free, fair and secure elections will be important for
the intra-Afghan peace talks and formal negotiations
between the Government and the Taliban to be
successful. In earlier elections, polls indicated that
approximately 4.2 million out of the 8.8 million
registered to vote actually voted. Many Afghans
appeared to have stayed at home instead of going to
the polling stations owing to fears of violence. Voting
was also marred by technical obstacles and corruption
throughout the country. The upcoming September
presidential elections will require addressing these
issues in order to ensure full participation of Afghan
voters, especially women and persons with disabilities.
We are also concerned about the possibility of a failed
election and waste of resources, whereby the gap
among political parties, the Afghan Government and
Taliban would be widened. This requires the immediate
attention of the United Nations and other relevant actors.

Since September 2018, the United States and other
countries have been working quickly to facilitate efforts
to achieve a negotiated peace settlement. There has
been a clear absence of the meaningful participation
of women and such other actors as victims directly
affected by war in the peace process, alarming many
who know that an inclusive delegation for peace is
important to ensuring the success of the process and
the sustainability of peace in Afghanistan.

Afghan women must be able to meaningfully
participate in decisions that directly affect them,
including the design, implementation and monitoring
of such decisions. Although the United States is
obligated to ensure women's active participation in the
peace processes, pursuant to its own domestic Women,
Peace and Security Act of 2017 and its Strategy on
Women, Peace and Security of 2019, its approach to
its peace talks with the Taliban has instead led to the
marginalization of women in the peace process.

Women have participated as members of the
High Peace Council in discussions for a future peace
agreement, but this is no longer a viable pathway for the
meaningful contribution ofwomen in the peace process
because the High Peace Council is limited to serving
as a consultative body, merely raising public awareness
rather than directly contributing to the peace process.
Furthermore, Afghans remain concerned about the
politicization ofthe peace talks by national, regional and
international actors that do not advocate the interests of
Afghans. At the recent peace talks in Doha, 11 strong
women participants demonstrated their solidarity and
commitment to national interests and communicated
directly with the Taliban about their rights,

Afghan women today are not the women of 30 or
40 years ago.

We know our rights; they have been granted by our
faith and are guaranteed by the Constitution, as required
by international conventions ratified by Afghanistan.
The international community must stand with us at this
critical moment and ensure that our rights will not be
compromised for a political peace deal. It must actively
push for women to be given a place the table and to be
publicly and actively engaged in building the future of
their country in order to ensure sustainable peace for
the nation.

I therefore urge the Council to ensure clear
procedures to engage Afghan women from diverse
backgrounds in peace negotiations and conflict
resolution efforts, including negotiators and religious
leaders who can bridge the current political gaps
towards sustainable peace. Furthermore, the Council
should ensure that the organization and facilitation of
the elections scheduled for later this year make space
for women through enhanced security for women voters
and candidates and for networks among Government,
civil society and other stakeholders to promote the
participation of women as voters, candidates and
observers. As the most important and trustworthy
body in the world, the United Nations must call for an
immediate ceasefire and a stop to the bloodshed on
both sides.

Finally, the Council should inquire about the
measures being taken to ensure the security and
protection of women leaders, women religious
peacemakers, women's rights activists, women human
rights defenders and journalists.

