Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Indonesia has been
following the developments in Zimbabwe closely, and
we wish to underline the significance of the negative
reports of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), the African Union and the
Pan-African Parliament observers on the presidential
run-off election held on 27 June 2008. Clearly, the
conduct of elections has to be undertaken in a free and
fair manner. We have been appalled by the political
violence, intimidation and the loss of life that has
occurred. We have also been concerned by reports of
the prevailing dire humanitarian situation.

It is our hope that the people of Zimbabwe will
be able to resolve the difficult situation they face in a
peaceful and democratic manner and in accordance
with Zimbabwe's own constitutional processes. The
leaders of the country, in particular, are called upon to
recognize the burden of responsibility on their
shoulders and to leave no stone unturned in the quest to
extricate Zimbabwe from its present predicament.

The people of Zimbabwe deserve international
support in that endeavour. Indonesia wishes to
acknowledge and reaffirm its support for the pivotal
role being played in promoting political reconciliation
among the political parties by SADC, by the facilitator
of the intra-Zimbabwe dialogue, His Excellency Thabo
Mbeki, President of South Africa, and by the African
Union. Indeed, the recent African Union summit in
Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, was unequivocal in its support
for dialogue and reconciliation. We commend also the
continued mediation efforts by the Secretary-General.

The Security Council, in synergy with such
regional efforts, must also support the people of
Zimbabwe in tackling the challenges before them. The
promotion of peace, stability, reconciliation and
democracy should guide our endeavours. In that, we
cannot emphasize enough the importance of the
Council working together with SADC and the African
Union.

We wish also to emphasize the need for Council
unity and a sense of common purpose in addressing
this issue. The Security Council has proved able to
speak with one voice through its presidential statement
of 23 June 2008 (S/PRST/2008/23). It is preferable
from our point of view that all Council decisions on the
matter should be placed in the same spirit. That we
must nurture and sustain.

We therefore deeply regret that the time allocated
to discussing the draft resolution has not been
sufficient and that flexibility has not yet been fully
exercised enabling all members of the Council to fully
engage in trying to reach a compromise on this matter.

In our view, any Security Council action must
pass two key tests. First, it must serve to promote
dialogue and reconciliation in Zimbabwe. In other
words, it must provide encouragement and incentives
to the political leaders of the country to set aside their
differences and place the interests of the nation above
anything else. Secondly, it must be in synergy with,
and build on, regional efforts to address the issue.

In short, the Security Council must exert a
positive influence. It should contribute to establishing
sufficient space and the necessary conducive
atmosphere to allow dialogue to take place and to
succeed. Its members are required to diligently ensure
that the measures the Council is contemplating would,
in fact, promote solutions. At this juncture, my
delegation has doubts whether the measures contained
in the draft resolution would promote dialogue among
the parties concerned.

In that regard, we are of the view that applying
sanctions at this particular stage will not encourage all
parties to the conflict to promote dialogue among
themselves. Invoking sanctions will also jeopardize
ongoing mediation efforts by regional organizations
and neighbouring countries.

For those pertinent reasons my delegation will
abstain in the vote on the draft resolution. In doing so,
our delegation is also looking to the future, for there is
a need to maintain the prospect of a united Security
Council in addressing this matter in synergy with the
regional efforts.
08-41947
