Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): I associate myself
with the words of welcome addressed to you and the words
of gratitude addressed to your predecessor.

My delegation is grateful to Mr. Vieira de Mello for
his impressive briefing, which supplements the already very
informative report of the Secretary-General. We welcome
the positive developments described in the report and the
briefing, such as the improved security situation. It is no
small matter that "for most people", to quote the report,
"there is now no threat of violence" (S/2000/53, para.2).
We also welcome the work of the National Consultative
Council in the five sessions that have taken place, the
close cooperation between the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East T imor (UNTAET) and the East
Timorese, the recruitment of local staff and the beginning
of the transition from the International Force in East
Timor (INTERFET) to the military component of
UNTAET. Two weeks ago, Senator Jesse Helms gave us
fair warning about his southern accent, but I am
beginning to believe that it takes a southern accent to
properly pronounce the acronym of UNTAET. I also
welcome the fact that UNTAET is giving priority to
increasing employment, provision of basic needs such as
water, food and accommodation and to reintegration of
refugees.

We are satisfied about the good cooperation between
the United Nations, international organizations, non-
governmental organizations and donor countries. With the
Secretary-General, we welcome the positive developments
in the relationship between Indonesia and East Timor.

It is clear that some negative aspects remain, and
they all seem to be related somehow to the poor state of
the economy. The increase of the crime rate and the re-
emergence of long-standing conflicts within East
Timorese society both seem to have to do with that.

The situation in the camps in West Timor continues
to be intolerable. It is not acceptable that the militias still
operate there and that the access of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) is restricted.

We are also disappointed that border incidents
continue despite the memorandum signed by the
Indonesian armed forces (TNI), the International Force in
East Timor (INTERFET) and UNTAET providing for
cooperation in the border area and formalizing the
deployment of United Nations border liaison teams. In
this connection, we were interested to hear Mr. Vieira de
Mello refer to his contacts with General Kiki Syahnakri,
the Governor of West Timor, and we are interested to
learn more about his assessment of this situation as well.

It is clear that all delegations agree that those
responsible for human rights abuses must be brought to
justice. That is also the View of the Government of the
Republic of Indonesia. We welcome the commitment of
that Government to bring those responsible for human
rights abuses to justice through Indonesia's national
judicial system.

 

We agree with Mr. Vieira de Mello that the United
Nations owes East Timor a debt and that, therefore, we
must try to turn the whole operation of UNTAET into a
paradigm of nation-building. Another argument for aiming
that high is that the East Timor crisis was handled from
beginning to end on a consensus basis. No Security Council
action is ever perfect, and I would not call our handling of
the East Timor crisis a paradigm of Security Council
intervention, but the issue never left the Council and,
therefore, never needed to be brought back to the Council.
Against that positive background, there is all the more
reason to make East Timor a success all the way.
Mr. Vieira de Mello has our full support in bringing that
about.
