Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for having opened the door for an exchange of views on
the situation in the Middle East, including, of course,
the Palestinian question.

The question of Palestine continues to be a
concern for nearly everyone. In spite of the recent
resumption of dialogue and negotiations based on the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, the occupying Power has continued its
abusive behaviour - a situation that serves to sow
mistrust and instability with respect to the ongoing
negotiation process.

The Israeli behaviour to which I refer leads to
systematic practices prohibited by international law,
including human rights law, international humanitarian
law and the Charter of the United Nations itself. More
specifically, I refer here to the illegal occupation of
territories, the unstoppable settlement activities, the
blockade on the Gaza Strip, the construction of the
separation wall, constant provocations, incitement to
religious conflicts and clashes, the excessive use of
force against Palestinian civilians through military
raids and the arrest of more Palestinians.

My country, Ecuador, considers it unfortunate to
see how Israel carries out such practices of military
control over another people. It is like so many other
blemishes of the past, which we cannot, and should
not, erase, for it is from our historical mistakes that we
learn, and we have an ethical duty to not repeat them.

Based on that premise, it is worth asking: what is
Israel seeking? We assume it is searching for a definitive
solution to promote the peaceful coexistence of its State
side by side with a Palestinian one, to restore justice,
dignity and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and to contribute to the long-awaited peace and
security of the entire region. Or perhaps it is seeking to
continue its unilateral and arbitrary policy that brings
about unjust suffering and denies the rights of the
Palestinian people, in flagrant violation of international
law, in complete contradiction with common sense and
to the detriment of the hope that the human species has
for itself and for a future of peace and reconciliation.

I wish to reiterate the solidarity extended by Ecuador
to the Palestinian State and people on 26 September
during the meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, with a view to
their just cause being realized through the exercise
of their inalienable right to self-determination and
freedom in an independent Palestinian State with its
1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. At
the same time, I wish to express our solidarity with the
other countries of the region that are also suffering from
Israeli military occupation, in complete disrespect for
the rights of their peoples.

