Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Mr. President, I wish to begin
by expressing our appreciation to you and to the delegation
of Canada for the creativity and work which made the
present briefing possible.

I also wish to express our gratitude to Mr. Cornelio
Sommaruga, President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, to Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director
of the United Nations Children's Fund, and to Mr. Olara
Otunnu, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for their introductory statements. Indeed, the
quality of these statements is such that one would wish
them to initiate not only an open briefing of the Security
Council, but a full-fledged open orientation debate, which
would allow all interested Member States to participate.
Active participation of all the interested United Nations
Members could help the Security Council in the effort to
develop appropriate policies for the future, and we hope
that that participation will be there when we move on
with our tasks.

The basic aim of United Nations humanitarian action
should be human security, with the key to security being
physical rather than only legal protection. The current
spirit of resolve in the Council to make progress in that
direction should lead to real improvement. A variety of
new efforts are needed, both within the United Nations
framework and in other settings. It is appropriate today,
therefore, to mention the initiative of a group of like-
minded States, under the leadership of Canada and
Norway, which is determined to give full meaning and
specific practical expression to the concept of human
security. Slovenia will continue to participate in that
initiative to the best of its ability. We hope that time will
bring concrete results in addition to those already
achieved in such areas as international mine action and
international criminal justice.

Today's Security Council discussion is focused on
the question of protection of civilians in armed conflict.
This, in my opinion, has at least two important
implications.
First, it involves the responsibility of the Security
Council, which, according to the United Nations Charter,
has the primary responsibility for international peace and
security. In other words, the Council's task is to prevent
military conflicts and, if they occur, to make a meaningful
contribution towards their resolution. Furthermore, the
Council has a responsibility after military conflicts end,
to enable the transition to post-conflict peace-building.

The primacy of these essentially political and
military tasks of the Security Council must always be
borne in mind. When addressing humanitarian issues, the
Security Council must avoid the trap of using
humanitarian action, or humanitarian discussions, as a

 

substitute for the necessary political or military action.
Above all, the Council must always be aware that
preventive action is preferable to any kind of cure. I am
reiterating these principles not only for conceptual clarity
but also, and above all, because of their practical relevance
to the way the Council deals with various situations on its
agenda and to the topic being discussed today.

The second implication of today's discussion is the
need for a full understanding of the importance of
protection of civilians in contemporary armed conflicts. The
protection of civilian populations requires action, and action
is very often a matter of necessity. For the Security
Council, this means that its powers must be used
adequately. Furthermore, protection of civilians in armed
conflict requires a variety of forms of cooperation among
States and their cooperation with the Security Council and
with humanitarian organizations.

At the stage when conflict prevention is still possible,
cooperation among States requires the ability to develop a
unified approach and bring the necessary pressure to bear
with the aim of making peaceful solutions more realistic
and military options less likely.

In situations characterized by humanitarian problems
resulting from existing military conflicts, a variety of
actions that are sometimes termed "medium alternatives"
may be necessary, such as providing police and other
personnel to guarantee security in refugee camps and
developing appropriate peacekeeping mandates, to mention
just two of the possible options.

In some military conflicts it is necessary for the
Security Council to be able to build the resolve of the
international community to use Chapter VII measures in
order to protect civilians, including those measures that
require the use of force. On the other hand, when deciding
on comprehensive economic sanctions, the Security Council
must provide for the necessary humanitarian exemptions.

Careful and timely use of the instruments and powers
which the United Nations Charter has made available to the
Security Council is the most effective contribution the
Council can make to conflict prevention and limitation and
consequently to protecting civilians. The Security Council
is a unique body with unique powers which have to be used
wisely and effectively.

The preceding remarks were made in an effort to
maintain the focus on the role of the Security Council while
addressing a variety of issues relating to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, including those pertaining to
the implementation of international humanitarian law.
Respect for humanitarian law is essential and an
obligation of all States. The President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross reminded us of article 1 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, which reads:

"The Il88] High Contracting Parties undertake
to respect and to ensure respect for the present
Convention in all circumstances."

Article 13 of Protocol II Additional to the Geneva
Convention, which relates to the protection of victims in
non-international armed conflicts, expressly prohibits all
attacks against civilians. These are important and basic
obligations that have to be given specific meaning.

I do not wish to attempt a systematic legal analysis
of the current problems in international humanitarian law.
The Security Council is certainly not the most appropriate
forum for such an analysis. On the other hand, there is a
need for the Security Council to address a basic, and I
should say existential problem of international
humanitarian law today.

The Security Council has been reminded many times
that the gap between the rules of humanitarian law and its
application has never been wider. Deliberate attacks
against civilians have become a basic feature of many
contemporary armed conflicts. The fate of children as
victims of war is particularly appalling. The basic rules of
humanitarian law are being deliberately violated. In some
situations described by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict, even
the most basic ethical norms and value systems
traditionally respected in all societies are disregarded.
This situation of what the Special Representative has
called "ethical vacuum" has the potential of undermining
the entire edifice of international humanitarian law.
This problem must be of the utmost concern to the
Security Council. What can we do? At present, I believe
that we need to understand the problem more fully.
Therefore we support the proposal for a report by the
Secretary-General, containing specific suggestions and
proposals, to the Security Council, acting in its sphere of
responsibility, with the aim of improving the physical and
legal protection of civilians in armed conflict. We believe
that such a study need not repeat the analysis of already
well-researched questions relating to the legal structure of
international humanitarian law, but it should focus on the

 

basic existential problems of international humanitarian law
today and should help the Security Council in devising
policies for the future.

The basic premise here should be that current
humanitarian law already comprises all the necessary
principles and basic rules. Additional norm creation need
not be a priority. It is necessary to avoid the temptation to
redefine already defined war crimes and crimes against
humanity. However, some norms need to be strengthened,
such as, for example, the prohibition of recruitment into
armed forces of children below the legal minimum age for
recruitment, or the norms related to the prohibition of
military action against areas declared safe havens for the
civilian population. Norms which require strengthening are
not too numerous but they are essential, and efforts in that
regard are necessary.

On the other hand, measures intended to give effect to
substantive norms of humanitarian law require further
elaboration and practical implementation. These include the
tasks which will make the future International Criminal
Court an effective institution, and the development of
mechanisms of cooperation among States which will enable
the realization of the idea advocated by, among others, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations of holding
combatants financially liable to their victims. Such practical
ideas, which may require new, ambitiously conceived forms
of international cooperation, should be among the priorities
of a possible study by the Secretary-General.

Such mechanisms will inevitably require long-term and
sustained action and will to a large extent involve the
Security Council in the future. At the same time, the
Council will have to ensure better implementation of its
own basic functions in the maintenance of international
peace and security, such as those to which I referred in the
first part of my statement. I hope that today's discussion
will represent a real contribution in that regard.

