Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia joins others in
welcoming Lithuania's initiative to hold an open debate
on the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
It is a well-chosen topic, whose importance is growing
day by day. I would also like to express my sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/34l) and for his comprehensive briefing today.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to add the
following remarks in my national capacity.

The rule of law constitutes the very essence
of the social contract between individuals and the
Government, under which citizens are granted
transparency, non-discrimination, fairness and equality
in their standing before the law and in their social
interactions. Competent, credible, efficient, responsible
and legitimate institutions are the guarantors of those
principles and serve as providers of confidence, which
allows individuals and communities to resolve their
disputes peacefully.

The lack of good governance and the rule of law,
on the other hand, often lies at the root of conflicts.
Therefore, as noted in the Secretary-General's report,
strong, inclusive and accountable institutions that
demonstrate the equitable application of the rule of law
are crucial for conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

Croatia recognizes the paramount importance of
the rule of law in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding. It is equally important for
achieving lasting peace and for sustainable development
in all its aspects. The functional and efficient rule of
law is as much an issue of security and stability as one
of economic and democratic development.

The rule of law has tremendous transformative
power and should be regarded as an essential instrument
for positive change. Simply put, it is the best investment
in a prosperous future.

Re-establishing, strengthening and reforming
judicial and legal systems and law enforcement
institutions, which provide a legal framework that
will stimulate the economy and safeguard democracy,
is a long-term process that requires not only political
determination, but also human and material resources,
skills and knowledge. The metaphor of growing an
oak tree seems appropriate: it takes time, patience,
determination and a lot of care, but with every year
the roots get deeper and the canopy wider, until the
tree becomes strong enough to withstand any storm.
Nonetheless, the early growing years are of decisive
importance.

We welcome the multidimensional approach to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, which places equal
emphasis on security sector reform, institution-building,
the protection of human rights, the restoration of the
social fabric of a country, the rejuvenation of the
economy and the protection of natural resources. In
all of those aspects, the rule of law plays a crucial and
indispensable role.

Against that backdrop, Croatia advocates for
devoting particular attention to rebuilding national
civilian capacities and institutions, while recognizing
the specific needs of each country and fully respecting
the principle of national ownership. We strongly
support the Civilian Capacities Initiative. Broadening
and deepening civilian capacity pools significantly
enhances the ability of peacekeeping operations to
achieve their goals.

Promoting the principle of the rule of law is
also a central part of the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Croatia, as a current Vice-Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, stands ready to do its part
in supporting countries emerging from conflict in their
efforts towards sustainable peace and development.
We are willing to share our empirical knowledge and
expertise in that field.

Accountability is an important aspect of the
principle of the rule of law. We see the fight against
impunity for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide as an important element in conflict
prevention. Such crimes must not go unpunished and
their effective prosecution has to be ensured. It is of
the utmost importance to put an end to the culture of
impunity.

We highly value the contributions of international
courts and tribunals in advancing the rule of law at the
international and national levels. The ad hoc tribunals
have profoundly changed the landscape of international
criminal justice and paved the way for the International
Criminal Court, whose work we strongly advocate.

We would also like to underline once again
the important role that women can play in conflict
prevention and resolution and in peacebuilding. It is
crucial to put in place gender-responsive transitional
justice measures as a key element in the process of
restoring the rule of law and governance systems in any
conflict-affected situation. Putting a country back on its
feet is a remarkable opportunity to strengthen women's
rights, leadership and empowerment. In that regard, the
appropriate legal framework is a vital instrument.

Finally, let me conclude by saying that without peace
and the rule of law there can be no true development.
The rule of law is the very essence and bedrock of any
democratic and successful society. That must be kept in
mind when contemplating each and every peacekeeping
and peacebuilding strategy.

