Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): My delegation believes
that, on the Israeli-Palestinian question, there is no real
alternative to a peaceful and negotiated settlement. Hence,
my Government has always supported every effort made
to achieve this objective, including the Declaration of
Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements
between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.

Nigeria has been encouraged by the progress made
so far by the parties to implement the various aspects of
the Declaration of Principles. In this context, we recall the
Gaza-Jericho Agreement of May 1994 and the Agreement
on Preparatory Transfer of Powers and Responsibilities of
August 1994, both of which have made it possible to
establish the Palestinian Authority. We believe that further
specific measures must be taken not only to preserve
these gains but also to implement fully the remaining
aspects of the peace process.

My delegation has been under no illusion that the
search for peace in the Middle East would be entirely
hitch-free. We have always known that there would be
bumps on the road to achieving a just and desirable peace
in the region. None the less, we hope that the parties will
not allow hope to fade in the region and our expectation
remains that the parties concerned should persevere and
continue to demonstrate the good faith and commitment
required to achieve a negotiated settlement. To this end,
the role of the international community is to be as
supportive as possible and the way it can best do so is, in
our opinion, by being an impartial umpire.

It is in this connection that my delegation viewed
with concern the recent settlement activities of one of the
parties, which violate both the letter and the spirit of
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, and could very well
jeopardize the peace process. In particular, we very much
regret the recent decision of the Government of Israel to

 

expropriate 53.5 hectares of land in East Jerusalem, an act
which - apart from undermining confidence between the
parties - also pre-empts the future discussions envisaged
for the final stage of negotiations on the status of
Jerusalem. We are of course not oblivious of Israel's
legitimate security concerns, but we cannot see how land
confiscations can constitute an appropriate response to those
concerns.

The draft resolution before the Council represents a
factual, non-judgemental but forthright response of the
international community to the worrying developments
resulting from the land expropriation in East Jerusalem. The
primary objective of the resolution is not to condemn, but
to encourage Israel to put an end to what appears to be a
trend which, if not checked, could reverse the gains already
achieved in the peace process.

What is more, my delegation is convinced that the
consequences of inaction by the Security Council would
undermine the authority of the Council itself and could
damage the credibility of the United Nations as the ultimate
defender of the rights of all States, including the strong,
and especially the weak.

My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

