Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour of
resolution 2350 (2017) because of the importance of the
role that the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti plays in stabilizing the situation in that country,
and because there is a need to continue extending
assistance to the Government of Haiti. At the same
time, we would like to offer some comments on the
content of the resolution and the working methods of
the Council.

We note that there is a discrepancy, on the one
hand, between the documents submitted and the nature
of our recent discussions over the situation in Haiti and,
on the other, the statements made by the author of the
resolution and those who supported it. It will be recalled
that on 6 April, the Council came together in order to
assess the effectiveness ofUnited Nations peacekeeping
operations (see S/PV.7918). Over the course of that
meeting, the United States delegation, which initiated
the meeting, stated that there was a need to go back to
basics in peacekeeping and make sure that we prevent an
uncontrolled bloating of mandates. The delegations and
the Secretariat said that it was important to make sure
that applicable mandates were made understandable,
clear and attainable. However, those ideas are not
reflected in the documents submitted. The mandate
of the mission is not clear. On one hand, the Mission
is to carry out the monitoring of human rights either
by itself or by helping the Government to do so. On
the other hand, it is stated that the decision was made
by the Council in line with Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which implies the use of force.
We do not understand how, in principle, this could be
implemented in practice.

In the course of working on the draft resolution, we
heard objections. People said that the previous mission
also worked on the basis of Chapter VII, but let us take
a careful look. Its use had been very clearly limited
exclusively to issues having to do with maintaining
security. So, the question arises: how did the situation
in the country change? Is it that the penholders and
those who supported the resolution within the Council
are so convinced that, against the backdrop of a gneral
improvement of the situation in Haiti, the situation
violations of human rights has, contrarily, become a
threat to international peace and security? That would
be the only case in which this situation could become a
subject for consideration for the Security Council.

Let me recall that the Blue Helmets are in Haiti
because of issues having nothing to do with human
rights. The same logic also applies to the Secretariat's
good offices. A question here is: to what extent are
they good if this is something that falls under Chapter
7 of the Charter? What is most surprising is that these
requests are being made against a background of basic
stabilization in Haiti, which is exactly what allowed us
to consider the drawdown and changing the format of the
presence of the United Nations in the country. Literally
two days ago, on 11 April (see S/PV.7920), we discussed
the Secretary-General's report on the situation in Haiti
(S/2017/223). Basically all those who spoke then,
including the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Sandra Honore and most members of the
Council, noted that a peaceful transfer of power had
taken place and that there was an improvement in the
security situation. They also noted that it was exactly
these positive developments that enabled us to consider
the issue of reviewing the mandate of the mission.

During the discussion of the draft statement, we
also heard that a robust mandate was necessary to
supposedly maintain the levers of influence over the
Government. We are not convinced that in this situation
we need to be talking about exerting influence or
pressure, especially since we are talking about the
Mission's success, which will enable us to close it in
six months. We think that in this context what we need
to be stressing is interaction and cooperation with the
host country, especially since there is a clear prospect
that the situation will normalize. Unfortunately, we
cannot confidently say that the text submitted was the
outcome of the work done by the Group of Fiends of
Haiti, and not only because the version adopted differs
from the version agreed in that format, but also because
of the criticism made by members of the Group about
the decision-making process within that informal body.

