Mr. Bessho (Japan): First, allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on a successful presidency during
the month of August. I would like to touch upon two
issues today, namely, North Korea and the revision of
presidential note S/2010/507.

First, with regard to North Korea, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2371 (2017) on 5 August
in response to the two ballistic-missile launches with
intercontinental range in July. All Members of the
United Nations must demonstrate renewed commitment
to rigorously and thoroughly implementing the existing
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2371
(2017). In addition, just yesterday, the Security Council
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/16) that
strongly condemns the most recent missile launch by
North Korea, which flew over Japan. The statement
demonstrates the unity of the Security Council and
sends a strong and clear message that North Korea
should immediately cease such provocative actions. We
urge North Korea to abide by this international call.

Secondly, on the revision of presidential note
507, as the Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and other Procedural Questions, I
would like to take this opportunity to announce that
the Council has just agreed on a revision of the note by
consensus. The Security Council held an open debate on
the working methods of the Council in July of last year,
during Japan's presidency, (see S/PV.7740), and listened
closely to the voices of not only Council members, but
also the broader United Nations membership in order
to identify areas that would benefit from adjustments.

Having collected some useful ideas and proposals
from that debate, we explored them in the Working Group
in the process of reviewing and updating presidential
note 507 over the subsequent months. As I said a few
hours ago, the Council agreed on a revised note 507 after
undertaking a series of textual negotiations starting in
May. Thanks to the contributions of the members of
the Working Group, I believe that the agreed revision
represents a comprehensive and balanced text that can
serve as a useful handbook on the agreed measures or
best practices on working methods of the Council. Let
me highlight a few points on the main revisions in some
detail in order to address the interests of the broader
membership.

In terms of the overall structure and content, the
revised note consolidates, streamlines and restructures
presidential note 507, of 2010, and all 13 other stand-
alone presidential notes, including the most recent
one (S/2016/6l9), concerning preparing newly
elected members, as well as the selection process and
preparation of Chairs of subsidiary bodies.

In addition, among others, the revised note includes
the following new elements.

On the monthly programme of work, incoming
presidencies are encouraged to discuss the programme
with other Council members well in advance of their
respective presidencies.

On informal consultations, the note refers to
additional measures, such as encouraging briefers to be
succinct and direct, making more effective use of"Other
matters" to raise issues of concern by signalling the
intention at least one day in advance, and encouraging
presidencies to suggest elements to the press at the end
of consultations.

On the drafting process of outcome documents of the
Council, the note refers to co-penholdership, including
taking into account the expertise and/or contributions
of Council members on the subject, encouraging
at least one round of face-to-face discussions with
all members of the Council in an inclusive manner,
providing sufficient time for consideration before the
silence procedure, and making the documents focused,
succinct and action-oriented.

On dialogue with non-Council members and bodies,
the note refers for the first time to the importance
of annual joint consultative meetings and informal
dialogues with the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as well as to consideration of joint
missions of the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union to address
conflict situations in Africa.

The note also refers to the Council members'
intention to regularly request, deliberate on and draw
upon the specific, strategic and targeted advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

On Security Council missions, the note refers to
additional elements concerning their value, as well as
aspects related to preparation, itineraries and follow-
up.

I believe that the revised product is full of
very useful ideas for enhancing the effectiveness,
efficiency, inclusivity and transparency of the Council,
if implemented appropriately, especially during our
respective presidencies. While the codification of
best practices is a useful exercise, it is not an end in
itself. What is most important is implementation and
the actual practice of the Council. It is my hope that
this revised note will be utilized as an important basis
for continuing to make further improvements in the
working methods through the daily work of the Council.

