Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): The thorough,
engaging and very sobering presentation which has just
been made by Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch forces me to set
aside my prepared speech. I believe that this is a very
special presentation that Mr. Petritsch has made. His
thoughts are very poignant and full of implications, not
only for Bosnia and Herzegovina but also for the whole
region.

On 22 March we had an open briefing on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, at which of course we did not have the
privilege of listening to Mr. Petritsch, but we had a fairly
good exchange on the current issues regarding that
country. We very much appreciate Mr. Petritsch's
briefing. I will touch on a few points from his speech.
But we also appreciate the detailed report, the printed
report which Mr. Petritsch presented to the Secretary-
General for circulation to us on the implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The appearance before the Security Council last
November of the joint Presidency and the reaffirmation in
the New York Declaration of the commitment to the
Dayton Peace Accord were significant steps. But we are
dismayed to hear from the High Representative that the
implementation of the Declaration has been disappointing.
The chief reason appears to be a lack of sufficient
political will and motivation. As Mr. Petritsch has said,
they are far from ready for the implementation of that
Declaration. We are disappointed to hear that, but I
believe that, in Bosnia, that is the reality.

 

We are very pleased that at one point the High
Representative imposed the State Border Service on the
region so as to establish law and order.

The pace of the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Accord needs to be accelerated, and we hope that our
discussion today will produce some guidelines in that
direction. Much of the success of the efforts will depend
upon the seriousness of the authorities, as we have just
mentioned. Compliance and active participation by all will
determine, to a large extent, how much political influence
we - the Security Council, and the international
community in general - will be able to exert, and how
keen our involvement will be in the reconstruction efforts
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Here, we take full account of
Mr. Petritsch's mention of the donor fatigue setting in with
regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also agree with him
that it is imperative that diminishing resources be
concentrated to maximum effect. I think that that is a very
important point, and we are very pleased to hear about the
three areas that he has identified: economic reform, the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons and the
consolidation of the institutions. I believe that this
prioritization of focused action is very important, and I
would like to support him fully in that regard.

We have noted with keenness the initiatives that the
High Representative is taking to boost economic activities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. His office has already taken
laudable initiatives in drafting laws on restitution, various
privatization schemes, the investigation and prosecution of
corruption cases and privatization and reform in the banking
sector, which are worth noting and should be appreciated.
We are also pleased to note that continued improvements
have been seen in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
implementation of the decisions of the Human Rights
Chamber and the recommendations of the Ombudsperson.
We urge the entities, which are still being slow in
implementing recent decisions of the human rights
institutions, to redouble their efforts for compliance. We
also note from the report that efforts to develop the
capacity of civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, to address human rights issues have
continued.

We are happy to note that, as a result of the municipal
elections on 8 April, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the
High Representative has said, the political landscape is
perceived to have become much more pluralistic, and we
welcome that.

On the subject of refugees and internally displaced
persons, we are very happy that decisive action has been
taken by the High Representative and that the issue of
refugees and internally displaced persons and of their
return has become what he calls an achievable reality. We
are very happy to learn about the collaboration of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the United Nations International Police
Task Force in that regard. We convey our appreciation to
them for that.

The point made by the High Representative
regarding the Government's task of creating an enabling
environment, so that investors can invest without going
through a maze of bureaucracy, is very important and
should receive our full support.

I should like to make one final comment, regarding
institution-building. We believe that this is a very
important aspect to be borne in mind. As the High
Representative said, Bosnia and Herzegovina must
become a cohesive State with central State structures that
exercise real power. We believe that the independence of
the judiciary and the setting up of institutions to ensure
the rule of law are very important in that regard.
Finally, I should again like to express our deep
appreciation to the High Representative for all the
initiatives that he has taken and for his very significant
statement and report with regard to the implementation of
the Dayton Accord.

