Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the African countries that are members of
the Security Council - Cote d'Ivoire, Ethiopia and
Equatorial Guinea - I thank the Chinese presidency
for organizing this open debate on strengthening
African peacekeeping operations.

This debate follows the 11th extraordinary session
of the Assembly of the African Union, held in Addis
Ababa on 17 and 18 November. At the Summit, the Heads
of State and Government took important decisions to
accelerate the institutional reform of the African Union
with a View to boosting its irreversible progress towards
financial autonomy and greater efficiency. China's
timely choice of bringing Africa to the forefront of its
presidency echoes the recent Beijing Summit of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, a major event
that fully reflects the virtuous path of Sino-African
cooperation over the course of several years.

We commend Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for his commitment to and ongoing support for conflict
prevention and resolution initiatives in Africa and,
on behalf of the African countries on the Council, I
thank him for his excellent briefings and insightful
recommendations. We also thank Ambassador Sma'i'l
Chergui, African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace
and Security, for the inspiring clarity of his briefing,
which informed the Council on the opportunities and
challenges related to peacekeeping in Africa.

Allow me also, on behalf of the African countries
on the Council, to pay a well-deserved tribute to all
peacekeepers who have fallen on the field of battle in
the accomplishment of their noble mission of bringing
peace and stability to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

As rightly stated in the concept note for this debate
(S/2018/1004, annex), Africa is an important part of
ongoing peacekeeping operations, not only through
its countries hosting United Nations missions, but
also and above all in the form of military contingents
and police units. Despite the current constraints on
its peacekeeping capabilities and in an environment
marked by the exacerbation of multifaceted security
threats, the African Union's determination to take
ownership of the collective security of the continent is
well established. Over the past decade, the pan-African
organization has been firmly committed to increasing
its contribution and building its peacekeeping capacity.

To mention but a few emblematic significant and
recent examples, that is the case for the operations in
Somalia, the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel region. They
indicate our firm determination to propose innovative
responses, based on the comparative advantage of
the rapid deployment of peace missions with robust
mandates within the framework of continental and
regional arrangements.

Those operations also illustrate the flexibility of
the African Peace and Security Architecture and its
ability to adapt to ever-changing security challenges.
In that context, we value the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, formalized by
the signing, on 19 April 2017, of the Joint Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security
by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat. The strategic framework
sets out the modalities for a division of responsibilities
and closer coordination of the efforts of the two
organizations, with a view to promoting sustainable
peace and security in Africa.

While the African Peace and Security Architecture
is a decisive step towards ownership of crisis prevention,
management and resolution in Africa, the effectiveness
of African peace support operations remains dependent
on the availability of predictable and sustainable
financial resources. Those operations, needless to say,
are part of the implementation of endogenous solutions
to African problems.

But, as you, Mr. President, will agree, the
effectiveness of African peace support operations will
remain limited, as I mentioned earlier, so long as the
thorny issue of predictable and sustainable financial
resources has not been resolved through consensual
and sustainable funding mechanisms and criteria. That
is the thrust of resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017).
In particular, paragraph 18 of resolution 2378 (2017)
states that the Council:

"Expresses its intention to give further
consideration to practical steps that can be taken,
and the conditions necessary, to establish the
mechanism through which African Union led peace
support operations authorized by the Security
Council and under the Security Council's authority
under Chapter VIII of the Charter could be
partly financed through United Nations assessed
contributions, on a case by case basis, in compliance
with relevant agreed standards and mechanisms".

Such funding would be based on consensus
standards and mechanisms, ensuring strategic financial
control and accountability for the management
of the resources available, as the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security noted. In that
regard, we appreciate the constructive cooperation
between the United Nations Secretariat and the African
Union Commission in strengthening the mandate,
management, oversight and accountability of African
Union peace support operations.

In view of the progress made on those issues
since the adoption of resolutions 2320 (2016) and
2378 (2017), the African Union Peace and Security
Council has instructed the three African members of
the Security Council to promote the African common
position on the predictability and sustainability of
funding for African peace support operations, through
statutory contributions from the United Nations. We
therefore call for the commitment of all peacekeeping
stakeholders to ensuring that the ongoing efforts result
in the adoption in December, under the chairmanship
of Cote d'Ivoire, of a draft resolution providing lasting
answers to that question. We also hope that the draft
resolution, which does not trigger the immediate
provision of funding, but rather provides a framework
for the Council's assessment, will obtain its agreement,
in principle, for consideration on a case-by-case basis,
as recommended by the report of the United Nations
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446).

In any case, the three African members of the
Security Council endorse the concerns expressed
by the members of the Council on the framework for
compliance with human rights and transparency in
resource management. We assure them that the United
Nations and the African Union have undertaken the
consultations necessary to developing a joint road map
that addresses the concerns of our partners. The road
map, which will be ready shortly - again, as noted by
the African Union Commissioner - will set out the
guiding principles and the progress made so far, and
identify outstanding issues.

The history of institutions, like that of the humans
who are their architects, illustrates the case at hand.
The history of the African Union, daughter of the
Organization of African Unity, is that of a continent
that has tirelessly sought, in perfect symbiosis with
the United Nations, lasting solutions to the challenges
to peace and security facing Africa. Our commitment
to owning and achieving our collective security and
destiny, as evidenced by the establishment of the
Peace Fund, has never been stronger in the face of the
complexity of the present challenges.

To conclude, I would therefore echo the urgent
appeal of the three African members of the Council that
we may be allowed to join in a dynamic of solidarity in
the search for lasting solutions to the multiple challenges
that mark African peace support operations. Beyond
our continent, that is an issue of international peace
and security, the maintenance of which, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council.

