I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths. As always, it is great to see him, and I thank him for his briefings and the ongoing dedicated work of his teams, especially in these challenging times. We were pleased to see the parties' statements in support of the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and for countering the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We welcome the Saudi Government's unilateral ceasefire, as well as the response from the Government of Yemen to comply with the ceasefire. We urge the Houthis to make the same commitment. Unfortunately, as is too often the case in Yemen, many areas of concern remain. In Ma'rib, internally displaced people and host communities remain equally vulnerable to continued ground fighting and the very real danger of a COVID-19 outbreak. The Houthis' ballistic missile attacks on Riyadh are unacceptable and directly contravene their stated support for the Organization's global ceasefire initiative. All parties must renew their commitment to de-escalation and resume talks toward a political solution, as further military escalation will only hinder the access of health-care workers and limit the access of the Yemeni people to health care. Special Envoy Griffiths and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia have been working diligently to convene a crisis meeting to address the fighting. We urge the Yemeni parties to accept the invitation and attend that meeting. Additionally, we urge all Member States to fully comply with the arms embargo established in resolution 2216 (2015), and note our concern about ongoing reports of Iranian interference in the conflict, including through the provision of lethal aid to the Houthis. Once again, we are forced to call out Houthi obstruction of humanitarian operations. The Houthis' deliberate interference with aid delivery limits the ability of the United Nations and other humanitarian organizations to help the most vulnerable Yemenis. Such obstructions are unacceptable and have already caused significant delays to existing aid programmes. They have also forced the United States Government to partially suspend existing assistance awards in Yemen's north for all but the most critical life-saving treatments and threaten international efforts to provide assistance crucial to preventing the spread of COVID-19 in Yemen. The Trump Administration restates its call to the Houthis to allow United Nations inspection and maintenance of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. United Nations officials must have immediate access to inspect and maintain the FSO SAFER in order to prevent an environmental catastrophe that would have far-reaching effects in Yemen and around the Red Sea. The Houthis must stop blocking a solution to this problem and permit required assessments and repairs. We have all endorsed the Secretary-General's call for the cessation of hostilities in Yemen, and the United States emphasizes the need to concentrate efforts on mitigating the spread of COVID-19 and ensuring principled humanitarian assistance operations and the unhindered access of health-care workers and medical assistance. Now is the time to fight the COVID-19 pandemic, not each other.
