Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): It is indeed dismaying and
shocking that just when diplomatic efforts are being
consolidated towards a much needed political solution,
military action continues to be intensified in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, which is resulting in the loss of
life and destruction of infrastructure.

We would like to recall the recent successful
humanitarian Visit of the Reverend Jesse Jackson to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which resulted in the
release of the American prisoners of war. Furthermore,
the Secretary-General of the United Nations undertook a
mission to some North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) countries and to Russia. All these efforts were
aimed at finding a peaceful solution. More importantly,
the statement of the G-8 ministers gave us a flicker of
hope.

My delegation has on many occasions underscored
the fact that continuation of hostilities in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia will have unimaginable
consequences. Yesterday, the Chinese Embassy in
Belgrade was hit. This is a very serious development.
Fatalities, serious injuries and missing Chinese diplomats
have been reported. We express our profound sympathy
and condolences to the Government and people of China.
The bombing of the Chinese Embassy could escalate the
conflict. We therefore await the results of the reported
ongoing investigations by NATO.

My delegation remains convinced that the pain and
suffering inflicted on the innocent and unsuspecting
Chinese diplomats, as well as other innocents civilians in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, could have been
avoided if there were political will for a political solution.
We believe that it is still possible and necessary to find a
timely political solution. It is imperative that the Security
Council becomes actively involved in the search for a
political solution. Similarly, the Secretary-General must
continue to work towards the cessation of hostilities. We
therefore reiterate our call for an immediate end to the
bombing in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Only
then can diplomacy be meaningfully pursued.

