Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus): The challenge of
addressing threats posed by weapons ofmass destruction
(WMDs) by ensuring effective non-proliferation is
not simply and maybe not very a technical one. To be
successful, a long-term non-proliferation strategy must
have a solid moral core. The increasing sophistication
of deception mechanisms must be accompanied by a
more sophisticated understanding on the part of leaders
and the public at large of the morally corrosive nature
of weapons of mass destruction and of the unbearable
moral responsibility that goes with their possession.

For as long as weapons of mass destruction
continue to be regarded as a prized and much sought-
after possession and a legitimate entitlement of the
very few to the right to dominate, and not as an evil
that has to be done away with, our technological
advances aimed at stopping the WMD plague on this
planet will never prove to be sufficient. For as long
as we focus our main efforts primarily on managing
the consequences - the proliferation of terrorism and
radicalism in our world - rather than on addressing
their root causes - political, social and economic
injustice - we may as well start preparing ourselves for
commemorating the centenary of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Effective non-proliferation
will not materialize in an environment where everyone
mistrusts everyone and where honouring one's word is
not considered a virtue.

One may ask: What is this country with the
habitually mispronounced name whose Ambassador
considers himself entitled to preach morality to the
members of the Council? Belarus is a country that,
in the Second World War, became an place of mass
destruction, although by conventional means, and lost
more than one-quarter of its population in the fire
of war. Belarus is a country that, in 1986, received
three-quarters of the entire radioactive fallout from the
largest civil nuclear disaster in history, the Chernobyl
disaster. Belarus is a country that, by joining the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
as a non-nuclear State, became the first State in
the world to renounce voluntarily and without any
preconditions the possession of operational nuclear
weapons deployed on its territory. Belarus is a country
that, since the mid-19905, has been a lone proponent
for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
Central and Eastern Europe. Belarus is a country that
for decades has been advocating in the United Nations
the prohibition of development and manufacturing of
new types of weapons of mass destruction and new
systems of such weapons.

It would, of course, be naive to expect that those
and similar idealistic initiatives and actions alone can
stop the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
But it would be reckless to dismiss the effect that the
elimination of double standards in world politics and
the relegation to the dustbin of history of the realpolitik
mentality can have on our ability to build a world that
cannot only survive through the balance of mutual
annihilation capability, but that can thrive through the
proliferation of the ideals of peace, good-neighbourly
relations, and the promotion of the rule of law.

Of the many extinction-level events that humankind
may be preparing itself for, the possible use of the
weapons of mass destruction is the only entirely
anthropogenic factor. Unlike climate change or a
dreaded encounter with an asteroid, WMDs do not
provide the excuse of a shadow of doubt - the excuse of
the uncertain and the unmanageable. Not just stopping
the proliferation of WMDs, but getting rid of them
completely is the most serious maturity test humankind
faces.

A hundred awareness-raising and outreach events a
year on resolution 1540 (2004) may be a righteous way
ofkeeping ourselves busy, but the real breakthrough will
happen when world leaders collectively come to realize
that the truest expression of real power is magnanimity,
that the surest way to influence one's opponent is to
empathize with him, and that when people talk, great
things happen. It is too bad that the United Nations
summits that we contemplate are unlikely to have much
to do with achieving that.

