Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom warmly welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2259 (2015). Through this adoption, the
Council gives its full support to the Libyan Political
Agreement signed last week, and its full backing to a
Government of National Accord based in Tripoli, as the
signatories of the Agreement have pledged to establish.
We welcome the process now under way to move to the
formation of that Government of National Accord in the
coming weeks, and we ask the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to
drive forward progress to that end. We urge all those
who have not yet signed to decide now to support
the Agreement and to work with the Government of
National Accord, once formed. The door is open and
the hand of friendship extended.
The Agreement is the culmination of over a year of
complex negotiations among the Libyan parties. There
have been false storms before, but in this Agreement
we have a Libyan-led political solution that will address
the political security, economic and institutional crises
facing the country. We commend all those who have
worked and persevered together to seek consensus in the
interests of the Libyan people. I would also like to pay
tribute to the role of the United Nations in facilitating
the Agreement. I join with all of us in praising the
energy and enthusiasm that Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kobler has brought to the
process. I would also like to pass on my personal thanks
to all Council members and other delegations involved,
including the delegation of Libya, for their cooperation
in the drafting and negotiation of the resolution.

With the Agreement signed, now is the moment
for all Member States to cease support to and official
contact with any parallel Libyan institutions outside of
the Agreement that claim to be the legitimate authority.
Doing so is essential to maintaining the integrity and
unity of Libyan State institutions, including State
financial institutions and the National Oil Company.
That is the best way to ensure that those institutions
function for the benefit of all Libyans.

The Agreement and resolution 2259 (2015) come
at a crucial time for Libya. Instability and insecurity
have allowed terrorist groups, including Daesh and
Al-Qaida, to threaten Libyans and those in the region.
The humanitarian situation has got worse, and human
rights violations and abuses have increased. Criminal
gangs have prospered, exacerbating the migration
crisis in the Mediterranean. Arms and ammunition
have proliferated, escalating the violence and further
undermining stability and security. We therefore
strongly back the Security Council's call on Member
States to support fully the efforts of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya to develop a coordinated
package of support to build the capacity of the
Government of National Accord. The United Kingdom
stands ready to play our part in that effort.

In adopting resolution 2259 (2015) today, we
have given a strong, collective sign of the Council's
commitment to Libya and its sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity under a single
Government ofNational Accord. But this is just the start

of the process for Libya, and we must therefore redouble
our efforts to help ensure that the huge potential of the
Agreement is realized. In doing so, we can help deliver
a stable and prosperous future for all Libyan citizens.

