Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the previous speakers,
especially the Secretary-General of the International
Maritime Organization (IMO), to which resolution
1816 (2008) entrusted an important role, as well, of
course, as the Assistant Secretary-General of the
Department of Political Affairs for his briefing and the
Permanent Representative of Somalia.

We have before us a report of the Secretary-
General (S/2008/709) that deals with several separate
issues: the general situation in Somalia from the
political, security and, above all, humanitarian points
of View; fundamentals concerning the planning of a
possible international force, be it a multinational force
or, later, a peacekeeping operation; and, lastly, the
issue of combating sea piracy. Naturally, we will need
to have more technical discussions on the second issue,
and here I would like only to touch on the fight against
piracy.

As he announced here before the Council in
September 2007, last year the President of the French
Republic took the initiative of ensuring the military
protection of the maritime convoys of the World Food
Programme, which was taken up by the Netherlands,
Denmark and Canada. However, all States members of
the European Union have mobilized to fight piracy
more broadly on the basis of resolutions 1814 (2008),
1816 (2008) and 1838 (2008). On 10 November, the
European Union Council took a very important step by
setting up a European Union naval operation off the
coast of Somalia for a period of one year. The
operation will be launched on 8 December with the full
agreement and full support of the Somali authorities. It
will mobilize five to six ships, with air capability, and
will protect the World Food Programme convoys and
vulnerable ships and curb acts of piracy and armed
attacks off the coast of Somalia. Yesterday, the
Secretary-General welcomed the operation.

A great many States - the countries of the
European Union and NATO, the Russian Federation
and major Asian States, such as India - have indicated
that they wished to respond to the Security Council's
appeal to act. Thus, the European Union is not the only

Power to act and does not wish to be so. The stakes are
huge, as the Secretary-General of the IMO reminded
us. That naturally raises the issue of coordinating the
efforts of the international community. The European
Union has set up its own coordination cell to be the
sole interlocutor with all its partners. It would like the
Secretary-General to set up a unified focal point within
the Secretariat for all its services, which would act as
interlocutor with the European Union.

We believe that beyond that, the Secretary-
General can also play a role in helping to reinforce
international mobilization, but, in our view, real
military coordination would not be feasible.

In that regard, we appeal to the Council to remain
seized to extend the mandate of resolution 1816
(2008), which expires at the beginning of December
and is necessary to continue fighting piracy off the
coast of Somalia. We collectively voiced our intention
to do so when we unanimously adopted resolution
1838 (2008).

Lastly, I would like to return to the link between
the fight against piracy and the tragic situation of the
Somali people. It is clear that the deep-rooted causes of
the phenomenon that the country is currently
experiencing are war, a weak State, lack of economic
opportunity and, without doubt, the acts of criminal
groups, which are the deep-seated causes of piracy. The
latter will be eradicated once and for all only when the
roots of the conflict are addressed.

No anti-piracy operation can in any way replace
the action of an international force on the ground.
France fully supports the idea that a robust
multinational force, appropriately equipped, be
authorized by the Security Council to deploy to
Mogadishu. That is a necessary stage to create the
conditions for the future deployment of a peacekeeping
operation, which seems vital.

