Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591
(2005), I have the honour to brief the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, covering
the period from 28 August to 24 November 2014. I am
pleased that the briefing is being provided in an open
format, which enhances the transparency of the work of
the Committee.

During the reporting period, the Sudan
Sanctions Committee approved action in relation to a
recommendation emanating from the mid-term report
of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan and received
the third quarterly update of the Panel of Experts. In
its mid-term report, the Panel recommended that the
Committee consider initiating a dialogue with interested
Member States, in particular those in the region, under
the auspices of paragraph 3 (a) (vii) of resolution 1591
(2005), in order to identify existing information gaps
and capacity-building requirements in the context of
the implementation of the sanctions measures.

Accordingly, the Committee convened its fifth
formal meeting on 13 November, in which it met with
the representatives to the United Nations of the Sudan,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Libya and South
Sudan. Participants generally welcomed the convening
of the meeting, with several calling for more frequent
interaction between the Committee and the interested
Member States.

During the discussion, the representative of the
Sudan elaborated on the steps his Government had
taken to cooperate with the Committee and its Panel
of Experts. He also referred in particular to the
agreements signed with Libya and Chad regarding the
operation of joint border patrols to prevent the flow
of arms into Darfur. His comments regarding border
control were echoed by the representatives of Libya and
Chad. While encouraging the further strengthening of
border cooperation, one Committee member expressed
the View that arms flows between the Government of
the Sudan and Darfur were the main issue.

Two other invited delegations reported on their
compliance with the sanctions regime, indicating that
they remained in communication with the Panel of
Experts. One Committee member, however, stated that
her delegation had hoped that more specific information
on the challenges faced in implementing the relevant
Security Council resolutions would have been shared
by the invited delegations. Stronger implementation
of the travel ban was urged, given that the Panel had
reported violations thereof. A call was also made on
Member States that had not yet done so to submit their
implementation reports to the Committee.

A Committee member applauded the growing
cooperation between the Sudan and the Panel of
Experts, adding that the country's economic problems
were hindering the progress ofthe Darfur peace process.
Some other Committee members, while appreciating
the improved cooperation, expressed the view that
better cooperation mechanisms were still needed.
Some Committee members noted that the Chair's visit
to the Sudan earlier this year was highly useful and
that initiatives such as those should become a regular
feature of the administration of sanctions regimes. In
my concluding remarks, I expressed the hope that a
deeper culture of dialogue would emerge and become
a best practice, leading to greater trust and thereby
contributing to the effectiveness of the Committee's
work. Following the meeting, the Committee issued a
press release.

On 13 November, the Panel of Experts submitted
its third quarterly update to the Committee. The Panel
reported that, during the period from 13 August to
4 November, it had maintained an almost continuous
presence in the Sudan and Darfur. Panel members also
travelled extensively, both in the region and to other
countries, for discussions and enquiries in connection
with their mandate. The Panel also reported in some
detail on its interactions with the Sudanese national
focal point for the Panel. All of those issues will
ultimately be covered in the final report of the Panel
to the Security Council, which is due no later than
17 January 2015.

Lastly, since I will have an opportunity to share
my personal reflections as Chair of the Committee
during the briefings by outgoing Chairs scheduled for
the month of December, I would like at this stage to
simply thank the members of the Committee for the
cooperation they have always extended to us.

