Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Austria fully
supports the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) for another 12 months and underlines its
continued support for the efforts by the Secretary-
General and his Personal Envoy for the resumption of
substantive and results-oriented negotiations.

We are very glad that the Council was able to
maintain consensus and are grateful to all those who
cooperated towards that effort. The unanimous
message of support of the Council for the efforts of the
United Nations is essential to move the parties beyond
the current impasse. Building consensus on the text
was a laborious process in view of the double-track
process used to prepare this resolution. We also
strongly encourage that this modus operandi be
reconsidered next year.

As both parties have the obligation to ensure
respect for the human rights of the people of Western
Sahara, Austria would have preferred explicit support
for the Secretary-General's call on the parties for a
continuous and constructive dialogue with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, with a view to ensuring respect for the human
rights of the people of Western Sahara in the territory
and the refugee camps.

At the same time, Austria strongly supports the
resolution's call for progress in the human dimension
of the conflict. The programme of visits by air should
be continued without further delay and the visits by
land inaugurated, as called for in this resolution.

We urge the parties to resume their dialogue as
soon as possible and to work in good faith and without
preconditions to overcome the impasse and provide the
people of Western Sahara with the prospect of a
dignified future of their choice.

Thus, Austria will continue to actively support all
United Nations efforts towards a just, lasting and
mutually acceptable solution that will provide for self-
determination in accordance with international law.
Austria stands ready to assist the Secretary-General
and the parties in advancing their dialogue towards that
goal.

