Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Madam, we wish
you the best of luck during your presidency, and you
can count on our full support in your work this month.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Peru
for its excellent stewardship of the Council in April,
both here in New York and during the Council's visits
abroad in April.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union later today.

Like others before me, I thank High Representative
Valentin Inzko for his briefing and his work.

Today I will focus on three issues: first, the political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, secondly, the rule
of law and thirdly, the country's future prospects.

With regard to my first point, about the political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, since the Dayton
Peace Agreement was signed, the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have worked hard to create a peaceful and
prosperous country and have done so with the strong
support of the international community. While progress
has been made, we share the High Representative's
concerns about the current political situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The divisive speech and actions of
political leaders are negatively affecting the country's
governance, cohesiveness and reforms. In the present
circumstances, we believe that the High Representative
and his Office remain essential.

That brings me to my second point, one that our
Peruvian colleague also highlighted just now, which
is that we are concerned about attempts to undermine
the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Attempts to
delay necessary amendments to the criminal procedure
code and the law establishing the Intelligence and
Security Agency are hindering the fight against
corruption and the sharing of intelligence, including
with international partners. We call on the Council
of Ministers and Parliament to pass the required
amendments without delay.

My third and final point relates to the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We support its Euro-Atlantic
integration as a means to ensure the future prosperity
and security of its people and the region. It is crucial
that Bosnia and Herzegovina's political leaders step
up their implementation of the reforms needed to
make progress towards that integration. Ensuring that
electoral reforms are in place should be the first step. A
constitutional crisis in October must be avoided.

In conclusion, in January the Secretary-General
urged European leaders to show that the continent can
live up to its ideals of shared prosperity and peaceful
coexistence. The general elections in October in Bosnia
and Herzegovina create an opportunity for its political
leaders to show their commitment to those ideals. We
strongly encourage them to grasp that opportunity and
put future before past, reform before stagnation and
unity before divisiveness.

