Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this briefing on
the latest developments in the political process in the
Syrian Arab Republic and thanks Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
his comprehensive briefing. We also thank Ms. Rajaa
Altalli, the representative of Syrian civil society, for
her briefing.

My delegation once again welcomes the launch
of the work of the Constitutional Committee on
30 October in Geneva, which was commended by
the whole international community, 20 months after
the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in Sochi on
30 January 2018, which led to the decision to establish
the Committee. Those developments, resulting from the
mediation efforts and good offices ofthe Special Envoy,
which led to the conclusion of an agreement between
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the
Syrian Negotiations Commission on the composition
of the Constitutional Committee, are very encouraging
signs and a glimmer of hope for a resumption of the
peace process.

My delegation also welcomed the holding on
11 December in Nur-Sultan of the fourteenth round of
the Astana talks, which brought together Iran, Russia
and Turkey, the guarantors of the Astana process,
the Syrian Government and opposition, and Jordan,
Lebanon, Iraq and the United Nations as observers. In
the joint statement that paved the way for the meeting,
the guarantors of the Astana process confirmed their
ongoing commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria. They also
expressed their concern about the increase in terrorist
activities in Idlib governorate and their willingness
to cooperate to eradicate terrorist groups in Syria,
including the Islamic State, the Al-Nusra Front and
other groups that the United Nations has designated
as terrorist.

We noted with regret the difficulties encountered
during the discussions in Geneva on 29 November
during the Constitutional Committee's second session
and the failure to hold a meeting of the 45-member
Committee owing to a lack of agreement on the agenda
between the Government and the opposition. In that
context, Cote d'Ivoire urges all the parties to continue
to work constructively to continue the talks. We also
call on all regional and international stakeholders
to uphold their commitment to the political process
and support it firmly. We appeal to the parties to the
conflict to cease hostilities throughout Syrian territory,
continue confidence-building measures such as the
reciprocal or unilateral release of detainees, and ensure
the protection of civilians in the Idlib de-escalation
zone and the surrounding areas.

Cote d'Ivoire calls on the Syrian parties to prioritize
dialogue and the interests of the Syrian people and to
resume the work of the Constitutional Committee with
a view to holding the fair, credible and transparent
elections that can ensure lasting peace and stability
in Syria and the region. We urge the Security Council
to give full support to the efforts of Special Envoy
Pedersen to reach a political settlement to the Syrian
conflict, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
resolution 2254 (2015).

Since this is the last scheduled public meeting that
my delegation will take part in before the end of my
country's term, on behalf of Ambassador Leon Adom,
Permanent Representative of Cote d'Ivoire to the United
Nations, President Alassane Ouattara of C6te d'Ivoire,
and the Ivorian Government and people, I would like to
convey a message of profound gratitude to the members
of the Security Council for their invaluable support to
cote d'Ivoire during these two years. We also wish to
warmly thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and
all members of the Secretariat for their valuable support
throughout our term, especially during Cote d'Ivoire's
presidency of the Security Council in December 2018. I
would be remiss ifI did not conclude by extending our
deep appreciation for the fruitful collaboration between
my delegation and the other outgoing members of the
Council and wishing every success to the incoming
members. Cote d'Ivoire has been honoured to participate
in the work of the Security Council during the past two
years and will continue to share its experience, values
and principles in the other bodies of the United Nations.

