Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): Uganda's Minister for
Foreign Affairs, the Honourable Sam Kutesa, sends
his sincere apologies for not attending this open debate
due to previously planned national obligations that
required his presence. However, he is with us in spirit,
and I deliver this statement at his behest. Our mission
appreciates Japan's convening of this open debate and
its promotion of peace and development in Africa. As a
country located between the Great Lakes and the Horn
of Africa regions, Uganda fully appreciates the theme
of this open debate.

Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations
mandates the Organization to maintain international
peace and security and, inter alia, to take collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
peace. Indeed, the Security Council is mandated to
follow up on the latter part of the Article, and it is doing
so by hosting this open debate, as we are witnessing
today. Today's global turmoil could lead one to conclude
that the world is experiencing its most unstable period.

However, the actual reality is that the overwhelming
majority of national and international relations are
being conducted peacefully. For instance, there
are more democracies in the world now than there
have been at any other time in human history, it is
wealthier, and there are more educated people living
longer lives. Crucially, enabling social, political and
economic architectures and infrastructures exist in
those countries and regions where peace prevails. For
instance, in North America, there has been no war for
the last century because its countries have evolved
democratic, inclusive and competitive political systems
and trade freely among themselves.

Critically, the United States, as a super-Power,
guarantees North America's security. Similarly, in
Europe, the creation of the United Nations - coupled
with the victorious Allied Powers' avoidance of the
vindictive approach to Germany adopted after the First
World War- consolidated the peace. Other contributing
factors include the balance of terror between the world's
two main military powers, the benefits derived from
the Marshall Plan that reconstructed Western Europe,
and the creation of the present-day European Union,
which within the context of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, has enabled European countries to access
each other's markets without resorting to war, as was
the case in the past.

Even in today's Africa, our reality is not all
characterized by doom and gloom because, for the
first time in many years, with the exception of Western
Sahara, the people of Africa have achieved their
self-determination, as required by the Charter of the
United Nations. That is a prerequisite for sustained
peace. Today, unlike in the 19605, when military coups
were the order of the day, most African countries are
democracies, meeting another vital requirement of
sustained peace.

Regional integration is another important
dimension. Africa has some of the most vibrant
regional integration entities on this planet, such as the
East African Community, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Southern African
Development Community. These entities structurally
entrench peace and development. Even socially and
economically, Africa is on the rise. Recent statistics
from the African Development Bank indicate that the
continent currently raises up to $450 billion annually as
domestic revenue, while external funding amounts to
approximately $50 billion annually. This positive trend
points towards sustained peace on this continent.

One instance of the continent's sustained economic
transformation and development is the investment by
the Dangote Group, an African private sector company,
of $15 billion in the construction of one of the biggest
oil refineries in the world in Nigeria. The aim is to
address fuel shortages in Nigeria and West Africa. The
refinery will be refining up to 650,000 barrels of crude
oil a day, and it is expected to create approximately
100,000 much-needed jobs.

This is not a stand-alone African development. With
funding from China's Export-Import Bank, a standard
gauge railway line is being built to connect East Africa,
Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda and South Sudan to the sea
and world trade, at an estimated cost of $3.8 billion.
Uganda and Tanzania will soon begin construction
of a 1,400-kilometre oil pipeline from Uganda's oil
belt in Hoima to the Indian Ocean port of Tanga, in
collaboration with the French Total oil company. The
investment amounts to at least $4 billion.

Within this exceedingly vibrant region, this is
not all. Unfortunately, time does not permit me to
discuss the other stories from the region and elsewhere
in southern Africa and other parts of the continent.
However, the point to note is that Africa is on the move
and full of promise for its people and the world. Cases
of persistent conflict on the continent have not been
been due to inexplicably bad luck. Their causes can be
scientifically explained and ideas and efforts can be
contributed to the process of finding and implementing
a solution.

For instance, colonialism, the arbitrary partition of
Africa, internal militarism and Cold War rivalry and
manipulation were key in precipitating the collapse of
the Somali State. Furthermore, we all vividly recall
the causes of the current crisis in Libya. Similarly, the
conflict in South Sudan is no accident. Colonial and
post-colonial marginalization over the last century
before its self-determination firmly laid the foundation
for this tragedy. If we are to resolve the conflicts that
exist in Africa, we do not need to reinvent the wheel.
Let us draw from the best practices elsewhere and
adopt and adapt them accordingly in South Sudan, the
Central African Republic, Libya and Somalia.

There will be a need to avoid quick-fix solutions, as
these may do more harm than good in the final analysis.
The Security Council should apply a consultative
approach to resolving the crises in these countries, for in
order to achieve durable peace, we must craft legitimate
political solutions. Consultations must therefore have
the support of the legitimate leaders of these countries.
We need to create armed forces that are effective and
yet fully subordinate to the legimitate civil authorities.

These countries have a rich natural endowment.
The international community should enable their
citizens to benefit from those resources through
policies that promote economic productivity and social
and economic transformation. Africa is an emerging
and vibrant market with plenty of potential to offer its
people and the world community. The international
community should follow the lead of China, the Obama
Administration in the United States, Japan and other
economies by investing in the interesting economic
prospects we have in Africa, for our mutual benefit.
Doing so will consolidate sustained peace on this
continent and in the world.

