Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over today's
meeting, Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his
thorough briefing and the Foreign Ministers present for
joining us today.

Across Israel, Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza,
clouds of fear have settled in. In the context of the recent
violence, one Israeli told a reporter, "I just don't feel safe
any more I watch to see who the people are around me.
I want to know who is behind me". A young Palestinian
said, "[Y]ou are worried that someone will shout, 'This
is an Arab, this is an Arab,' and someone will shoot
without you doing anything." An Israeli tenth-grader
said, "I'm petrified. Children are scared to leave the
house. They won't go to the shop or walk around the
neighbourhood". Across the city, a Palestinian father
said, "I don't feel safe. The best strategy for me was
to keep the children home from school". In Jerusalem,
shoppers and merchants are on edge. An Israeli
shopkeeper said that his customers came, bought
and fled, and that people are afraid. Said an Arab
shopkeeper in the Old City, "When I prepare the juice,
I am scared to cut the oranges in case someone sees me
with the knife and shoots me".

That mutual fear risks worsening the already
dangerous cycle of violence. The United States is
deeply concerned, and condemns in the strongest
possible terms the terrorist attacks and the recent and
ongoing violence. The human suffering inflicted by
these acts has been grave and continues to deepen. We
mourn the loss of all life and continue to stress how
important it is that both parties condemn the violence
and avoid provocative statements that could further
inflame tensions. Both sides must exercise restraint.

There is growing frustration on all sides as the
prospect of reaching a two-State solution appears to be
diminishing. But that frustration is not a justification
for reprehensible acts of violence against civilians.
Stabbing innocent people as they go about their day
is not an acceptable way of expressing anything. It is,
as the Deputy Secretary-General just said, attempted
murder, full stop. Such attacks must be unequivocally
condemned in Israel, as they would be in any of our
countries. We support Israel's right to defend its citizens,
and we mourn the senseless and deliberate taking
of innocent lives. We have also expressed our deep
concern about the deaths and injuries of Palestinians
due to live fire from Israeli security forces, and we have
urged Israel to take steps to prevent an escalation of
the Violence. As always, it is critical that every possible
effort be made to guard against unnecessary loss of life,
protect the innocent, reduce tensions and restore calm.

We have also raised our heightened concern about
the increased Israeli settler violence against Palestinians
and their property in the West Bank. Most immediately,
we urge all sides to take affirmative steps to restore calm
and reduce tensions. In that regard, we welcome Israel
and Jordan's commitment to maintaining the status quo
at the Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, and we strongly
support the efforts of all sides to ensure that this status
quo is indeed maintained. Prime Minister Netanyahu
has publicly committed to that point.

In the longer term, we remain concerned that the
trends on the ground, including violence and settlement
and outpost activity, are dangerously imperiling
the Viability of a two-State solution. As the Quartet
statement of 30 September said, the United States and
its partners support concrete steps to help stabilize
the situation, show meaningful progress towards a
two-State solution and restore hope. Together we must
continue to press for meaningful steps that will lay
the groundwork for achieving a negotiated two-State
solution. Significant policy advances, particularly in
Area C, will be critical to increasing the Palestinian
Authority's ability to address key economic and
institutional challenges. These can be pursued while
respecting Israel's legitimate security needs. Indeed,
they will enhance stability and security for Israelis and
Palestinians alike. We continue to believe that the best
way to reduce tension is to work towards a political
solution that will result in two States living side by
side in peace and security. Only through a solution
negotiated by the two sides will true peace and security
be achieved.

Secretary Kerry had a constructive meeting earlier
today with Prime Minister Netanyahu. They discussed
the security situation in Israel, the West Bank and the
region, as well as the situation on the Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount. A number of constructive proposals
were suggested, including steps that Israel could take
to reaffirm its continued commitment to maintaining
the status quo on the Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount.
Both agreed that there is a need to stop incitement, to
reduce tension and to restore calm. The Secretary will
discuss this further when the Quartet Ministers meet
in Vienna tomorrow, and he will then travel to Jordan,
where he will meet separately with President Abbas
and King Abdullah on Saturday. In his meetings, the
Secretary will be encouraging efforts to restore calm
and bring an end to the violence.
We cannot discuss peace and security in the Middle
East and not address the horrific situation in Syria,
which has escalated dramatically since we gathered
for our last quarterly open debate on the Middle East
(see S/PV.7490). The repercussions of events there also
reverberate well beyond the region. After four and a half
years of war, Syrian civilians continue to endure barrel
bombs, extremist violence and widespread deprivations.
In September alone, the Syrian Network for Human
Rights reported that the Al-Assad regime dropped
1,715 barrel bombs on its own people, hitting mosques,
hospitals, schools and other civilian infrastructure. The
death toll over the course of the conflict has surpassed
250,000 people, and that figure does not include the
tens of thousands of missing Syrians. In addition, more
than 10 million Syrians are displaced.

The new Russian military offensive has worsened
an already dire situation. Around Aleppo and Homs,
Russian airstrikes are providing cover for an offensive
by Al-Assad's forces, supplemented by Iranian and
Hizbullah fighters. According to the United Nations,
the new offensive has forced as many as 50,000 more
Syrians from their homes in the south-western districts
of Aleppo City, and another 35,000 from Hama. That
is 85,000 people newly displaced in a relatively short
period of time. Returning from southern Aleppo earlier
this week, Dr. Zedoun Al-Zoabi, head of the Union of
Syrian Medical Relief Organizations, said, "People are
scared to death. Everyone is on the move".

Russia says that it is defending Syrians, but
according to credible Syrian observer groups Russian
strikes around Aleppo City have primarily struck
critical civilian infrastructure, including schools and
markets. At least 100 civilians have been killed by
these strikes to date, according to the Syrian Network
for Human Rights. The Russian offensive has also been
profoundly counterproductive, even in relation to its
stated goals, as it concentrates its firepower not on
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), but on
groups that in many cases have taken huge casualties
fighting ISIL.

Russia says that it is targeting terrorists, but Russia
is in fact targeting groups and individuals opposed
to Al-Assad's violent rule. Just yesterday, Reuter's
reported a very credible study of Russian strikes, which
showed that 80 per cent of the targets that Russia has
hit are located outside of ISIL control. By attacking
non-extremist groups, Russia has boosted, perversely,
the relative strength of ISIL, which has taken advantage
of this campaign by seizing new territory in Rural
Aleppo. Since Russia began its strikes, the Syrian map
has shifted in ISIL's favour. Civilians are on the move
in terror, and ISIL is on the move gaining ground.

Let me be clear. Aiding and abetting Al-Assad's
military as it targets the very groups that we need to
bring to the negotiating table will only prolong the
conflict and push a political solution further from
reach. This conflict will not end until Syria is free of
Al-Assad. Supporting him now only ensures that, by the
time a political transition is negotiated, ISIL will only
be stronger - its recruitment having been bolstered
by the actions of Russia, Iran and the regime - and
the Syrian State will only be weaker, the country more
fragmented, and the heartbreak for families across the
country more widespread.

Peace in Syria cannot be secured overnight, any
more than the fear that clouds Jerusalem today will
immediately dissipate. We hope that tomorrow's
meeting between Secretary Kerry and Foreign Minister
Lavrov will result in Russia's recommitting, in words
and in action, to a political solution for Syria based on
the Geneva communique' (S/2012/523, annex). At the
same time, we call on Israeli and Palestinian leaders
to take every possible measure to reduce tension and
restore calm on the ground. Throughout the region, a
return to political dialogue represents the only real path
through these darks days of terror and fear.

