Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Madam President, my delegation welcomes your
participation in today's meeting in your capacity as
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of
South Africa, and we are pleased to see you presiding
over our work. We also welcome the presence of Her
Excellency Ms. Antic Leendertse, State Secretary of
the Federal Foreign Office of Germany. We also wish to
commend Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his excellent
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.
The 24 October marked the seventy-fourth
anniversary of the adoption of the founding Charter of
the United Nations, the main objectives of which are
to build a world of peace, security and social progress.
Since the adoption of the Charter, the international
community, through the Security Council, has not
flagged in its efforts to promote peace and security
around the world. However, despite our many
successes, several hotbeds of tension continue to afflict
the world and currently represent a genuine threat to
our collective security.

The decades-old Israeli-Palestinian dispute is
representative of those conflicts, the regional and
international repercussions of which continue to
undermine peace and security on a global scale. That is
why Cote d'Ivoire remains deeply concerned about the
political impasse that has prevailed since the signing
of the Oslo Accords, as well as the cases of sporadic
violence that contribute to moving us further away
from the hope for a peaceful and lasting solution to the
conflict. My delegation welcomes the holding of this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, which provides us once again
with an opportunity to reiterate our firm belief that
only constructive dialogue between the two parties on
all of the issues causing current divisions might lead to
a lasting and mutually acceptable solution.

Cote d'Ivoire launches once again an urgent call for
the resumption of negotiations without preconditions
between Israelis and Palestinians, while also urging
the international community, including the United
Nations, to work with stakeholders to achieve the two-
State solution, with two independent States peacefully
coexisting within the 1967 borders. In this regard,
my delegation commends the visit of Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, from 5 to 11 October, to the
Middle East, in particular to Jerusalem, where she
spoke of the need to revive the dialogue between
Israelis and Palestinians in order to promote the two-
State solution. It is therefore important that both parties
refrain from unilateral actions that could further
degrade an already precarious security environment
and jeopardize the international community's efforts
towards rapprochement and reconciliation.

My country would also like to reiterate its
commitment both to Israel's security and to the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination. Those are two fundamental requirements
that are not mutually exclusive, but rather mutually
reinforcing, and are in strict keeping with the two-
State solution.

My delegation believes that the humanitarian
situation in the Palestinian territories continues to
worsen, fuel tension between Fatah and Hamas, and
stoke Palestinian resentment against the State of Israel.
This very worrying situation is undeniably exacerbated
by persistent youth unemployment and water and
electricity shortages, all in the context of an acute
economic crisis in the Palestinian territories. In this
regard, Cote d'Ivoire urges the international community
to provide the needed humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian population in distress and to promote the
economic recovery and reconstruction of the Gaza
Strip through adequate financing and investment.
Accordingly, we welcome the pledges of support to the
budget of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in order to
reduce the Agency's budgetary deficit.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire renews its support for
the efforts of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov to promote peace
and stability in the Middle East, in general, and between
Israeli and Palestinians, in particular. It is fully aligned
with the objective ofa comprehensive and lasting peace
in the Middle East and reiterates its readiness to work
together with all Council members to ensure a peaceful
resolution ofthe Israeli-Palestinian crisis in accordance
with the relevant Council resolutions.

