Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): This afternoon we
are going to have a wrap-up meeting on the work of the
month, but since it is likely to be the last meeting of
the year we thought it might be useful to review the
successes and the failures of the year as well. We were
going to say this afternoon that Angola was clearly not
a success story. But today Ambassador Gambari has
given us a glimmer of hope. Yet he has also created a
problem for us, because we now have to re-write our
speech for this afternoon.

I certainly agree with Ambassador Chowdhury,
who said that Ambassador Gambari had been far too
modest about his own personal contribution to what has
happened. We have no doubt that it is as a result of his
strong personal involvement that we see what he has
called a new window of opportunity in Angola.

But this, as everyone has observed, is a 26-year-
old conflict. There must have been other windows of
opportunity that came and went. The question is, "How
do we keep this window of opportunity truly open?"
Here, I was going to ask Ambassador Gambari whether
he could, in his responses, perhaps reflect a little more
on the factors that have created the new window of
opportunity. Some of the factors have been touched on
in the discussion so far, for example the military
defeats of UNITA; clearly, that is a new factor. Another
factor is the willingness of the Government to get the
United Nations engaged in the process of dialogue.
Here, I must say Ijoin Ambassador Eldon in thanking
the Government of Angola for the access it gave
Ambassador Gambari; I am glad he met President Dos
Santos on the first day, not the last day. I hope that
becomes a pattern for his visits there.
Were there any other factors? For example - just
speaking out of ignorance - did the neighbours of
Angola play a role? Has civil society been touched
upon? It would be helpful if Mr. Gambari could tell us
exactly what has created this new window of
opportunity, so that we can, in a sense, strengthen those
factors that created this window.

Secondly, I think everyone has agreed in their
remarks today that the humanitarian situation, to put it
very mildly, is very bad. The most alarming figure we
heard this morning is, ifI heard Ambassador Gambari
correctly, that there are 4.1 million internally displaced
persons out of a population of 12 million. That makes
it one third of the population - 33 per cent. This must
surely be the highest figure for any country in the
world.

I wonder whether Ambassador Gambari can
confirm that, because if that figure is right, it shows
how large the problem is. Indeed, according to a World
Food Programme report last week, the latest military
campaigns against UNITA in central and eastern
Angola have actually led to another significant increase
of internally displaced persons in these regions, with
acute malnutrition rates reaching as high as 25 per cent
in some refugee centres. I believe several previous
speakers asked what more can be done to ameliorate
the humanitarian situation. If Ambassador Gambari
could respond to that, that would be very helpful.

Thirdly- again, this is unique in today's
debate 4 everyone has emphasized the important role
of civil society and the role of the churches. Here I
agree with Ambassador Durrant's comment that when
the technical teams goes to Angola, it should have
more meetings with civil society members. But until I
heard the representative of France, these civil society
figures appeared to be faceless, nameless heroes. I am
glad that one of them has been recognized and has
received the Sakharov Prize.

But what else can we do to clearly help this
positive new factor? Again, speaking off the cuff, for
example, I wonder if it would be helpful to perhaps
invite some members of civil society to come to the
Council to speak to us, either in an Arria-formula
meeting or in some other meeting. This may have two
positive benefits. One, of course, is that we will hear
directly from a party that has played a positive role,
and, secondly, we hope that having a dialogue with
them will further enhance their capacity to play an
even more constructive role in the political process. I
wonder whether Ambassador Gambari would like to
comment on that suggestion.

Finally, Ambassador Chowdhury referred to the
last report of the Secretary-General, where the
Secretary-General said that the complexity of the
situation clearly requires what he called "creative
ways" to solve the problem.

I must thank Ambassador Gambari for coming to
speak to us almost immediately, right off the plane,
because we know he landed yesterday; we knew it was
a tremendous imposition for him to come speak to us
right away, but if the jet lag is not troubling him too
much, if he has other creative thoughts, I hope he will
share them with us.

