Ms. Bird (Australia): The Secretary-General's May
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2016/447)is a grim illustration of the huge number of
civilians whose lives are being devastated by conflict.
Protecting civilians is the primary responsibility of
Governments, a fundamental principle of international
humanitarian law, and a core obligation of United
Nations peace operations.

The credibility and legitimacy of United Nations
peacekeepers largely depend on their willingness and
capability to act when civilians are under threat. Despite
significant growth in norms and frameworks for the
protection of civilians, performance across United
Nations peacekeeping operations remains mixed. The
implementation of the recommendations of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations provide
an important opportunity to embed the protection
of civilians at the centre of peacekeeping. The Panel
highlights that protection mandates are a mission-wide
task involving military, police and civilian personnel
and utilizing every tool at their disposal.

First, significant progress is being made in delivering
this critical objective. Australia welcomes the renewed
efforts of States to support the unprecedented demands
facing United Nations peacekeeping. Implementing
the substantial pledges made at the 2014 and 2015
peacekeeping summits will be vital to ensuring that
capabilities and resources match mandates. Australia,
for its part, has pledged strategic airlift support,
training for regional peacekeepers and funding to build
capacity to counter improvised explosive devices.

Secondly, we support implementing whole-of-
mission protection of civilians strategies and best
practices. For example, we welcome the deployment of
senior protection of civilian advisers in all missions,
and we encourage the creation of community alert
networks to deepen our understanding of threats and
how to reduce risk. We also recognize that the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians provide a useful
set of principles to guide troop- and police-contributing
countries. The principles emphasize the importance of
personnel being appropriately trained, equipped and
tasked to protect civilians.

Thirdly, accountability is crucial to improving the
protection of civilians by peacekeeping operations.
We therefore welcome the trial of a new compact
between the United Nations and the Central African
Republic, strengthening accountability for civilian
protection. We also support the implementation of
new indicators to assess the effectiveness of protection
mandates and evaluate performance. Central to that is
mission reporting on obstacles to fulfilling protection
mandates, including the failure of peacekeepers to act
or follow orders.

Finally, it is hard to imagine a more shocking
contradiction to the intent of protecting civilians than
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers of the
very people they have been sent to protect. We therefore
commend the Security Council for taking strong action
to ensure accountability foe sexual exploitation and
abuse through resolution 2272 (2016), in particular the
authorization to repatriate military or police units that
fail to hold perpetrators to account.

In conclusion, there can be no doubt that protecting
civilians is a challenging and complex endeavour, but it
is the measure by which United Nations peacekeeping
is judged, and it demands our sustained attention
and commitment.

