Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): My delegation is
concerned by the recent incident, as reported by the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. We have taken careful note of the views
expressed by all related parties with regard to the
incident.

The incident reminds us of the continuing grave
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The
humanitarian suffering caused by the illegal blockade
and the closure of Gaza crossings by the Israeli
authorities are well chronicled and unacceptable. The
provisions of international humanitarian law must be
respected. We are aware that, at some points, Israel has
allowed humanitarian assistance to enter Gaza.
However, we believe that humanitarian access should
be provided continuously and permanently in order to
achieve tangible improvement of the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. Many humanitarian agencies rely on
the Israeli authorities for access to Gaza to assist a
civilian population of more than 1 million living there.

My delegation underlines that the movement of
persons and goods into Gaza should be immediately
normalized in order to facilitate economic activity and
to meet humanitarian needs.

The continued provision of emergency and
humanitarian assistance by the international
community to the Palestinian people in Gaza remains
critical. In this regard, we commend the work and
contribution of United Nations agencies, including the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, and other humanitarian
organizations to mitigate suffering in the area.

While we need to urgently address the current
dire humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, my
delegation is not oblivious to the broader context of the
issues under discussion. We consistently believe that
finding a peaceful, just, lasting and comprehensive
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is of
primary importance. At this juncture, it is our belief
that the Council needs to provide positive
encouragement to the parties to continue and redouble
their efforts to engage in vigorous, ongoing and
continuous negotiations and to make every effort to
achieve meaningful and results-oriented efforts. It is
also pertinent for the Council to call on both parties to
avoid any actions, activities or statements that could
undermine or hamper the peace process.

It is also important for the Council to encourage
early improvements in the situation on the ground that
could help build confidence among the parties and
create an atmosphere conducive to negotiations. In
short, we need for the Security Council to speak, to
pronounce itself, with one voice.

Finally, we wish to reaffirm our support for a
two-State solution that envisions the creation of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State
living side by side in peace and security with Israel and
its other neighbours.

