Ms. Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa: I would like to respond
to the question about what I need to do better to prevent
sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence. Resolution 2406 (2018) mandates us
to protect civilians and at the same time gives us an
opportunity to give technical assistance and advice to
the South Sudanese national police on preventing and
investigating sexual and gender-based violence. What
that means to us, and what we are currently working
on, is that we have some limited opportunities to work
on capacity-building with the national police. Going
forward, we may be able to transition from providing
technical assistance and advice to building the capacity
of the national police to take on the task of preventing
and investigating sexual and gender-based violence. In
addition to that, an issue we are also looking into is
ensuring a consistent supply of female officers for the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
something that the police-contributing countries can
assist us with, so that we have women there on the
ground working with the local police to prevent sexual
and gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual
violence. Those are the areas we are currently exploring,
as well as strengthening the specialized police teams
that we are now deploying into the Mission. Going
forward, they will really help us to consolidate our
approach to the prevention of sexual and gender-based
violence and conflict-related sexual violence.

Iwould also like to address the question on protecting
civilians from threats of physical violence and how we
can work responsibly in that regard. We appreciate
the fact - and we have heard it here today - that the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
rests with the local Government that we work with on a
day-to-day basis. But then again, given the fact that we
are there, and given the unpredictability of the security
situation on the ground, our presence can be a deterrent
to threats of physical violence against the civilians
whom we work with on a daily basis.
There was also a comment about how the police and
military components work on the ground. In UNMISS,
we have been consistently conducting progressive
tabletop exercises that we do together. We have field
training exercises, as well as joint planning exercises to
enable us to work together on our approach to operations
and so forth. We all understand the roles of the United
Nations Police and the military force, and we know that
they cannot replace each other, because we have very
defined roles regarding the security situation on the
ground. Working together on these regular exercises
therefore really helps us to identify areas where we can
work together to deliver a cohesive operation on the
ground every day.

