Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the initiative of our Mexican
colleagues to convene today's meeting of the Security
Council on this very important item. We are also
grateful to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/158). We Wish too to thank
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Mr. Le Roy and Ms. Veneman for
the timely information they provided. We listened with
close attention to the heart-rending statement made by
Ms. Grace Akallo.

Russia endorses the Secretary-General's appeal to
that proper attention be accorded to all grave violations
of the rights of children in conflict. Crimes against
children should not go unpunished. Here, we welcome
the Secretary-General's recommendation that the
criteria for the inclusion of parties to armed conflict in
the annexes of his reports be expanded to include the
killing or maiming of children.

We resolutely condemn intentional attacks on
civilians, including children, and the deadly,
indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force. One
example of action of that kind was the August 2008
attack by the Georgian military against South Ossetia.
The killing of civilians, including children, and the
destruction of schools and hospitals have been
recorded in reports of the Secretary-General.

Nor can we pass over in silence the grave
violations of international humanitarian law during the
military operations that Israel carried out in Gaza in
January; these claimed the lives of hundreds of
children and reduced schools - including a school
operated by the United Nations - to rubble.

Once again, we call upon parties to conflict to
abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to refrain from the use of force
against the civilian population.

Children continue to fall victim to the conflicts in
Iraq and Afghanistan, where armed groups attack the
peaceful population and engage in terrorist acts. It is

important that Al-Qaida in Iraq has finally been
included, alongside the Taliban, among the violators
listed in annex I of the current report of the Secretary-
General. Regrettably, children in those countries also
lose their lives as a result of the actions of foreign
forces, whose mission is to protect them. The United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
has provided telling statistics in that regard. Despite
repeated assurances about additional measures
continuing to be taken to prevent such incidents, these
occur with tragic regularity. This threatens the peace
processes in those countries.

We consider that attempts to refer to civilian
deaths as "collateral damage" are unacceptable and
inconsistent with, inter alia, the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions. We advocate the thorough
investigation of such incidents and the punishment of
those responsible.

We are pleased that monitoring and reporting
mechanisms have been set up in all situations within
the purview of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. It is now necessary to
ensure that those mechanisms submit timely, objective,
accurate and reliable information, pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005). We also favour the
inclusion in peacekeeping operations of child
protection advisers.

We take note of the work by United Nations
country teams in urging parties to conflict to adopt
plans of action to demobilize child soldiers and to end
their recruitment. In that connection, we stress that
contacts between the United Nations mechanism and
non-State armed groups can be established only with
the consent of the Governments of affected States.
Moreover, although they are an important instrument
for the protection of children, plans of action should
not be ends in themselves. The genuine improvement
of the situation of children on the ground is far more
important to the assessment of progress than promises
that are made on paper but often not fulfilled.

The Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, chaired by France and then by Mexico, has
done a great deal to elaborate recommendations on
specific situations. The effective implementation of
those recommendations will require the development
of constructive cooperation with interested States.

The rehabilitation of child victims and their
reintegration into society require concrete, long-term
steps, including the establishment of conditions to
ensure their access to full education and health care.
There is also a need to take steps to prevent crimes
against minors. In that respect, in many conflict and
post-conflict situations the decisive factor can be
effective international support for national efforts to
protect children's' rights.

