Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let
me, too, thank the Chairmen for their briefings. Their
dedicated leadership is central to the effectiveness of
the Council's three counter-terrorism-related
committees. I would especially like to thank the
Chairmen for their recommendations, which merit
serious consideration.

The importance of this work and the broader
international effort to combat terrorism was
underscored by the recent foiled plot involving the
explosives-laden parcels flown out of Yemen that were
tracked down in the United Kingdom and Dubai. That
event and other attempts earlier this year are harsh
reminders of the global nature of the terrorist threat.
The United States remains committed to reaching out
and forging international coalitions, based on mutual
interests and respect, to combat terrorism and prevent
the spread of weapons of mass destruction to terrorists.

Working with our partners to strengthen the
ability of the United Nations to help address those
threats continues to be a key priority of my
Government. To achieve that goal, we must continue to
maximize the effectiveness, transparency and relevance
of the Council's counter-terrorism-related subsidiary
bodies.

Let me thank Ambassador Apakan for an
exceptional job guiding the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) during his tenure as Chair.
Ambassador has Apakan fostered greater efficiency in
the CTC's work and worked with Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Director Mike Smith to keep the
general membership up to date on the Committee's
activities through open meetings on such topics as
international legal cooperation and maritime security.
As the Council begins to look at the renewal of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) mandate, which the United States strongly
supports, CTED should intensify its regional and
thematic approach to its work. It should also continue
to develop regional capacity- and network-building
initiatives in the Horn of Africa, South Asia and the
Sahel.

Finally, consistent with the emphasis that this
Council placed on prevention issues in its September
presidential statement on terrorism (S/PRST/2010/ 19),
CTED should devote more attention to dialogue with
countries on the issues addressed in resolution 1624
(2005) that relate to softer approaches to counter-
terrorism. The CTC and CTED have made great strides
in 2010, and we look forward to working with our
partners to ensure that their efforts remain practical,
focused and innovative.

Over the past 11 years, the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime has been one of the United Nations
most effective counter-terrorism tools and a symbol of
international consensus against the ongoing threats
posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. The United States
will continue to work through the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) to
recommend the addition and removal of names on the
sanctions list to ensure that the list keeps pace with the
changing threat. We must now focus on ensuring that
countries are implementing the financial, arms and
travel sanctions against those on the list.

The United States welcomes the significant
enhancements to the regime's listing and de-listing
processes outlined in resolutions 1735 (2006), 1822
(2008) and 1904 (2009). We remain confident that the
establishment of an independent Ombudsman for the
regime will help ensure that the de-listing procedures
are fair and transparent. We welcome Kimberly Prost's
appointment as the Committee's first Ombudsperson,
and we look forward to working with her.

Let me thank Ambassador Mayr-Harting and his
team, as well as the Secretariat, for their tremendous
efforts. They have worked steadfastly to implement
these reforms, and we are truly grateful for their work.
I also thank the 1267 Monitoring Team for its
important role in preparing narrative summaries of the
reasons for listing each entry and proposing
recommendations for improving the Committee's work.

Finally, let join my colleagues in thanking
Ambassador Heller for leading the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) this past
year. The United States views the Committee's
activities over the past six years as a landmark effort to
gain strong political support for the broad obligations
created by that resolution, the success of which is
noted in resolution 1887 (2009), adopted during the
2009 Security Council summit (see S/PV.6191), the
2009 comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004)
and the work plan for this year's Nuclear Security
Summit. Resolution 1540 (2004) is not only a crucial
instrument in the international counter-terrorism
regime; it is also a vital piece on the international non-
proliferation landscape.

The United States is pleased with the efforts of
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and
its recent workshops in Croatia and Viet Nam, which
we co-sponsored. We are preparing to provide a
financial contribution to the 1540 Committee through
existing United Nations official development
assistance funding mechanisms. We hope that this will
help facilitate and motivate cooperation among other
assistance providers.

The United States supports a lengthy, perhaps
indefinite, continuation of the 1540 Committee to
allow for long-term strategic implementation and
resourcing. Such a mandate would include a periodic
review of the Committee's mandate and work methods,
as well as a sunset provision requiring the Committee
to cease operations when the Security Council
determines that it has met all its objectives.

We are pleased with the direction steered by the
three Committees. Under the capable leadership of the
three current Chairs, United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts will guide and reinforce Member States' actions
to deter terrorism, including the threats posed by
Al-Qaida, its affiliated groups and the Taliban, as well
as proliferation efforts by non-State actors.

