Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): Let me at the outset
express, on behalf of President Ernest Bai Koroma and
the Government and the people of Sierra Leone, our
profound appreciation to you, Madam President, and
the members of the Security Council, for convening
this all-important meeting.

Our gathering at this crucial time, particularly as
the consequences of the unprecedented outbreak of the
Ebola virus unfold in our subregion, underscores the
heightened concern of the international community.
Clearly, the impact of the epidemic has not only been
frightening but also taken a toll on the entire fabric of
the three countries concerned. The need to understand
and to robustly respond to the worst-ever Ebola outbreak
in history therefore cannot be overemphasized.

Let me also convey the sincere appreciation of
President Koroma to all those who have, in turn,
expressed their sympathy to the people of Sierra
Leone either through telephone calls, in particular
the Secretary-General and President Obama, or by
high-level visits of United Nations agencies, including
Ms. Chan, who is sitting on my left. Mr. Jackson
Nabarro also visited. We appreciate all such visits,
most particularly the very recent visit of the President
of the Economic Community of West African States
Commission, President Mahama, They all came with
expressions of sympathy, good hope and good wishes.

We are in unfamiliar territory. To date, the origins,
symptoms, threat and contagion of Ebola are not only
baffling but also very confusing. Ebola is challenging
us as the human race. It is challenging our level of
preparedness at both the national and the international
levels. It is challenging our behavioural patterns and
our resolve to address such an epidemic. It is the very
first time that we have had such an epidemic. It is also
testing our resilience. We have heard today that it is
testing our level of coordination and our patience in
understanding one another.

Our people in Sierra Leone live in fear and cannot
understand the nature ofa disease that Claims a life and
then prevents family members from burying their loved
ones. Despite the deployment of all such measures, the
crisis has deepened and the virus remains one step,
or even many steps, ahead of our efforts. Ebola, as an
extraordinary disease, has precipitated extraordinary
actions by Sierra Leone, including a state of public
health emergency. There are various high-level
committees, jointly managed by development partners
and the national authorities.

From tomorrow, we will observe a three-day
curfew period. That is not to our liking, but since Ebola
is an extraordinary disease, it requires extraordinary
steps because there is no cure for the virus. We hope
that, after tomorrow, there will be a better sense of
understanding and appreciation given that, as of today,
the sense of fear and, we believe, ignorance, denial
and misinformation are aspects that are diminishing.
However, we still have much more to do given the fact
that Ebola is spreading exponentially. As of today, the
cumulative figure of confirmed cases stands at 1,571
and of confirmed deaths at 483, 60 per cent of whom
are women. Children are greatly affected. Importantly,
even health facilities and personnel are impacted. We
have lost four doctors. Several nurses and health-care
workers have also died.

As the international community, and the United
Nations in particular, can testify, since they have been
fully involved in our post-conflict peace consolidation
and peacebuilding activities, in Sierra Leone we have
made tremendous progress in rebuilding the economy
and the lives of those who suffered during the war.
Last year, I was here to join the Security Council
in celebrating with Sierra Leone the successes that
we have made in that direction (see S/PV.7034).
We graduated from the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone and proudly from
the Peacebuilding Commission reconfiguration.

Today, we are here in a different capacity. It is a
sad story that is reversing all our gains and, more
particularly, if we are not careful, that has strong
global systemic challenges. If we do not act fast, it will
challenge our human capacities. That is why I fully
appreciate the unamimous adoption of resolution 2177
(2014). However, I agree with you, Madam President,
that adopting a resolution is not the end but a means to
an end. We therefore need to finance and implement the
resolution. In doing that, I must emphasize that speed
is of the essence. Accuracy, appropriateness and the
lack of conditionality in the flow of funds and support
are all very important elements in rendering effective
assistance.

Aid for Ebola is dedicated assistance. We must
therefore rally and be completely serious in the kind of
aid provided and the type of responses and interventions
that we bring to bear in the three countries. At this
juncture, let me perhaps make one or two suggestions.

Today, in the three countries, we have laid
the foundations for the restructuring of our public
health sectors. Treatment and holding centres have
been constructed and laboratories installed. Yet
there is no centre for disease control of a significant
nature. President Ernest Bai Koroma is approaching
the People's Republic of China for the use of an
ultramodern hospital that has been constructed at Jui
to be transformed into a centre for disease control to
serve the country, the subregion and, in particular, even
the continent of Africa. All other developed countries
have centres for disease control. I would therefore like
to urge the Security Council to join President Koroma
in appealing to the People's Republic of China.

With a centre, we will have modern research
facilities to be able to understand the origins of such
infectious diseases. It is not only Ebola that plagues
Africa. We still have problems understanding malaria.
There is tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, smallpox and
chickenpox. All those diseases exist in Africa. We need
a centralized institution where we take our knowledge
forward. So I would like to plead that the Security
Council join us in pleading with the People's Republic
of China.

The fabric has already been set up because the
intervention of China in constructing a treatment centre
and a modern laboratory has just been done within the
vicinity of the hospital. It will use the hospital as a
holding centre, not just a treatment centre. Certainly,
the treatment centre that has been constructed by the
United Kingdom will also be brought to bear in the
use of the building. South Africa is helping us with
laboratory assistance.

I believe that, as we construct prefabricated
treatment and holding centres, that our challenge going
forward will be to have a centre for disease control. To
that end, I would like to appeal to all those institutions
that may have been affected by the derogatory remarks
and unfair comments of the sovereign people of Sierra
Leone. There is a saying that when a man is drowning,
he will not hesitate to take hold of even the sharpest
blade. I would like to particularly express our sympathy
with and our appeal to all of these institutions. I am
sure many of them have been taken aback, including the
World Health Organization (WHO), and we understand
that there have been complaints from the media and
from the citizens of Sierra Leone. That happened simply
because there was a time when we had a patient - the
most recent casualty, a woman doctor - and I think
there was an appeal to WHO for evacuation. But again,
there was a lack of understanding. The WHO does not
have global hospitals. WHO has planes. But that is the
reality when one is suffering, when one is there on the
ground.

I also want to state that I would not be surprised
if the discussions at the sixty-ninth session were
overshadowed by discussions on Ebola. I think it would

be very appropriate, by the end of the discussions at
the General Assembly's sixty-ninth session, for us to
be very clear and come up with definitive conclusions
on how to not only contain the spread of Ebola, but
treat Ebola, or more particularly how to move forward
in the treatment of other infectious diseases. To those
countries that, through panicked reactions, have
closed their borders and cancelled flights and shipping
arrangements, I want tojoin my colleagues from Liberia
and Guinea to plead for a return to normalcy. Ebola was
not the making of any one of those three countries. It
just came. I hope that, in the not-too-distant future, it
will go back as fast as it came.

