Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Let me begin by
warmly congratulating you, Mr. President, on Angola's
assumption of the presidency for this month and also
by expressing our deep appreciation to Ambassador
Ramirez Carrefio for his leadership during the month
of February.

At the outset, I would like to commend the efforts
of both the United States and China in drafting and
putting on the table the text of resolution 2270 (2016)
in response to the recent nuclear test and rocket launch
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We
appreciate the convening of the expert-level meetings
on 25 and 26 February by the delegation of the United
States, so that each Council member had an opportunity
to raise any questions related to the resolution and
its annexes.

We consider the resolution just adopted to be a
comprehensive and balanced document that, on the one
hand, strengthens the existing regime and reinforces it
with additional sectoral and targeted sanctions and, on
the other, clearly demonstrates the Council's openness
to dialogue on peaceful and diplomatic solutions to
the situation. Such an approach fully corresponds
to the Council's intention to avoid both affecting the
humanitarian situation in North Korea and aggravating
tensions on the peninsula. Moreover, the document
reflects the findings contained in the reports of the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1874 (2009), which in our opinion only strengthens the
rationale behind new sanctions.

Ukraine has always been committed to effective
multilateral action against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Our collective decision today is a
historic step which clearly demonstrates the Council's
consolidated and firm stance to respond decisively and
eradicate any threat to the global non-proliferation
regime. Ukraine is honoured to co-sponsor the
resolution, which, as we all hope, will become one ofthe
defining documents in putting an end to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's illegal activities in
defiance of every international law principle.

