Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Let me lend my voice to
those who have congratulated you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of Colombia for initiating this important
discussion on Haiti. Your effort speaks to the fraternal
and long-standing relationship your nation shares with
Haiti and the vital role Colombia continues to play in
supporting Haiti's efforts to overcome its daunting
challenges.

We want to welcome President Pre'val to the
Security Council and to thank him for all his efforts for
the survival of Haiti. The presence among us of the
Ministers of the Organization of American States
(OAS) and of European States speaks to their integral
role in Haiti's recovery. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
comprehensive report and statement. I especially thank
the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, President
Clinton, for his very insightful remarks.

I intend to address the political, security and
humanitarian aspects of Haiti's progress and the role of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in that endeavour.

The response of the international community to
the Haitian earthquake of 2010 was both remarkable
and swift. However, Haiti's recovery efforts have been
especially complicated by the outbreak of cholera,
insecurity and political instability. In our view, Haiti
can overcome those obstacles only through a
comprehensive programme of institutional reform,
including inclusive political dialogue and economic
development, as we have heard this morning.

Notwithstanding major obstacles, Nigeria
recognizes Haiti's potential for growth and stability.
That is why we welcome the news of the preliminary
results of the elections, and we believe that it reflects
the will of the people. Indeed, the elections, which
were regarded as largely free and fair, mark an
important milestone for Haiti as the Government and
people confront the enormous challenge of rebuilding
their nation.

The interdependence between peace and security
and development is indisputable in today's world, as
we have heard this morning, and that fact should be the
guiding principle of all our efforts in Haiti. In fact,
peace and security can be sustained only when we
relinquish leadership of the process of development to
the Haitian people.

The very fabric of Haitian society must be
restored. The economy is in dire need of restoration at
the local and national level. Social infrastructure such
as schools, hospitals, prisons and courts must also be
rebuilt as societal missions, as well as with bricks and
mortar. Public spiritedness, justice, opportunity and
respect for human rights must also be fostered as a
matter of top priority. That seems to be a tall order for
any society, and not least for one that is only now
recovering from a massive natural disaster, but it can
be done.

In order to rejuvenate Haitian society, it is also
imperative that Haiti's legislative and executive
branches of government engage genuinely and
constructively. That cooperation will ensure political
stability in the current challenging environment and
indeed will buttress the maturation of Haiti's
democratic experience. In that connection, we urge the
new Parliament to ratify the constitutional amendments
of September 2009 and affirm the consensus that they
represent. Further, we encourage Parliament to renew
the emergency law of 15 April 2010 and extend the
mandate of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission to
enable it to fulfil its mission.

Those charged with governing the Haitian people
should do so with an attitude of transparency and
vocation. Such is the enormity of their task.

As aptly noted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/l83*), the sustained support of the
international community will have a major impact on
Haiti's prospects. While the funds pledged to date are
urgently needed on the ground, a great deal of care
must be exercised to manage, coordinate, prioritize and
effect the distribution of those funds in accordance
with Haiti's own stated priorities. As friends of Haiti,
we should also promote capacity-building measures in
the country to enable Haitians ultimately to drive their
own renaissance.

That goal, however, does not preclude
international assistance. Haiti needs long-term partners
on its road to recovery. As President Santos reminded
us this morning, many hands make the load lighter.

Turning to Haiti's security environment, Nigeria
notes with regret that the security situation continues to
simmer. That was particularly evident in the violence
following the first round of elections. The Haitian
National Police maintained order during the run-off,
and should be commended. Nonetheless, they need
continued support to combat organized crime, drug
trafficking, kidnapping and armed robbery, among
others.

We are also dismayed at the ongoing violence,
particularly against women, within internally displaced
persons (IDPs) camps. The time has come to strengthen
Haiti's capacity to meet those and other core security
challenges. MINUSTAH's active role as a guarantor of
peace and security must be recognized. We
acknowledge that the force has been a critical actor,
engaged under an appropriately broad mandate. Its
important work on behalf of the international
community should be lauded.

Despite the efforts of MINUSTAH and other
actors, there are still many humanitarian issues to be
addressed. We commend the United Nations country
team for providing humanitarian and recovery
assistance, including the return and relocation of IDPs,
and for responding to the hurricane season and cholera
epidemic. We look forward to successful collaboration
between MINUSTAH and the United Nations country
team in establishing the integrated strategic framework,
which will facilitate the Haitian Government's national
action plan for recovery and development.

I want to state that Nigeria was among the early
responders to Haiti's call for assistance in 2010. We
will continue to support efforts to provide humanitarian
and other forms of assistance to Haiti. We were there
for the Haitian people at the beginning of the process.
We will stand with them until their aspirations are fully
realized.

