Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In the context of the international efforts to
resolve the issue of the Western Sahara, we would like
to once again affirm the Russian Federation's well-
known and consistent position.

We support a balanced and unbiased approach to
the issue, with direct negotiations between Morocco
and the Frente Popular para la Liberacion de Saguia
el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro (Frente POLISARIO). As
a permanent member of the Security Council and a
member of the Group of Friends of Western Sahara,
we continue to engage actively with all the parties
concerned, working with the Moroccans, Frente
POLISARIO members, Algerians and Mauritanians.
Russia has historically strong and friendly relations
with all the States involved that we naturally value. We
believe that only a mutually acceptable solution, based
on the relevant Security Council resolutions, within a
framework of procedures consistent with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, can
be stable and viable.

We support the work of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO),
whose personnel include Russian military observers.
The Mission plays a crucial stabilizing role in the
region. Its effective work helps to maintain an
environment conducive to advancing a settlement for
Western Sahara. We very much appreciate the efforts
of former President Kohler, who has unfortunately had
to resign his post as Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General and who has done a great deal to maintain a
dialogue among the parties. We await the appointment
of a new Personal Envoy and hope to see progress in the
plan to hold another round of negotiations in Geneva
between the parties to the settlement of the Western
Sahara issue, with the participation of neighbouring
countries. We urge for the inclusion of all the invitees
in a constructive dialogue without preconditions and
with a view to achieving mutually acceptable solutions.

We realize that the tasks that come under the
Mission's mandate still have to be implemented. At the
same time, we believe it is wrong to try to use resolution
2494 (2019), adopted today to extend that mandate, to
predetermine the direction of the negotiation process
being conducted under the auspices of the United
Nations or to change established approaches affirmed
in previously adopted resolutions. In the past few years,
unfortunately, there have been modifications made to
the resolutions extending MINURSO's mandate that
in our view are damaging to the Security Council's
impartial and unbiased approach. It is unacceptable
to blur previously approved parameters that among
other things outline the blueprint for a settlement and
provide for arriving at a mutually acceptable solution
that guarantees the self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara that is consistent with the purposes
and principles of the Charter. We did not agree with
these arbitrary modifications in previous years and
cannot support such an approach today. Replacing the
fundamental principles of a settlement of the issue of
Western Sahara with generalizations about the need to
stick to realistic approaches or resort to compromise
creates ambiguity, undermines trust in our work and
clouds the prospects for the political process.

Russia will continue to be an impartial and balanced
actor in the settlement of the Western Saharan conflict,
while maintaining contact with all parties ofthe region.
We will work actively to support the negotiation
process, but in the understanding that only the parties
themselves can come up with the kind of decision that
coresponds to the interests of regional security and
stability. We cannot permit the various extremist forces
in the region to take advantage ofa vacuum in the peace
process and a failure to resolve the problem at hand,
which could have a negative impact on the military
and political situation in the entire region. The task of
consolidating the positions of the external players in
order to avoid such a scenario is an urgent one.

