Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): This Security Council
meeting on the use of sanctions is of direct relevance to
the challenges that are on the minds of all of us these
days. The search for effective tools in addressing
threats to international peace and security is more
urgent and more important than ever before. It can
therefore only be right now to focus on the search for
improved ways and means to deal with, and to contain,
the sources of aggression and conflict.

Sanctions represent an important part of the
Security Council's set of instruments for carrying out
its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. If sanctions can be improved and be
made more effective, it will also strengthen the
authority of the Council. It will make it easier for this
body not only to say what is right, but also to do what
is right.
The aim of sanctions, traditionally, has been to
maximize their effects on the will, the capacity and the
behaviour of decision makers - to the extent that they
will change their behaviour - while minimizing the
damage to others, such as innocent civilians. That is
the theory. In practice, the story is often different.

We have seen how Council decisions, even those
with a substantial economic impact on the target, have
led to little or no change in behaviour. We have seen
too many sanctions being violated or circumvented. We
have seen numerous side-effects, whereby vulnerable
groups have been the hardest hit.

It is no wonder that there is a sense of frustration
here. I felt that frustration myself some years ago as
Chairperson of the sanctions Committee on Sierra
Leone. I remember standing there on the border
between that country and Guinea and seeing how easy
it was to break the oil embargo just by taking another
road through the jungle.

So one question has been whether one can make
these sanctions more effective and at the same time
more humane. And that question has in turn triggered
the search for smart sanctions. That search has been
taken a good bit further through the excellent
initiatives of the Governments of Switzerland and of
Germany. What Ambassador Staehelin and
Ambassador Kastrup have just reported are, to our
mind, important contributions to the improvement of
financial sanctions, travel restrictions and arms
embargoes. That goes both for the theory behind them
and for their practical applications.

Yet we have also learned through the activities in
Interlaken, in Bonn and in Berlin that much more can
be done to develop the concept and the practice of
smart sanctions. And I am pleased to announce that the
Government of Sweden is now ready to continue the
important work already done by Switzerland and
Germany. Through what we will call the Stockholm
process, we will invite a broad range of Government
representatives, non-governmental organizations,
regional organizations, academics and, of course,
United Nations actors to participate in the endeavour.
This is a project that will be carried out for a period of
one year, with a concluding seminar next autumn.

One particular focus of that process will be on the
implementation and monitoring of targeted sanctions,
and on suggesting improvements, building on what has
already been done in the processes so far. That includes
the issue of how to achieve the more coherent and
effective enactment of Security Council resolutions
into national legislation. It includes how the United
Nations and its Member States can better ensure truly
effective monitoring of compliance and enforcement:
there is much lacking there still. We will also look at
how Member States can best be assisted in
implementing sanctions regimes, and at what technical
and financial support might be called for.

Another theme will be more conceptual. If it were
possible to find a clearer understanding within the
international community of both the scope and the
limitations of sanctions, then it might also be easier in
practice to pursue a more effective sanctions policy.
We shall look at how that might be done.

My Government looks forward to an active
interchange with other Member States and with other
actors in this process. We hope that it can help us all to
move on in the pursuit of making sanctions a more
effective tool for the Security Council to use. It is to
you, Mr. President, and to your 14 colleagues that we
all look to make use of these tools, especially in the
light of new and emerging threats. There is no better
illustration of how well that can be done than the
Council's historic decision to adopt, by consensus,
resolution 1373 (2001).

