Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): The
work undertaken by the countries represented around
this table today is of perhaps unprecedented
importance. History will judge the United Nations and
the Security Council on the way in which they will
manage the Iraqi crisis. Throughout the world, people
are making their voices heard and are demanding a
peaceful settlement of this crisis. No one wants a war.
But people know Saddam Hussain's record of massive
human rights violations only too well, and they know
that, equipped with weapons of mass destruction, he
represents a great threat to international peace and
security in the region.

Since the inspectors withdrew in 1998, we have
had no proof that Iraq has rid itself of its weapons of
mass destruction. In fact, we have reasons to fear that
the opposite is true.

(spoke in English)

As the United Nations Special Commission and
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) have both
reported, there are still major weapons unaccounted for
and essential questions unanswered, especially with
regard to chemical and biological weapons and missile
systems. That is why the Council unanimously decided,
in resolution 1441 (2002), that Iraq should be given
one last chance to answer these questions convincingly
and to cooperate with the inspectors in disarming itself
voluntarily, actively and transparently.

While we may be seeing the beginning of the
kind of cooperation that should have been forthcoming
years ago, this cooperation remains last-minute,
process-oriented and grudging. As chief inspector Blix
told the Council on 27 January, Saddam Hussain
clearly has not fully accepted his obligation to disarm.
Recent cooperation from Baghdad has come only in
response to intense international pressure, including the
deliberate and useful build-up of United States and
United Kingdom military forces in the region.

The job of the inspectors is to verify Iraq's
disarmament, not to seek out weapons of mass
destruction on their own. More time for inspectors, or
even an intensified inspection process - as suggested
by some - could be useful, but only if Iraq decides to
cooperate fully, actively and transparently, beginning
now. The decision is Iraq's to make.

As Mr. Blix said on 14 February, the period for
disarmament through inspection could still be short if
Iraq were willing to cooperate. Some see merit in
making absolutely clear to Iraq what is required. The
world simply must have the answers to the as-yet-
unanswered questions, especially about the disposition
of VX gas, mustard gas, anthrax and botulinum.

In order to spell out clearly to Iraq what is
expected of it and within what timelines, we suggest
that the Council direct the inspectors to lay out the list
of key remaining disarmament tasks immediately and
to establish which of those tasks most urgently require
evidence of Iraqi compliance. The Council should also
establish an early deadline for Iraqi compliance. Such a
process would provide the Council with a basis on
which to assess Iraqi compliance. More important, it
would allow the Security Council and the international
community to judge whether Iraq is cooperating on
substance and not just on process.

Everyone here understands what disarmament
looks like. The case study of South Africa is often
cited, because that country took the decision to get out
of the business of weapons of mass destruction entirely
and did so with determination and transparency and
purpose. Iraq can do the same if it so decides.

This crisis is not only about weapons of mass
destruction; it is also about people - especially the
people of Iraq, who have already suffered under
Saddam Hussain through two wars and a decade of
sanctions. The humanitarian situation in that country is
already grave. Sixty per cent of the population depends
on the food distributed under the oil-for-food
programme. Children and the elderly are particularly
vulnerable, and they need protection. For years,
Member States have called on humanitarian agencies to
get ahead of the curve in anticipation of a possible
crisis. Canada therefore applauds the efforts of United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
to undertake critical contingency planning. It is
crucially important that they do so.

The Government of Canada urges all the
members of the Council to keep the welfare of the Iraqi
people at the heart of their deliberations. As Prime
Minister Chretien stated in Chicago on 13 February, the
whole world hopes that Saddam Hussain will act, even
at this late hour, by respecting the wishes of the world
community. And by complying with successive United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 1441 (2002),
he can ensure that his people are spared further
suffering.

The Government and the people of Canada want a
peaceful resolution to this crisis, and we believe that a
peaceful resolution remains possible. The world asks
that the Council spare no effort to try to find common
ground. Division would have profound consequences
for regional and international peace and security, for
the authority of this Council and for the standing of the
United Nations itself.

Multilateral institutions are essential to managing
our ever more integrated world. The world needs the
United Nations to emerge from this crisis strengthened,
and not diminished. Iraq is only the latest of what will
surely be other threats to our common peace and
security, not least from international terrorism. A
strengthened United Nations will serve everyone's
interests, big and small.

The Government and people of Canada are fully
prepared to accept the judgements of the inspectors and
the decisions of this Council. Canada will assume its
responsibilities accordingly.

