Mr. Inzko: Allow me before I begin my briefing
to recall May 1992, 17 years ago, when the Austrian
President of the Security Council, Mr. Hohenfellner,
introduced draft resolutions proposing United Nations
membership for Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The General Assembly acted accordingly
on 22 May 1992 (see A/46/PV.86), and since then
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been a State Member of
the United Nations. In Slovenia, to this day, that date is
celebrated as the day of Slovenian diplomacy. Nor has
that important day been forgotten in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Seventeen years later, let me today congratulate
Bosnia and Herzegovina on its election to a seat on the
Security Council. This, in my view, is Bosnia and
Herzegovina's greatest foreign policy achievement
since the signature of the Dayton Agreement. However,
it is of course also a huge responsibility for the
country, which I believe Bosnia and Herzegovina will
shoulder well, with the kind and generous assistance of
the other members of the Council.

For 14 years, the international community has
worked with the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
rebuild their society, focusing on the practical
challenges of post-war recovery and Euro-Atlantic
integration. Development in Bosnia and Herzegovina
today no longer focuses on practical challenges, but on
a fundamental political debate which has, not resolved
a number of relevant political problems. The
international community is working intensively with its
partners in Bosnia and Herzegovina to resolve this
debate. When that is done, we can achieve rapid
09-61649
progress towards our final objective: a sovereign,
prosperous and democratic Bosnia and Herzegovina
fully integrated in Euro-Atlantic structures.

But we have not yet resolved all the open
political issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and as a
result we have seen a series of obstacles, delays and
failures. All of these failures are, basically, a
consequence of political differences and, sometimes,
obstructionism. I believe, for two reasons, that we will
find a way around obstruction.

First, Bosnia and Herzegovina is a society with
distinctive, if sometimes specific, ways of producing
consensus. It may not always be possible to find the
most straightforward solution, but I am confident that
in due course we will find a Bosnian way, and that this
will allow us to reach our ultimate objective.

Secondly, Bosnia and Herzegovina is part of the
sustained international effort to integrate the countries
of the Western Balkans into Euro-Atlantic structures.
The international community cannot and must not
abandon its massive investment of political and
material resources because of the present difficulties.
Resolving the political impasse in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is in our interest as well as the interest of
the people of that country.

The unresolved political issues I mentioned
earlier, are a product of two confusions. First, there is
confusion in the Republika Srpska over the nature of
the entity and the nature of the State; and there is
confusion in both entities about the proper focus and
functioning of politics and the State as a system. The
Republika Srpska leadership has failed to grasp that the
State and entity authorities have separate and clearly
defined mandates and that each must do its work,
complementing the other. This discrepancy in approach
has generated considerable difficulties.

At the same time, a number of political leaders in
the Federation advocate a much stronger role at the
State level and a reduced role for the entities in the
State structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This too
does not contribute to improved dialogue and forward-
looking politics.

The reporting period has been characterized by
persistent political problems and a lack of progress on
key agendas in which Bosnia and Herzegovina is
involved. As a result, a number of laws that were
required for Euro-Atlantic integration and for the
09-61649

closure of my office have been delayed. At the same
time, the Council of Ministers has failed to make key
appointments at the highest level of Government and
State agencies. This has further slowed progress and
the development of a professional public
administration.

On 1 October, Serb members of the House of
Representatives voted down a law that would have
extended the mandates of international judges and
prosecutors working in the State court and the
Prosecutor's Office, despite repeated requests from all
the judicial institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
from the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and from non-governmental organizations
working in the fields of anti-corruption and war-crimes
prosecution to extend the mandate. The relevant
authorities also failed to undertake any serious effort to
replace these international judges and prosecutors with
local counterparts. This issue is still unresolved, and I
fear that a failure to solve the extension of the judges
and prosecutors may result in a collapse of the judicial
system in the country.

It is self-explanatory why the fight against
organized crime, corruption and terrorism is so
important. Bosnia and Herzegovina's capacity to
pursue war crimes trials is equally crucial to the
individualization of the guilt and the reconciliation
process in general.

A consistent pattern can be identified in this
behaviour. Parties from Republika Srpska frequently
criticize State-level institutions for lack of efficiency at
the very same time as they are actively engaged in
undermining those same institutions. In other words,
from time to time they create a problem at the State
level and then criticize the State for having the
problem. This is happening at the same time as Bosnia
and Herzegovina is desperately struggling to become a
member of NATO and the European Union (EU). We
thus have a disagreement and confusion over the nature
of the entity and the nature and the functions of the
State.

The second confusion involves the proper focus
of politics. As I said earlier, this has been a problem
not only in Republika Srpska, but also in the other
entity - the Federation. During the reporting period,
tens of thousands of jobs were lost in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a result of the world recession and of
the failure to ensure cooperation and proper fiscal
3
coordination in the country. This represents an
existential crisis for thousands of families in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is a crisis that has been largely
ignored by the political establishment. Where there has
been any focus at all on the economy, it has concerned
the spending cuts that were required by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) before it would
disburse the first tranche of a €1.2 billion loan in July.

The new Federation Prime Minister, Mustafa
Mujezinovic, appointed on 25 June after his
predecessor resigned amid corruption allegations, has
had to face well-orchestrated protests from budget
beneficiaries who stand to lose money as a result of the
IMF-mandated cuts. There have been numerous
problems in this regard; however, the latest IMF
mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina ended successfully
last week, which should now open up the disbursement
of additional IMF funds. In this regard, I would like to
thank Prime Minister Spirie for the speedy and
successful negotiations with the IMF.

In related areas, progress in the reporting period
has been limited and further compromised by the
failure, for political reasons, to appoint key personnel.
This was also confirmed by the European
Commission's progress report in October, which
outlined that overall only "limited progress" has been
achieved in addressing EU-related reforms.
Meanwhile, 120,000 citizens continue to be classified
as internally displaced, amid the constant politicization
of the issue of refugee return. However, there has been
no agreement to provide for a sustainable solution to
this problem, and the strategy for refugee return has
been blocked for years now.

I want to make it clear that this litany of
administrative problems, parliamentary gridlock, and
frequent Government stalemate has political, not
structural or administrative roots, although such causes
also exist. However, there can be progress if there is
political will. Clear evidence of this is the progress in
addressing the conditions for visa liberalization. I want
to commend and thank Prime Minister Spirie and other
political leaders in this regard. Prime Minister Spiric'
has successfully accelerated the adoption of a number
of draft laws relevant to the visa liberalization agenda,
which we hope will keep the time gap between Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the other countries of the region
as small as possible.
It is for the aforementioned political problems that
the diplomatic initiative being spearheaded by Carl
Bildt for the European Union presidency and James
Steinberg for the United States Department of State is
so important. This is a resolute attempt to grasp the bull
by the horns and sort out the political problem at the
heart of Bosnia and Herzegovina's present difficulties.
This is the highest level political effort since Dayton,
and there is no other process ongoing at present. I have
repeatedly welcomed and strongly supported these
efforts, and I hope that this joint EU-United States
initiative will come to a positive conclusion in early
December.

The joint EU-United States efforts, as well as the
recent visits of the British, Russian and Turkish
Foreign Ministers and other high-level dignitaries, such
as those of President Mesic' last week and Prime
Minister Kosor on 2 November, are very important and
welcome, but nevertheless a clear indication that
continued high-level attention from the wider
international community is still needed to keep Bosnia
and Herzegovina on the right track.

Progress in the EU-United States initiative will
have a direct bearing upon the future of the Office of
the High Representative (OHR). As Council members
know, in February 2008 the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board drew up five objectives and
two requirements that must be met before my Office
can be closed to make way for a strengthened EU
Special Representative. At that time, it seemed
reasonable to expect these objectives and conditions to
be met fairly quickly, and in the course of 2008 we saw
substantial progress. During the current reporting
period, however, we have sometimes also witnessed
regression.

The two objectives related to State and military
property have not yet been met and the conditions for
closing the Brcko District supervision have not yet
been entirely fulfilled. As a result, the Peace
Implementation Council is not at present able to make
a positive assessment that would allow for the closure
of OHR. This was confirmed last week by the Peace
Implementation Council. The lack of progress on the so
called 5+2 agenda by domestic political leaders has
also forced me to use my executive powers on a
number of occasions.

As Council members know, I am the fourth High
Representative who has simultaneously held the
position of EU Special Representative. There are clear
synergies to be derived from this arrangement, but at
the same time it has to be recognized that it was
initiated when circumstances in Bosnia and
Herzegovina were fundamentally different. Thus, the
time may have come to review the usefulness of having
the two positions held by the same person. This,
however, is only one possibility for the way forward
that will have to be considered in the coming months.

By the same token, for the past three years, as
attention has focused on closing OHR, the use of the
Bonn powers has been scaled back. OHR intervention
in the domestic political system has been further
constrained by the desirability of giving the political
actors greater political space to explore possibilities for
consensus as part of the current EU- and United States-
led negotiating process.

The task before us is to complete the rule of law
and economic reform agenda, resolve the issue of State
and defence property, make provision for continued
refugee return and, where necessary, eliminate the
political obstructions to those Dayton objectives. I am
confident that we can find international consensus on
the right way to do this. None of the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board members want
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to deteriorate
further. At the same time all - and I stress all - of the
Steering Board members support full implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement, and that gives us good
reason for moderate optimism.

I would like to commend the Security Council for
its adoption last week of resolution 1895 (2009),
approving the extension of the mandate of the
European Union military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR). The international community's
military presence - down from 60,000 soldiers after
the war to 2,000 troops today - is clear evidence of
positive developments in the country. However, I
consider that a continued EUFOR deployment, with an
executive mandate, is still important, as it is a
guarantee to citizens that the international community
will not tolerate the possibility of a return to violence.

Despite the somewhat gloomy nature of my
report this morning, I am still confident that Bosnia
and Herzegovina can break out of the present impasse.
The country is now at a crossroads, and the political
leaders will now need to decide whether they are ready
to fulfil the necessary conditions that would help them

move forward on Euro-Atlantic integration and
whether they are ready to address the conditions
needed for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative and the transition to a reinforced EU
engagement. However, the international community, as
I mentioned, will equally have to decide on its future
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, because a robust
international presence will still be needed after the
closure of the Office of the High Representative, as the
challenges deriving from the Dayton Agreement will
still need to be addressed. But the question will be in
what role and with what mandate the international
community will stay in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
future. That is an issue that the Peace Implementation
Council will have to decide upon in 2010.

As I have mentioned before, the international
community is now engaged in an intensive exercise
which would not only make the country more
functional but also support the enormous human capital
of the country. Let us remember that Bosnians and
Herzegovinians have shown resilience, creativity and
fortitude in the past. I know that, with their help, we
can improve the present situation and move ahead to
strengthen Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign,
prosperous, stable and democratic country, standing on
its own and, in the future, fully integrated into the
Euro-Atlantic family.

Finally, I would like to thank the outgoing High
Representative, Javier Solana, for his efforts to
strengthen peace and security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and I would like to wish him all the best
for his future.

