Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): My delegation wishes to
express its profound appreciation to the delegation of
Japan for convening this timely debate on the
important theme of post-conflict peacebuilding. We are
also honoured by the presence here today of ministers
from Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sierra
Leone and Timor-Leste and the Managing Director of
the World Bank.

Mr. President, your choice of theme has provided
an opportunity for the Security Council to contribute to
the series of events targeting the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) five years after its
establishment. We believe that the outcome of this
debate can make an important contribution to the
mandated review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.

The year 2010 is a pivotal one for peacebuilding.
First, the African Union has declared 2010 the Year of
Peace and Security in Africa. Secondly, the World
Bank's World Development Report 2010 will focus on
the issues of conflict and fragility. It is also the year
that the Secretary-General will issue his first progress
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict. These activities, combined with the Council's
previous discussions on this subject, will, we hope,
underline the importance of peacebuilding as an
integral pillar of peace and security.

I would like to highlight five main points in this
debate. First, national capacity and ownership are Vital
to ensuring lasting peace. We stressed this point a few
days ago in the context of the presence of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in that country and ardently
believe in its applicability to other countries emerging
from conflict. Ensuring ownership on the basis of
capacity is a challenge that we all recognize and should
strive to meet.

Although peacekeepers are often called upon to
support this effort, their role is essentially a gap-filling
measure. It is important, therefore, for national
Governments and other actors in peacebuilding to
better understand the very thin line between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding responsibilities.

Secondly, a comprehensive approach to
peacebuilding requires partnership, consistency and
coherence among the various actors. For a partnership
to be strong and effective, it must be grounded in a
shared vision and common objective. As Member
States engaged in peacebuilding, we need to be
consistent and coherent in the policies that we promote
and, indeed, speak with one voice on this issue,
regardless of the setting and place of discussion.

Nowhere is there greater need for this approach
than in the interactions between the United Nations,
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
World Trade Organization aimed at enhancing the
goals of peace, security and development in the
aftermath of conflict. In our opinion, our shared vision
of and common objective for peacebuilding should
guide the various programmatic activities and enable
the different actors to adapt and respond to emerging
challenges, notwithstanding their operational mandates
and reporting lines.

Thirdly, threats to peace have cross-border
implications and linkages, often demanding broader
efforts and mechanisms at the regional and subregional
levels. This is not only true of conflicts in West Africa,
but is the case in most regions of the world. For this
reason, we would like to emphasize the need to pay
due attention to the regional dimensions of
peacebuilding. Peacebuilding cannot be achieved using
a short-term strategy. It requires a comprehensive and
integrated strategy responsive to needs and priorities,
as well as the long-term commitment of all actors at
the national, regional and international levels.
Fourthly, the PBC should have a central role in
sustaining a monitoring commitment to peacebuilding
activities. Monitoring for its own sake will be of little
use if it does not seek to focus attention on an end-
state. Consequently, the PBC should aim to keep
international focus on the end goals of peacebuilding.
The PBC is not an abstract entity. In essence, it is made
up of member States with a political will. As such, we
should demonstrate through our words and our deeds
that we truly own and cherish the institution. Its
strength or weakness will be measured in large part by
the quality of our political commitment to the
institution and its cause.

I believe that we should seize the moment in
2010 following the PBC review to regenerate
momentum around peacebuilding. We would also need
to alert our individual Governments to the need to
invest in peacebuilding if we are to help countries
emerging from conflict to sustain their peace. The
review should help us reinvigorate the vision of 2005
on the basis of the experience gained from engaging
countries on the PBC's agenda.

Lastly, if the PBC is to serve its intended
purpose, it will require substantive support, expertise
and institutional linkages within the United Nations
system and beyond. Strengthening the capacity and
role of the Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO)
should be the first step in the direction of positioning
the Office to provide such support and build such
linkages. The PBSO could also assist the PBC in
promoting partnerships for peacebuilding.

Let me conclude by reiterating our support for the
delegation of Japan's initiative to convene this debate
and the critical importance of feeding its outcome into
the PBC review. We support the draft presidential
statement to be adopted at the end of today's debate.

