The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw attention to the letter dated
25 May 2004 from the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan addressed to the President of the Security
Council, contained in document 8/2004/425, which
refers to the humanitarian situation in Darfur,

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Council expresses its grave concern
over the deteriorating humanitarian and human
rights situation in the Darfur region of Sudan.
Noting that thousands have been killed and that
hundreds of thousands of people are at risk of
dying in the coming months, the Council
emphasizes the need for immediate humanitarian
access to the vulnerable population.

"The Council also expresses its deep
concern at the continuing reports of large-scale
violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law in Darfur, including
indiscriminate attacks on civilians, sexual
violence, forced displacement and acts of
violence, especially those with an ethnic
dimension, and demands that those responsible be
held accountable. The Council strongly condemns
these acts, which jeopardize a peaceful solution
to the crisis, stresses that all parties to the
N'Djamena humanitarian ceasefire agreement
committed themselves to refraining from any act
of violence or any other abuse against civilian
populations, in particular women and children,
and that the Government of Sudan also
committed itself to neutralizing the armed
Janjaweed militias, and urges all parties to take

necessary steps to put an end to violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
In this regard, the Council takes note of the
recommendations of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in his report dated 7 May.

"The Council reiterates its call on the
parties to ensure the protection of civilians and to
facilitate humanitarian access to the affected
population. In that regard, the Council
emphasizes the need for the Government of
Sudan to facilitate the voluntary and safe return
of refugees and displaced persons to their homes
and to provide protection for them, and also calls
upon all parties, including opposition groups, to
support these objectives. The Council calls on all
parties, in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1502 (2003), to allow full unimpeded
access by humanitarian personnel to all people in
need of assistance and to make available, as far as
possible, all necessary facilities for their
operations, and to promote the safety, security
and freedom of movement of humanitarian
personnel and their assets.

"The Council, while welcoming the
ceasefire agreement signed 8 April in
N'Djamena, Chad, emphasizes the urgent need
for all parties to observe the ceasefire and to take
immediate measures to end the violence and calls
on the Government of Sudan to respect its
commitments to ensure that the Janjaweed
militias are neutralized and disarmed. Stressing
that a ceasefire commission with international
representation is a central component of the 8
April agreement, the Council expresses its full
and active support for the efforts of the African
Union to establish the ceasefire commission and
protection units and calls upon the opposition
groups and the Government of Sudan to facilitate
the immediate deployment of monitors in Darfur
and to ensure their free movement throughout
Darfur. The Council also calls upon Member
States to provide generous support for the efforts
of the African Union.

"The Council welcomes the announcement
by the Government of Sudan that it will issue
visas to all humanitarian workers within 48 hours
of application, eliminate the need for travel
permits, and facilitate the entrance and clearance
of equipment imported for humanitarian

purposes. The Council acknowledges

appointment of a fact-finding commission by
presidential decree. The Council, however, is
seriously concerned about continued logistical
the

impediments prohibiting a rapid response in the
face of a stark and mounting crisis and calls upon
the Government to fulfil its announced
commitment to cooperate fully and expeditiously
with humanitarian efforts to provide assistance to
the imperilled populations of Darfur, noting with
particular concern that the humanitarian
challenge will be aggravated by the imminent
onset of the rainy season.

"The Council calls upon the international
community to respond rapidly and effectively to
the consolidated appeal for Darfur.

"The Council observes with distress the
prolonged absence of an accredited Resident
Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator and
affirms the need for the immediate appointment
and appropriate accreditation of a permanent
Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator
to ensure daily coordination in order to address
impediments to humanitarian access brought to
the United Nations attention by the international
aid community.

"The Council encourages the parties to step
up their efforts to reach a political settlement to
their dispute in the interest of the unity and
sovereignty of Sudan.

"The Council requests that the Secretary-
General keep it informed on the humanitarian and
human rights crisis as it unfolds, and, as
necessary, to make recommendations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2004/18.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.
