Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to take this opportunity to convey the gravity of the
occasion today as we have just adopted resolution 2303
(2016), on Burundi. After intense negotiations, today
the Security Council has taken an important decision
that marks a potentially decisive step on the path to
peace in Burundi. I wish to thank all my colleagues and
their teams for the great amount of work that we done
together in a consistently constructive spirit.

In adopting resolution 2303 (2016), the Security
Council is pursuing two main goals. The first is to
support an authentic inter-Burundian dialogue. The
Security Council strongly reaffirms that only a peaceful
dialogue among all Burundians will allow Burundi to
restore lasting peace. To that end, the Security Council
is renewing its full support to the facilitator of the
inter-Burundian dialogue, former President Benjamin
Mkapa. The Security Council urges the Burundian
parties to commit without delay to the process led by
Mr. Mkapa in a constructive and sincere manner. Next
week's visits to Tanzania and Kenya by the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault,
will provide the opportunity to renew that support.

The Security Council also reiterating its support
for the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Benomar, so that he can support the work of the
facilitators. The dialogue must be based in no uncertain
terms on the Arusha Peace Agreement and respect it
in letter and spirit. More than ever, the Arusha Peace
Agreement is the compass that must guide stakeholders
in Burundi and the international community.

The second goal is to end the violence and calm
tensions in Burundi. Let us be clear - as the Office
of the High Commissioner on Human Rights has
underscored, acts of violence persist in Burundi,
accompanied by an increase of serious violations of
fundamental rights and freedoms. The number of
cases of forced disappearances and torture in detention
centres, the location of which is often kept secret, is
even on the rise. Targeted acts of political violence
continue and only increase tensions. Last month, the
arrest of 70 young people for having drawn caricatures
of the President of Burundi in their school notebooks
was a very troubling indication of that.

In order to contribute to calming the situation,
the Security Council expresses its readiness to adopt
sanctions against all those who threaten peace and
security in Burundi. Moreover, the Security Council
urges the Government of Burundi to finally allow the
deployment of 200 observers of the African Union in
compliance with the commitments undertaken last
February to the delegation of the Heads of State of the
African Union. As of today, fewer than 50 of those
observers are deployed in Burundi.

Finally, based on a proposal by the Secretary-
General, the Security Council has decided to deploy 228
United Nations police officers to monitor the security
and human rights situations. With the rise in Violence
and tensions, the Security Council must be have all cars
and eyes on the ground to alert, prevent and avoid the
worst in Burundi. By helping to reassure the people, the
police presence should assist in dissipating tensions,
thereby facilitating a peaceful dialogue. It will also help
to alert the Council if the situation further deteriorates.

In its history, Burundi has already experienced
tragic massacres wherein ethnicity was exploited for the
worst ends. Today, the Security Council is carrying out
its responsibility so that history does not repeat itself.
Within the Chamber, we often stress the importance
of acting in a timely manner in order to prevent
conflicts. That is exactly what the Security Council is
doing through the adoption of resolution 2303 (2016).
Today, we are collectively carrying out a decisive act of
preventive diplomacy faced with the threat of tragedy,
requiring us to continue to work tirelessly, despite our
differences and with Burundi, to pave the necessary
way to peace.

We will never forget the Rwandan genocide of
1994. We will never forget our collective responsibility
in connection with what happened in Rwanda. We
promised ourselves: "Never again". By adopting
resolution 2303 (2016), the Security Council is learning
from the past. By adopting resolution 2303 (2016), the
Security Council is acting in order to prevent Burundi
from reliving the worst possible scenario. By adopting
resolution 2303 (2016), the Security Council has heeded
the desire of the people of Burundi to finally resume
the road to peace. Today, while we are not at the end
of the road, we have taken a major step and sent a loud
message together.

