Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We believe that
we need to strengthen the efforts of the United Nations
in order to move from a culture of reaction to one of
prevention. The United Nations needs to agree on a
collective toolkit to assess the severity of the increasing
problems that should be based on international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and the multidimensional
approaches of preventive diplomacy, conflict resolution,
peacebuilding, reconstruction, rehabilitation and
development.

It is of great importance that the political
differences among the Security Council members should
not hinder the Council's role in fulfilling its primary task
of the maintenance of international peace and security.
Since conflict, peace and development are interrelated,
there is also a lack of consensus on what falls under
the Council's mandate. Furthermore, Security Council
statements issued because members do not agree on
resolutions are ineffective in the undertaking of any
action. We therefore call for a united front in the
Security Council.

The Council and Member States should strongly
support the long-term work on conflict prevention of the
Secretary-General and of his special envoys and special
representatives. We support the activities of the United
Nations regional offices in serving as platforms for
good offices and preventive diplomacy. Kazakhstan
proposed establishing a United Nations regional hub for
development and humanitarian assistance in Almaty,
which could complement the work of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia. The proposal seeks a more robust political
presence of the United Nations in the vast territory of
the Eurasian region.

Besides United Nations regional organizations, we
must also mobilize the African Union, the European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the League of Arab States and other regional
entities in order to support fragile States in resolving
their long-standing problems. Kazakhstan initiated the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia (CICA), which is a platform for
cooperation and dialogue in Asia that works actively
in the region. In order to increase its effectiveness and
to further institutionalize it, Kazakhstan proposed
transforming CICA into the organization for security
and development in Asia.

Our approaches must also be fundamentally directed
at the protection of civilians - women and children,
as well as humanitarian workers, who are increasingly
becoming targets. At the same time, we must respect
the right of Governments to resolve their own internal
crises. The international community must address the
problems of inadequate financing, insufficient troops,
the lack of adequate civilian personnel and capacity-
building to handle the multiple and complex mandates
of peacekeeping operations. Conflict prevention also
implies measures after a ceasefire, when peace and
stability are bring brokered as an ongoing process.

Kazakhstan pursues a pragmatic and independent
foreign policy on the basis of balancing interests
and the protection of national interests. My country
stands united with the international community in
strengthening the work of the United Nations and
the Security Council. It supports Member States in
constructively transforming conflict into peace,
security, development, the protection of human rights
and the promotion of the rule of law.

One form of such efforts for conflict prevention
could be the promotion of tolerance, non-discrimination
and understanding among the various ethnic and
religious groups and the development of dialogue among
cultures and civilizations. We believe that international
entities and initiatives such as the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations, the Congress of Leaders of
World and Traditional Religions and the International
Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures 2013-2022
should play a role in strengthening conflict prevention
and resolution.

