Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation thanks Mr.
Bildt for his briefing of the Security Council on the
positive developments in the Balkans and on the
difficult issues still faced by the region.
We take note of these positive developments in
the region, which we believe auger well for the
achievement of sustainable peace. There are ongoing
regional initiatives aimed at reconciliation and
reintegration, and these are commendable. It is for this
reason that my delegation attaches great importance to
the Stability Pact process, to the Central European
initiative and the working community of the Danube
regions. The relations between States continue to
evolve, and we encourage and support attempts at
regional cooperation, integration and development.

We have seen the induction of new leaders in
Croatia following elections, and the continuation of
policies that foster stability, not only in Croatia but in
the entire region. Their recent accession to the
partnership for peace at the recent North Atlantic
Treaty Organization(NATO) meeting in Florence is a
positive step forward. We also note the recent signing
of an agreement between Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina on financial assistance to the federal
Ministry of Defense. The holding of local elections
recently in Montenegro is also a positive development
for the region.

In light of these positive developments, my
delegation regrets the necessity for the procedures the
Council was forced to employ today in determining
participation in our discussions of the Balkans region.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continues to be
further isolated from full participation in the progress
being made in the region, for reasons which have been
stated here today. This dilemma remains, and it is
difficult to move forward without a solution. Our
decision here this morning provides glaring proof of
the magnitude of this problem. This exclusion affects
stability in the region, and we are hopeful that a
solution will be found soon.

The United Nations continues to work diligently
in Kosovo to bring stability to that territory as quickly
as possible on par with the countries ofthe region, both
economically and politically. Ongoing efforts to reduce
the level of violence and the discrimination against
minorities are crucial to this process. The recent
discovery of a cache of arms in Kosovo is a major
concern.

We have noted reports in the media that Mr.
Kouchner intends to establish a hybrid court in Kosovo
to try cases related to war crimes and other related
crimes in Kosovo.

While we recognize this to be in response to the
climate of criminality prevailing in Kosovo and the
admitted failure to establish an impartial judiciary in
Kosovo, it is not clear to us the extent ofjurisdiction
that is contemplated. The reach of that jurisdiction will
require careful consideration. The concurrent
jurisdiction with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) over certain
criminal acts must be appropriately defined so as to
avoid duplication and conflict. This takes on added
significance in the context of expansion of the ICTY
that is currently being considered by the Security
Council.

My delegation views this decision by Mr.
Kouchner as very significant for the region. Because
this decision is imminent, we have to assume that this
matter has been under consideration for some time.
However, the Council has not been briefed on this issue
in recent reports. I also note that Mr. Bildt made no
mention of this, and my delegation would welcome his
comments.

The progress made recently in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, particularly to ensure the full
implementation of the Dayton accords and to ensure
membership in the Council of Europe, also constitutes
a positive development. We are concerned, however,
that, for all those positive developments, the refugee
situation throughout the region remains to be solved.
We hope that this matter will retain priority status in
regional talks aimed at reconciliation.

