Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
The Security Council has on several occasions set out the
principles that would make it possible to bring about a
political settlement in Burundi. To summarize these
principles, it is a matter, first and foremost, of the
cessation of violence, the initiation of a comprehensive
political dialogue between all the parties, without
exception, and finally, support for those initiatives from
outside that are designed to facilitate such a dialogue.

 

The Council reacted to the events of 25 July of this
year in the presidential statement of 29 July, in which it
condemned the actions leading to the overthrow of
constitutional order in Burundi. It once more requested the
cessation of violence and the commencement of a dialogue
that would lead to a political settlement of the crisis on the
basis of institutional consensus.

The demands expressed by the Council a month ago
call for a reply on the part of all the parties and leaders of
Burundi. The French delegation will associate itself with
the efforts of the Council to ensure that this response is a
positive one and that it comes quickly.

The French delegation, in the spirit of the statement
made by the European Union on 19 August, which was
quoted earlier by the representative of Ireland, speaking on
behalf of the Union, supports the efforts made by the
regional leaders, the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and former President Nyerere to help Burundi overcome the
very serious crisis it is experiencing. Like its European
partners, France is concerned by the humanitarian
repercussions of the measures taken by the States in the
region, particularly by the impact of these measures on
disadvantaged groups. It is important that international
organizations and non-governmental organizations be able
to continue their work on behalf of these groups. My
delegation considers that this question should be examined
as a question of urgency and with the greatest possible
attention.

Furthermore, the French delegation would still like a
conference to be held, as soon as conditions are met, on the
situation in the Great Lakes region, under the aegis of the
United Nations and with the support of the Organization of
African Unity.

