Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): First,
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you on
assuming this precious, even coveted seat on behalf of
the goodf and beautiful Kingdom of Morocco. It is clear
that the world will be in good hands in December, as
it also was during the very busy month of November
under the leadership of Ambassador Hardeep Singh
Puri, whom I commend for his outstanding work.

(spoke in English)

My delegation wishes to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their reports on the
completion strategies of their respective Tribunals
(S/2012/592 and S/2012/594).

My delegation commends the ICTR's achievements
since its inception and hopes that it will complete its
trials successfully, despite the challenges it faces
relating to staff retention and recruitment. Indeed, it
has so far delivered 54 first-instance judgements on 74
accused persons, and we look forward to ajudgement in
the case of Augustin Ngirabatware, which is scheduled
in just two weeks and will close the Tribunal's trials at
first instance.

However, despite those encouraging steps towards
the completion of the ICTR's work, much more needs to
be done. In that regard, Rwanda urges the countries of
the region and beyond to cooperate with the Tribunal in
making additional efforts to track, arrest and transfer
the remaining genocide fugitives, particularly those
most wanted, such as Felicien Kabuga and Protais
Mpiranya.

Earlier this year, Rwanda welcomed the decision
of the Federal Court of Canada to extradite Leon
Mugesera to Rwanda, a genocide suspect well known
for his November 1992 hate speech against the Tutsi.
However, many more genocide fugitives are living
quietly in Europe and North America. We would
encourage those countries concerned to arrest and/or
extradite all genocide fugitives or suspects living on
their soil instead of harbouring them and sometimes
participating in their negative campaigns against our
country.

As stated in the ICTR report, the Tribunal referred
eight cases to Rwanda, among which were those of two
apprehended fugitives, Jean Uwinkindi and Bernard
Munyagishari. Although the appeal decision on the
latter case is still pending, my delegation thanks the
ICTR for this vote of confidence in Rwanda's justice
system, and pledges its cooperation in completing those
trials successfully.

In November 2007, the Tribunal also referred two
other cases - those of Wenceslas Munyeshyaka and
Laurent Bucyibaruta - to the national jurisdiction
of France. However, five years after that referral,
little has been done to try the accused, and Rwanda is
concerned about that. We take note of the ICTR report,
which states that "significant progress" was made in
those cases during the reporting period. Nonetheless,
we would like to see more details on the state of the
proceedings in the next ICTR report, and we call on
France to expedite those proceedings.

I would like to draw the Council's attention
to paragraph 2 of article 25 of the Statute of the
International Residual Mechanism of the Criminal
Tribunals (resolution 1966 (2010), annex 1), which
provides that

"the Mechanism shall have the power to supervise
the enforcement of sentences pronounced by the
ICTY, the ICTR or the Mechanism, including
the implementation of sentence enforcement
agreements entered into by the United Nations with
Member States".

In that regard, Rwanda, while deeply concerned
about the political, security and humanitarian situation
in Mali, is also alarmed by information according to
which genocide convicts who were transferred to
Mali to serve their sentences are leading lavish lives
and running businesses. We have been informed that
the 14 convicts, including former Prime Minister Jean
Kambanda, run businesses in Mali's capital, Bamako,
and are allowed to leave their cells, unguarded, in
order to visit their friends and families. We call on
the Mechanism to investigate this serious matter and,
if it is confirmed, to take appropriate measures to end
the situation, including by reviewing the sentence
enforcement agreement with Mali.

Rwanda commends the work being done by the
ICTR to transfer its archives to the Mechanism, but, as
the Council may know, our country is looking further
ahead. We have always believed that the ICTR archives
should remain the property of the United Nations, since
genocide is a crime committed against humanity. At the
same time, however, we also believe that the archives
are an important part of the heritage of the Rwandan
people, since genocide was committed by Rwandans
against their fellow Rwandans and on Rwandan territory.
That is why, on many occasions, my Government has
requested that we host the United Nations archives in
Kigali, upon completion of the work of the Mechanism.

That request was also recently supported by the
East African Community, a subregional organization
whose members are Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda
and Tanzania, which is the ICTR host country. Indeed,
these records constitute an integral part of our history
and are vital for the preservation of the memory and
education of our younger generations. Locating the
archives in Rwanda would ensure easy access for
genocide survivors, researchers and the broader
international community, with a View to achieving
the mission of the United Nations to promote peace,
prevent genocide and protect civilians under threat of
extermination.

Eighteen years after a devastating genocide,
Rwanda, with the support of the Security Council, has
come a long way in delivering justice to victims and in
promoting reconciliation in Rwanda. The community-
based Gacaca jurisdictions were officially closed on
18 June, after trying more than 400,000 people and
fostering truth and reconciliation.

With the upcoming closure of the ICTR, Rwanda
will symbolically close a dark chapter in its history and
will focus on the consolidation of peace, reconciliation
and development

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, Rwanda wishes once again to
pay tribute to the ICTR, which has largely been able
to render justice to the people of Rwanda and to
humankind. We would also like to sincerely thank
the Security Council for the work that has been
accomplished in that regard, in particular through the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
led by my dear friend, Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of
Guatemala, to whom I also wish to pay tribute. Rwanda,
which will become a Council member in a few weeks'
time, will naturally work with the Council to ensure
the successful completion of the work of the ICTR as

well as of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

