Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madame President, for convening this open
debate and for your very lucid concept note
(S/2011/50), as circulated by your Mission.

The complex links between security and
development are quite obvious, even at the intuitive or
common-sense level. Over the years, these links have
been codified and clarified in numerous internal and
academic studies, from Secretary-General Boutros-
Ghali's 1992 Agenda for Peace (S/24111) to the
forthcoming World Development Report 201]:
Conflict, Security and Development, which was
introduced here this morning by the Special
Representative of the World Bank, in addition to the
various reports mentioned in the concept note.

We nevertheless continue to draw lessons from
every peacekeeping and peacebuilding operation,
precisely because each has its own unique
characteristics, from country to country, from region to
region within the same country, or even within a single
region or country, but at different moments in time. I
will not even attempt to add insights to the conceptual
elements that link security development. I will instead
allude to my own country, which experienced internal
armed conflict for more than three decades that ended
only in 1996.

I would like to make three brief comments. First,
and as stated in the concept note, poverty and injustice
alone do not necessarily lead to violence and conflict. If
that were the case, conflict would have erupted in my
country much earlier, since poverty and exclusion alike
were the rule, rather than the exception, for decades and
even centuries. What prevailed during most of that
period was a history of poverty and injustice that
created much frustration and resentment - a proverbial
powder keg - that had the potential to explode if mixed
with other factors. In the case of the conflicts in Central
America, including Guatemala, the detonator was
supplied by an external source, subjecting our rather
parochial differences to an East-West confrontation in
the context of the so-called Cold War. That greatly
polarized our society along divisive ideological lines
that were superimposed over the traditional cleavage
that separated the rich from the poor.

The spiral of violence stemming from that
polarization was not the product of poverty and
injustice alone, but their presence most certainly added
fuel to the fire. Attention should therefore really be
paid to both the underlying circumstances and the other
complex factors that can trigger conflict.

As I said before, it is common sense that, where
there are high levels of unemployment, especially
among young people, and a high incidence of poverty
coexisting with first-world standards of living enjoyed
by a minority, at least some of the elements of potential
conflict are present. Those must be addressed, not only
for intrinsic and ethical reasons, but also, in the
broader context, as a conflict prevention measure.

Secondly, almost the same arguments can be
made, at least in the case of Guatemala, for promoting
the rule of law and strengthening democratic
institutions. I do not have the time to expand on the
matter, so I will limit my comments to noting that the
worst-case scenario is one in which accumulated
frustrations are not addressed in any concrete way, and
are not even allowed to be expressed openly to
influence public policy responses. We had a long, sad
record of repression and a culture of impunity, which
we are combating even today with the help of the
United Nations. The main point is that any serious
examination of the links between security and
development has to include the matter of institution-
building and the strengthening of the rule of law.
Finally, it is quite clear that one pillar of the
United Nations - the maintenance of peace in
countries emerging from conflict - can be maintained
only if solid foundations are laid for sustainable peace

and development. The United Nations cannot approach
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in a
piecemeal manner, so we are pleased to note the
innovations introduced since 2005 in creating what is
now called the peacebuilding architecture. It is our
hope that last year's review of the peacebuilding
architecture will lead to greater clarity regarding the
role of each of the principal organs and the
Peacebuilding Commission so that sustainable peace
and development can be addressed in an integrated and
coordinated manner system-wide.

