Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We would like to thank
Special Representative Abou Moussa for his briefing
and for his invaluable work as the Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
We also extend our gratitude to the Special Envoy of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
Lord's Resistance Army Issues, Ambassador Francisco
Caetano Jose' Madeira, for his statement.

The report of the Secretary General on the
activities of UNOCA and on areas affected by the
Lord's Resistance Army (S/2012/42l) highlights several
challenges being faced by the subregion, including a
fragile security situation, the proliferation of weapons,
the menace of transatlantic crime, the issue of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea, and threats posed by terrorism
and the activities of armed groups, including the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). As noted by the report, those
challenges have been further exacerbated due to an
influx of illegal arms and combatants in the region as
part of the fallout of the Libyan crisis. Addressing those
cross-cutting challenges requires greater collaboration
and coordination at the regional and subregional levels.

Against that backdrop, the work of UNOCA
remains important for the peace and stability of the
subregion through mediation and the provision of good
offices, ensuring a coherent and coordinated United
Nations system response to challenges faced by the
subregion and strengthening the capacity of subregional
organizations to address regional peace and security
challenges.

We are deeply concerned at the increased attacks
against civilians by the LRA and the resulting
displacement of populations in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan. The threat posed by the LRA requires
a coordinated regional and international response
entailing a comprehensive approach aimed not only
at eliminating and bringing to justice the remaining
leadership of the LRA, but also towards strengthening
the State capacity of the relevant countries and
addressing the long-term developmental needs of the
LRA-affected areas.

In that regard, we welcome the development by
UNOCA, in collaboration with the relevant stakeholders,
of the United Nations regional strategy to address the
threat and impact of the activities of the LRA. We
hope that the strategy will provide a strong basis for
a comprehensive response to the threat posed by the
LRA. We also welcome the launching of the African
Union-led regional cooperation initiative against LRA
and the commitment of the LRA-affected countries to
contribute troops to the regional task force under the
initiative.

The successful implementation of the initiative
hinges on the availability of adequate and timely
resources and on building the requisite capacities
of the militaries in the LRA-affected countries. The
international community should provide the resources
needed for the successful implementation of the
initiative, in line with the priorities identified by the
African Union and consistent with the principle of
national ownership.

Pakistan will continue to support all efforts for
durable peace and stability in Central Africa and for
countering the threat posed by the LRA to the subregion.

