Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Our delegation is grateful to the Secretary-
General for his report on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and to Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, Head of
the Mission, for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in the province. We also note the participation
in and the statement made at today's meeting by the
President of the Coordination Centre of Serbia and
Montenegro and of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo
and Metohija, Mr. Covic'.

The assessments contained in the report and in
the statement made by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to a large extent echo our view
of the processes occurring in Kosovo, Serbia and
Montenegro. Despite some advances, progress in the
implementation of standards in Kosovo remains, so far,
uneven.

As the report notes, none of the eight standards
has been so far implemented. We agree with the view
of the Secretary-General that real progress in standards
implementation in Kosovo will become possible only
when the statements and the intentions of the political
leaders of the province are reflected in concrete,
effective action that brings solid results.

The non-participation by the Kosovo Serbs in the
activities of the province's Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government proves that Kosovo is still far from
resolving the main challenge of creating a multi-ethnic
and democratic society. The level of minority trust in
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government for
Kosovo remains low. Moreover, the fears of the non-
Albanian communities are being fuelled by all kinds of
incidents that often are not eliciting due reaction from
local political leaders. The provincial authorities are
not taking the necessary action to prosecute those
responsible for ethnically based crimes, to organize a
system to monitor violations of the language laws, or
to establish a culture of human rights and tolerance,
particularly among the young people of Kosovo.

Efforts are still insufficient to speed up the
process of returns. We are convinced that today the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government must take
visible practical steps to create conditions that would
encourage minorities to cooperate with the provincial
authorities and to participate in all ongoing activities in
Kosovo. The majority community, as is quite rightly
noted in the report, must create a climate in which
members of the minority communities, in particular the
Kosovo Serbs, feel confident that they can return to
Kosovo and that they can remain there. The speedy
restoration of power supplies to the Kosovo Serb
enclaves would be of great political and humanitarian
importance.

The priority tasks of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government in Kosovo, as we see it, include
achieving concrete results in the priority areas of
providing security, freedom of movement and equal
rights for ethnic minorities, as well as post-March
rebuilding and accelerating refugee returns and the
return of displaced persons from the non-Albanian
community.

Of course, as the Secretary-General quite rightly
warns, any outbreaks of violence such as the ones that
took place in Kosovo in March 2004 would be a step
back in the process of finding a political settlement.

Let me make another specific point as well. We
deem of great importance for the normalization of
inter-ethnic relations in the province the restoration,
with the constructive cooperation of the Orthodox
Church, of religious and cultural heritage sites that
were damaged or destroyed during the outbreak of
violence that took place in March 2004.

Frankly, there is something we do not fully
understand. We were surprised to hear statements to
the effect that the Serbian Orthodox Church has opted
out of these reconstruction efforts. In this situation,
which is very delicate, we believe that a special role
could be played by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
helping to find a mutually acceptable option for
resolving this problem for the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government and the Serbian Orthodox Church.

Moreover, we believe that involving Belgrade in
the negotiating process would help to find a solution to
the whole range of priority problems for the ethnic
minorities in the province. We, like the Secretary-
General, take note of the recent proposal by Belgrade
to resume direct expert dialogue on missing persons
and on energy. The constructive participation of all
parties could only help to restore trust and bring about
reconciliation among the communities.

Reforming local government is important to the
normalization of the situation in Kosovo. We believe
that it is appropriate to continue the practice of
consulting on decentralization within the format of the
September meeting that was held in Vienna, that is,
with the participation of the representatives of
UNMIK, the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government of Kosovo, Kosovo Serbs, Belgrade and
the Contact Group. This is particularly useful given the
need to establish constructive interaction between the
United Nations Mission and the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government with the Kosovo Serbs
and Belgrade.

We welcome the progress that has been made in
resolving economic difficulties in Kosovo. We take
note of the increased oversight over the pension system
and the banking sector of the province, as well as the
fact that the process of privatization is continuing and
that, on the whole, there is some capacity-building of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in the
economic sector.

However, assigning additional authority to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government should be
accompanied by greater accountability and greater
effective control over its activities by the head of
UNMIK. In particular, there should be appropriate
sanctions against those persons whose actions run
counter to the tasks set forth in the Kosovo standards.
We deem it exceptionally important that the Secretary-
General has drawn the conclusion that resolution 1244
(1999) is the essential political platform for reaching a
settlement in Kosovo. We remain committed to the
comprehensive strategy of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo as well as to full and consistent support for the
policy of standards before status.

The lasting stabilization of the province will be
possible only if there is an agreed international
strategy, with the lead role being played by the
Security Council. We deem highly useful the initiative
of Romania to dispatch to Kosovo a Security Council
mission right before the next assessment, so that
Council members could have firsthand information to
form an objective picture of the situation in the
province.

We firmly believe that there can be no
automaticity in launching the upcoming political
process for determining the future status of the
province unless there is real progress towards the
implementation of democratic standards and unless the
Security Council takes a specific decision in that
respect.

Russia, for its part, is prepared to cooperate very
closely with the Secretary-General and with his Special
Representative, with the head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Jessen-
Petersen, as well as with partners in the Contact Group,
in the interest of consolidating stability and security for
all inhabitants of the province.
