Mr. Djokic: May I at the outset congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January this year.

I should also like warmly to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Italy, His Excellency Mr. Antonio Martino,
with whose country Yugoslavia has had a long history of
friendly and good neighbourly relations.

The decision that the Security Council is about to
take on the extension of the partial suspension of
sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is a
thoroughly inadequate response to the great efforts and
contribution that Yugoslavia has been making in the
search for a just and lasting solution to the crisis in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As is well known, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has fulfilled all the obligations and met all the
conditions set by the relevant Security Council resolutions
by which the sanctions regime was established. In
addition, Yugoslavia has accepted the peace plan of the
Contact Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina, as it has
accepted all the other peace proposals, and has done
everything in its power to influence the Bosnian Serbs to
do the same.

In this framework, my Government has consistently
fulfilled its commitment to sever all political and
economic contacts with the Bosnian Serb leadership. This
has been clearly confirmed by the reports of the
Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia,
which have certified that the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is continuing to meet its
commitment to close the border between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Srpska.
Therefore, the decision by the Council to extend only the
very limited partial suspension of the sanctions for just
another 100 days and to put forward new conditionalities
and restrictions is certainly very disappointing. It reflects
a lack of political will to assess objectively the positive
and constructive role of the Federal Republic of

 

Yugoslavia in the search for a peaceful solution to the civil
war in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It ignores the fact that the
decision to close the border with the Bosnian Serbs was a
unilateral one, for which the Yugoslav Government asked
for the assistance of the Mission of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia.

References in the draft resolution concerning the
export of products from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
to the Krajina Serbs have absolutely nothing to do with the
primary objective of the closure of the border, which is to
influence the Bosnian Serbs to accept the Contact Group's
peace plan. It represents an attempt to impose new
conditions on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which is
unacceptable. The draft resolution, in fact, is not a mere
extension of the partial suspension of the sanctions, but
actually calls for the cessation of practically all economic
relations between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the Krajina Serbs. Moreover, it seeks to exact an indirect
recognition of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
is unacceptable to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
before the overall political solution to the crisis has been
found and accepted by all parties concerned. This approach
is counter-productive and harmful, particularly in this
delicate phase of the peace process, which is demonstrating
some signs of progress.

By opting again to maintain the greatest part of
sanctions against Yugoslavia, the Security Council is in fact
playing into the hands of the extremist elements in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, thus continuing to encourage the war option.
This, of course, fuels the ambitions of the hardline Bosnian
Muslim leadership, which feels that the continuation of the
sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the Serb nation as a whole is the shortest way to realize its
extremist political goals. At the same time, the perpetuation
of the sanctions also strengthens the hand of the Serb
extremists, who argue that, no matter what the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is doing, the sanctions will remain
in place and therefore the war option should be pursued.

That the sanctions have never managed to accomplish
the goals they were imposed for in the first place, except to
severely punish the most vulnerable segments of the
population, was unambiguously stated in the Secretary-
General's "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace"
(S/1995/1). By making a decision to lift or substantially
alleviate the sanctions, the Council would marginalize those
extremist positions and would indeed make a significant
contribution to the peace process.

Unfortunately, in the past hundred days the very
limited suspension of the sanctions established by
Security Council resolution 943 (1994) has also not been
entirely fulfilled. Despite a clear call by that resolution to
the sanctions Committee to adopt appropriate streamlined
procedures for expediting its consideration of applications
concerning legitimate humanitarian assistance, the
Committee has in fact resorted to an ever stricter
implementation of the sanctions. Due to the inflexible
positions of some delegations, the Committee consistently
rejected requests for the export of gas for humanitarian
purposes to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, even
though all conditions concerning the monitoring and
control by the World Health Organization of the
consumption of the gas were met. The sanctions
Committee has also steadfastly refused to allow the
import into the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of raw
materials for the pharmaceutical industry, which is a
necessary precondition for the regular supply of
medicaments to the population. The Security Council for
its part has ignored the request of the Prime Minister of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for the one-shot
export of $70 million worth of goods, whose proceeds
would have been used for the import of emergency
humanitarian products.

Furthermore, even though resolution 943 (1994)
clearly allowed all civilian passenger flights to and from
Belgrade Airport, it has not yet been possible to purchase
or even make reservations for tickets from United States
territory to Belgrade, a matter about which the Mission of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia informed the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee in its letter of 31
October 1994.
As the Council has now decided to extend the partial
suspension of the sanctions, it is to be hoped that these
shortcomings and flaws in the interpretation of resolution
943 (1994) will be overcome.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is convinced
that the plan of the Contact Group, as a basis for the
continuation of the peace process, is the rational and
viable way to end the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina

 

and to establish a just and lasting solution. For its part, it is
prepared to continue to make efforts towards that end.

In this framework, any linking of the further
suspension of sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to conditions that were not valid at the time
when the sanctions were imposed, or have no connection
with the resolution of the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
cannot be acceptable. By pursuing this policy, the Security
Council in fact continues the practice of punishing the
citizens of a sovereign country for events over which it has
no control, which is a definite abuse of Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations and is highly inhumane.

In spite of the fact that the Security Council has failed
so far to properly weigh the constructive role that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has been playing with
regard to the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Yugoslavia will continue to pursue the option of a peaceful,
negotiated settlement, which it continues to believe is the
only one possible and which it is convinced is in the best
interests of all the peoples of the Balkan region.

I would like to offer the following comments in
connection with some of the statements made during the
debate. My delegation categorically rejects the untrue and
malicious allegations made by certain delegations. The
situation in the former Yugoslavia is far too serious for the
Council to be manipulated in order to satisfy the domestic
and political propaganda needs of certain countries. Those
delegations that have again chosen to put forward such
allegations have thus clearly shown that they are not
striving to reach a just and lasting peaceful solution.

I must admit that my delegation is surprised and
disappointed that the Security Council did not grant its
request to sit at the Council table throughout the discussion
of this item, which exclusively refers to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. It is all the more incomprehensible
why the Council decided to make this precedent, when such
a request was granted in the past. I should like to believe
that the Security Council reached such a decision in
particular circumstances, and that it is only an unwanted
exception, which will not be repeated.

