Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like first to
express the gratitude of my delegation to Under-
Secretary-General Egeland for his valuable briefing
today, and to the Danish presidency for organizing this
important discussion on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Slovakia fully associates itself with the
statement to be delivered later this afternoon by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union.

We welcome the continuing efforts of the
Security Council, and of the whole international
community, in strengthening the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Security Council resolutions 1265
(1999) and 1296 (2000) comprise a significant
milestone and reflect the growing commitment of the
international community to better address the tragic
plight of civilians trapped in situations of armed
conflict.

The adoption of the latest resolution on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, resolution
1674 (2006), following the submission of the report of
the Secretary-General of 28 November 2005
(S/2005/740), not only showed the urgency of the
problem, but, While reaffirming the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity, it also
identified measures and actions the Security Council
8
might take in order to make the response to the needs
of civilians in armed conflict more effective.

Despite the increasing attention paid by the
Security Council and the international community to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, we still
witness, in conflict regions, the killing of civilians,
sexual Violence, attacks motivated by ethnic and
religious hatred or political confrontation and other
grave Violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights. In that regard, let me highlight the
situation in Darfur, where we have experienced one of
the greatest crises of protection, as described so
precisely by Mr. Egeland and as the Security Council
mission itself witnessed in Darfur and eastern Chad
earlier this month. The civilian population has been
subjected to forced displacement on an unprecedented
scale: there have been about 2 million internally
displaced persons, as well as widespread physical and
sexual Violence. In that context we welcome the
progress made by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) who, despite lasting insecurity in
the region, continues to take steps to investigate the
situation referred to him by the Security Council.

With regard to the special attention devoted to the
protection of children, we would appreciate the current
work of the International Criminal Court and the recent
arrest of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo, a Congolese national
and a leader of the Union des patriotes congolais
alleged to have committed war crimes, in particular
conscripting and enlisting children under the age of 15
and using them to participate actively in hostilities.

It is imperative that grave violations of human
rights, international humanitarian law and other
relevant provisions of international law be investigated
in a timely and credible manner, and that perpetrators
of the worst crimes under international law be
prosecuted and brought to justice.

At this point, we would like also to emphasize a
deterrent effect upon possible perpetrators of such
crimes and the contributions made by the ICC-related
investigations I have mentioned to prevention, the fight
against impunity, the restoration of the rule of law and
the establishment of a secure and safe environment.

With regard to ending impunity for perpetrators
of the worst crimes under international law; we would
like to note, in a general context, other appropriate
means within the broader range of justice and
reconciliation mechanisms, including national,
international and mixed criminal courts and tribunals
and truth and reconciliation commissions. We call on
all States that have not yet done so to consider
ratification of the instruments of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. We
consider it alarming that, out of 26 countries in which a
total of 30 armed conflicts occurred in 2004, only 13
are parties to the Additional Protocol II to the Geneva
Conventions, regulating internal armed conflicts.
Serious gaps remain in the implementation of legal
documents by which those States are already bound.
Therefore, we call upon all Member States to further
enhance the legal framework concerning the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts in their domestic legal
systems.

Also, we appeal to all parties to the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel to fulfil their obligations arising from that
international instrument, in particular to allow access
to humanitarian assistance and to take all necessary
measures to guarantee the safety, security and freedom
of movement of humanitarian personnel and United
Nations and associate personnel.

Finally, with the aim of improving the
protectional capacity of peacekeeping operations, we
should consider a request for information on the on-
the-ground implementation of provisions of resolution
1674 (2006) to be included in all reports of the
Secretary-General on United Nations country
operations. In our View, that would help us to better
tune protection mandates in order to have more
professional and responsible security forces capable of
providing adequate protection to civilians. We should
focus our endeavours on long-term security-sector
reform and reform of the judiciary. That task should be
among the priorities of United Nations country teams,
host Governments and donors.

We are aware of the strengthened role of regional
organizations and other intergovernmental institutions,
which have an increasing valuable role in the
protection of civilians. In our View, enhanced, closer
cooperation between the United Nations and Member
States and regional organizations such as the African
Union should be developed, since regional
organizations can often provide their own experience
to effectively address protection concerns.

