This meeting of the Security Council is being held at a pivotal moment. The Israeli occupation authorities are intent on carrying out their oft-stated plans to annex parts of the West Bank, including the Jordan Valley, the northern shore of the Dead Sea and the territories on which settlements have been built, along with their surroundings. In so doing, they seek to implement their expansionist policies, to the detriment of the establishment of an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the borders of 4 June 1967. Council members are well aware that the establishment of that State is the fundamental condition for the realization of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East. Annexation would be a flagrant violation of international laws and the principles and resolutions of the United Nations. It would be a blow to the prospects for peace in the region and the credibility of the international community. It would be a new Nakba for the Palestinian people, its security and its future, and would amount to the plain theft of its land, water and economic resources - something that would have an adverse impact on all concerned. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/555) underscores today's reality. It denounces the establishment by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem. As is stated in resolution 2334 (2016), such settlements have no legal validity and constitute a flagrant violation under international law. They are a major obstacle to the achievement of the two- State solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. The report also warns that the annexation plan has dire consequences for peace and security. Lebanon supports the Palestinian cause because it is just, however much time may have passed. Lebanon defends the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and, first and foremost, the right of return enshrined in General Assembly resolution 194 (III). Despite its own difficult domestic situation, Lebanon has hosted hundreds of thousands of Palestine refugees. It has provided them with basic humanitarian care in cooperation with the United Nations Relief Fund for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which is now facing a targeted campaign for its abolition as a way to dispose of the Palestine refugee issue. We must warn against any attempt to undermine the mandate of UNRWA. The Agency is not only a lifeline for more than 5 million Palestine refugees; it also plays a vital role in maintaining stability in the region. The present moment calls for mobilization of the United Nations and all international forums at all levels. Stakeholders should communicate with global Powers and allied States to rescue the peace process and relaunch it on the basis of the principles of international law, the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and the Arab Peace Initiative, adopted in Beirut in 2002, which calls for an end to the Israeli occupation of all occupied Arab territories within a specific time frame. In that connection, I recall that the international Quartet should immediately convene an urgent meeting and assume its responsibility to oversee the resumption of the peace process on the bases to which I referred. Time is working against peace, and Israel is taking advantage of that reality to create fundamental changes at every level in the occupied Palestinian territory in order to prevent the establishment of an independent Palestinian State, which is the fundamental condition for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. The present moment requires us all to take urgent, continuous and effective action to realize peace on the basis of the terms of reference, both in principle and in law, to which I referred. Peace is not only a Palestinian or Arab interest; it would benefit the region and the international community as a whole.
