Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for including
this item on our agenda and for convening this open
debate on the welcome initiative of Canada. I wish also
to thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson
for their presence here today and for their statements,
which attest to the timeliness of our concerns.

The item before us is now at the very heart of the
mandate of the Security Council. It is necessary only to
recall our recent debate on Timor to evoke the violence
against civilian populations perpetrated in East Timor. But
we must also recall, this time with satisfaction, the
Council's speedy and unanimous reaction in deciding, in
order to address the protection of the civilian population,
to authorize a multinational force to restore peace and
security and to put an end to the violence.

We also recall other, no less serious, conflicts
elsewhere in the world, such as those in Afghanistan,
Angola and the Great Lakes region of Africa, where
civilians are also the principal victims. One example is
provided by the team from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) that
visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
stated yesterday that the conflict there had uprooted
nearly a million individuals, who have become refugees

 

or displaced persons. Here again, the Council must act and
must shoulder its responsibilities.

There is no need to repeat what others have said about
the changing nature of armed conflict and about the fact
that a majority of its victims are now civilians. Combatants,
of course, fight one another, but not only one another: they
also attack defenceless populations in violation of
international law and the fundamental principles of
humanitarian law. This is a strategy of terror that spares no
person and no area, a strategy of all-out war. And all-out
war requires a global response, as rightly proposed by the
Secretary-General in his welcome report to the Council.

We must thoroughly consider all the ways and means
available to us to respond to these threats, beginning with
prevention. This can mean the rapid deployment of
preventive peacekeeping operations with a view to
preventing the deterioration of a situation by which the
civilian population could quickly be affected.

I note with interest the Secretary-General's proposal
that Security Council working groups relating to volatile
situations be established, making use of all the analytical
resources of the United Nations, and especially of the
human rights information and analysis emanating from
independent experts.

Prevention involves scrupulous respect for human
rights and democratic norms. The international community
must also disseminate information about the principles of
international law with a view to creating a climate of
respect for those norms that will protect the rights of
civilian populations.

Prevention, then, must come first, but later, when we
see a threat to the civilian population, we must punish the
perpetrators. We must therefore give high priority to the
fight against impunity. Here, we note a welcome
development in the sphere of international law: the
establishment of two international criminal tribunals. The
Security Council has certain legal means at its disposal -
when the political will exists. It also has all the tools of the
Charter to pursue the guilty and to cause them to change
their behaviour, through the use of sanctions - which,
however, must be carefully targeted and proportionate, so
that they will not harm civilian populations.

This year, the Security Council has already taken up

the question of the protection of humanitarian personnel,
and has reaffirmed its collective responsibility to guarantee
the safety and security of such personnel. In this respect,
too, principles and declarations exist. But they can be
translated into fact only though our unrelenting vigilance.
I am thinking about the action that the Secretariat takes
when it must respond quickly to problems in certain crisis
areas when the security or freedom of movement of
humanitarian personnel is at stake. We can all recall the
action that the Secretariat had to take in crisis regions in
Europe, as well as in Afghanistan.

As the Secretary-General has recommended, we
must therefore forge a global and coordinated approach.
When the deployment of a peacekeeping operation is
envisaged, all aspects that can help protect the civilian
population must be considered: the establishment of a
civilian police force, humanitarian assistance,
disarmament, demobilization and measures to provide
work for people who have been demobilized. As the
report of the Secretary-General recommends, it is
essential to have a multidisciplinary and integrated
approach to these problems.

The Security Council has already adopted a
resolution on the protection of children in armed conflict
which contains a number of commitments that we must
constantly ensure are properly implemented. A draft
resolution on the protection of civilian populations is
before us today, and we fully support it. However, France
is willing to continue to give full consideration to the
recommendations that the Secretary-General has put to us
with a view to finding effective ways to ensure such
protection for civilian populations.

