Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I, too, would like
to join others in welcoming High Representative
Mr. Lajcak back to the Chamber. I thank him for the
comprehensive picture he has given us today of the
political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and I
would like, through him, to thank his people on the
ground and the European Union (EU) people on the
ground for their efforts to facilitate reform and uphold
the Dayton Peace Agreements.

My Government strongly and fully supports the
Office of the High Representative, and we invite other
members of the Council to join us in that. I would like
to align myself with the statement by the representative
of France on behalf of the European Union and to
thank Ambassador Terzi on behalf of the European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR) for everything that his Government and
others are doing to help ensure peace, security and
stability there.

I would also like to welcome Mr. Spiric',
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is very good to see him here in the
Chamber again and very good to hear what he had to
say about Bosnia's economy and also about his support
for the High Representative.

It was very good that in November this Council
was able to renew EUFOR's mandate for a further
12 months.

A number of speakers has referred to the fact that
we are now 13 years after the Dayton Peace
Agreement. Thirteen years after Dayton is also
13 years after Srebrenica. I would like to use this
occasion to pay tribute to the memory of the victims of
that sad event. We welcome the fact that Radovan
Karadzic was arrested recently and transferred to The
Hague. We look forward to the similar arrest and
transfer, by the Serbian authorities, of Mladic and other
remaining indictees.

The future of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as with
the other countries of the Balkans, lies in Europe. We
join others in regretting the loss of momentum since
the signing of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union and we share the
concern about the situation in Bosnia, with regard to
both the lack of reform and to the ongoing ethnic-
nationalist rhetoric on all sides.
Against that background, the home-grown
Bosnian initiative - the 8 November Odzaci
agreement - is a very welcome step forward. It is all
the more commendable because it is indeed a Bosnian
local initiative. We welcome it. We support it. We
believe it is an example of efforts to find common
political ground. We look to all politicians in Bosnia -
and I would like to stress, all politicians in Bosnia ~
to engage with the reform agenda and work towards
concrete action.

I would just like to take a moment to support
what the High Representative said about the
unacceptability of the move by Republika Srpska to
present a criminal report against First Deputy High
Representative Raffi Gregorian and a number of
journalists and representatives of non-governmental
organizations. Such actions are anti-Dayton and do the
people bringing them no credit. We welcome the recent
statement made by ambassadors of the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council to that effect, as
well as that made by European Union foreign ministers
on 10 November.

It is a matter of regret that, once again, we have
to address the question of ethnic and nationalist
rhetoric coming from both ends of the political
spectrum. The High Representative singled out in
particular two leaders on each end of the political
spectrum for that. The Bosnian people, whether they
are Bosniak, Bosnian Serb or Bosnian Croat, are not
well served by attempts to undermine the status of
Republika Srpska. Republika Srpska is an integral part
of Bosnia and its status is set out in the Dayton Peace
Agreement. Its status cannot be changed, except by the
acceptance of the people of Bosnia. The Bosnian
people are not well served by attempts to undermine
the State of Bosnia. That too is set out in the Dayton
Peace Agreement, and it has been upheld by NATO, the
European Union and the Security Council on numerous
occasions.

Nor are the Bosnian people well served by
attempts to undermine the High Representative and not
to cooperate with him. I reiterate how welcome it was
to hear Mr. Spirie pay tribute to the High
Representative. Instead of non-cooperation with the
High Representative, it would be better if Bosnia's
leaders were working hard to achieve the five
objectives and two conditions that are necessary for the
closure of the High Representative's Office and the
transition to a wholly European Union civilian
presence. The High Representative makes clear in his
report that, given the state of affairs on the ground, it is
unlikely that it will be possible to take that decision,
which is scheduled for March 2009. Our position is
that that decision should only be taken when the
conditions are right to do so.

I would also like to take this opportunity to say
that, while we believe the Bonn powers should be used
sparingly and only when necessary, it is the case that
they exist and that they have been endorsed by the
Council in a Chapter VII resolution. We support the
High Representative in his judgment as to whether or
not to use them on each particular occasion.

I would like to conclude by restating that the
European Union is committed to playing an enhanced
role in Bosnia and Herzegovina. For our part as the
United Kingdom, we will continue to support efforts to
ensure security, stability and prosperity there, as well
as a multiethnic future for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
for the Balkan region as a whole.

