Mr. Hannigan (Iceland): I would like to thank the
Spanish presidency for convening today's meeting.

Icelandjoins others in expressing grave concern at
the present spike in violence in the occupied State of
Palestine, including East Jerusalem, and in Israel. Acts
of terror are unacceptable in all circumstances.

As has been stated, these acts of violence do not
occur in a vacuum. Assistant Secretary-General Taye-
Brook Zerihoun highlighted a number of key elements
of the context in his briefing to the Security Council
last week (S/PV.7536). Among them, he identified
demolitions of Palestinian dwellings, ongoing
settlements, heavy-handed Israeli military action
against civilians and the blockade of Gaza. Collective
punishment of the Palestinian population is not only a
breach of international law, but it is also demonstrably
counterproductive. These ongoing developments
on the ground have a key significance for the wider
context of this conflict. They add up to the dangerous
undermining of the only viable course to peace - a
two-State solution.

Yes, there is incitement - on both sides, through
the social media, according to Assistant Secretary-
General Zerihoun. But incitement also has a context.
Incitement is a part of the violence and is facilitated
and given credibility by the wider context of loss of
political perspective and a growing despair among
the Palestinian population and fear among Israeli
civilians. Political leaders on both sides bear a heavy
responsibility to encourage restraint.

It is vital that the Council respond urgently and
effectively to this crisis. There must be de-escalation
and a cessation of all violence from both sides. But
the deep distrust that exists between the two parties
puts a large question mark over whether de-escalation
is possible without external assistance. One Security
Council member has commented on the tendency for
each side to highlight the provocations and acts of
violence by the other side, while seeking to minimize
its own actions. There is little chance in the present
situation that Palestinians could see the Israeli forces
as acting even-handedly.

The Council should look at ways to assist in starting
on the long road back to some kind ofmutual confidence
between the parties. In that regard, we should not forget
the huge potential that exists in involving women on
all sides. The importance of getting women involved in
peace processes was proclaimed by the Council earlier
this month, when it marked the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) (see S/PV.7533).
In the short term, Palestinians need a sense of security
for their own people. The Security Council should look
at ways of bringing that about. Palestinians also need
confidence that there is a political route to the two-
State solution within a finite time period. Israelis must
have confidence that their security is not compromised.
The urgency is redoubled by the religious dimension,
which has become more present since the violence at
the holy places in Jerusalem. It is vital that the status
quo be maintained, not only in word but also in deed.
The Security Council must ensure that the parties are in
no doubt as to the importance of that.

