Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): A year ago, when
the Netherlands joined this Council, Burundi was often
referred to as a shimmer of light in a region of darkest
conflict. Regional sanctions were subsequently lifted, and
it was expected that by the end of this year the Arusha
peace process would result in an overall settlement.

Today I cannot but express the Netherlands' extreme
concern about the present situation in Burundi. Extremist
forces have gained new ground, and in this atmosphere
two United Nations staff were recently killed, one of
whom was a Dutch national. The perpetrators of these
murders must be brought to justice.

Amidst these deteriorating security conditions, the
humanitarian situation continues to worsen. We call upon
all parties to respect the relevant rules of international
humanitarian law. The neutrality and impartiality of
humanitarian assistance must be respected and everything
possible must be done to guarantee the safety of those
who deliver this assistance.

While we appreciate that a degenerating security
situation may call for exceptional measures, we do not
believe that the forced regrouping of the rural population
is an acceptable response. At any rate, we wish to remind
the authorities concerned that, by virtue of this policy, the
Government of Burundi has assumed full responsibility
for the safety and well-being of those who have been
regrouped against their will.

The untimely death of President Nyerere and the
subsequent interruption of the Arusha peace process could
not have occurred at a more inopportune time. The
Arusha peace process must be resumed as soon as
possible. We hope the parties concerned will soon be able
to identify a successor to Mr. Nyerere so that a dangerous
vacuum may be avoided. All parties must gear their
efforts towards an early resumption of the negotiations.
The Netherlands stands ready to continue its support for
the Arusha peace process.

The situation in Burundi is cause for broader
concern because of its potentially dangerous implications
for the entire region. The Arusha process and the Lusaka
process are intertwined: they are dependent on each
other's success. There is no hope for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo if there is no prospect

 

of stability based on reconciliation in its neighbouring
countries to the east.

In conclusion, I wish to confirm that the Netherlands
associates itself with the statement the representative of
Finland will deliver on behalf of the European Union.

