Mr. Calderisi: Very briefly, I would like to refer
to the question which the representative of Bangladesh
posed about the current situation with regard to
suspending the disbursements of the World Bank to the
Central African Republic.

We can, in fact, make arrangements occasionally
to solve this more quickly than might otherwise be
true. We did, late last year in a similar situation, take
special steps to release $5 million of budget support in
December and waved, in part, the conditions for its
disbursement. That was instrumental, I believe, in
helping the Government meet the civil service salaries
for Christmas and the New Year.

In the current situation we are fairly optimistic
about having those arrears cleared soon. In the future,
if the situation arises, we can certainly consider making
exceptions for humanitarian projects like the
HIV/AIDS project, where we will very much argue that
once approved by the Board, it should be immune from
the application of our rules on disbursements.

But we do still need to ensure some good order in
the settlement of payments to the Bank group, because,

as you know, the funds for Africa come entirely from
about 30 Governments in the world. We are custodians
of those funds and need to manage them in a way that
will bring confidence to the donors and, of course, to
the international community.

To end on a positive note, while we agree that
limits to administrative capacity are affecting the
Central African Republic, we do not regard them as the
principal obstacle to progress. We think that, as in
other African countries, there is much more capacity
than meets the eye. Better governance will release
some of that capacity, attract it back from overseas and
allow the country and African institutions, we hope, to
decide on a programme of technical assistance which
will be as small and as targeted as possible as a
supplement for what the country itself cannot provide.
Thank you again, Mr. President, for letting us be
with you again today.

