Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the initiative to discuss in
the Security Council issues of legal cooperation in
the context of combating terrorism. We think it is a
timely debate. The tragedies in Egypt, Turkey and
other countries remind us once again of the need for
an energetic, consistent and joint struggle against the
scourge of terrorism. We join others in expressing
our condolences to the States that have been victims
of terrorist acts. It is now, in the light of the active
struggle against terrorists in Syria and Iraq, and with
the endless funnelling of human and material resources
to terrorist groups, that the sheer scope of the problem
that law enforcement bodies in various States face in
the area of law and order and cooperation with one
another becomes clear.

We also must note that State obligations already
enshrined in Security Council counter-terrorism
resolutions are not, by any means, always being fulfilled.
Today's resolution 2322 (2016) highlights the gaps
in existing criminal legal mechanisms for combating
terrorism and possible options for their elimination. An
important expert role in this work should be played by
the United Nations specialized agencies, such as the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

One of the priorities in countering terrorism
for States and for specialized international regional
organizations is the need to harmonize and modernize
existing bilateral and multilateral treaties on issues of
extradition, legal assistance in criminal matters and the
transfer ofcriminal proceedings from onejurisdiction to
another. A helpful step would be a review of the various
reservations to those treaties concerning procedures
for cooperation in combating crime and terrorism.
Moreover, the absence of specialized international
treaties should not be an obstacle to legal aid and
extradition. In such far-from-ideal cases, States can and
must cooperate based on the principle of reciprocity.

During talks on today's resolution, our delegation
insisted that the issues of the importance of updating
the international legal basis and invoking the principle
of reciprocity should be made very concrete to the
maximum extent possible. Sadly, those and some of our
other proposals were not reflected.

The resolution we adopted confirmed that it
is unacceptable to refuse to extradite terrorists for
political motives or provide them safe haven. The
document calls for further streamlining of procedures
for rendering legal assistance and for the extradition
of terrorists. We believe that an imperative of such
cooperation should continue to be to bring radicals
to justice. Achieving that is impossible without
building a sound knowledge-sharing system, primarily
through the specialized services, security bodies
and law enforcement agencies. In that regard, we
draw the attention of delegations to the actively
developing - with the support of United Nations
specialized agencies - Global Terrorism Database.

We would also like to separately touch on issues
of legal cooperation in the area of combating the
financing of terrorism. The resolution calls on States
to exchange information on the criminalization of
financing terrorism, with an emphasis on the Financial
Action Task Force's (FATF) fifth recommendation.
At Russia's initiative, its scope has been expanded to
a complete ban on any trade with terrorists, including
trade in natural resources, as set forth in resolutions
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015). We believe that the FATF
now take very tough steps against States that fail to
meet the requirements of those resolutions, going so far
as to black- or grey-list them.
In our further joint work, we need to take into
account the specific terrorist challenges that have been
particularly prominent in recent years. One priority
is to address the increase in radicalism, which is
fuelled by unprecedented terrorist propaganda aimed
primarily at youth. That propaganda has adapted to
modern technological advances such as the Internet and
social networks. Sadly, there is a demand for it, which
is reflected in the scale of the recruitment of foreign
terrorist fighters to the ranks of the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria (ISIS), Jabhat Al-Nusra and other associated
terrorist groups.

Objectively, it is high time to pool our resources
and the experience of the international community to
prevent such manifestations. Once again, the resolution
highlights the presence of that problem. At the same
time, additional practical steps are needed to combat
the spread of the ideology of terrorism. We look
forward to continuing substantive work on that theme
in the Council, as well as in the counter-terrorism
bodies accountable to it. We should not forget about
the aspects of criminal activities that use information
communications technology. In that context, what
is still relevant is the Russian initiative to develop,
under the auspices of the United Nations, a treaty on
combating cybercrime.

In conclusion, we would like to stress the importance
of strengthening coordination and interaction among
States in order to destroy ISIS, Jabhat Al-Nusra and
other associated groups. That must be done by putting
an end to double standards and must include the central
coordinating role of the United Nations, based firmly
on international law.

