Mr. Gayito (Ethiopia): We thank the Russian
Federation for convening today's important debate
on United Nations peacekeeping operations, which
is a strategic issue that Ethiopia placed high on the
Security Council's agenda during its presidency of the
Council in September 2017. The adoption of resolution
2378 (2017) was one of the major accomplishments
of Ethiopia's presidency (see S/PV.8051). Let me also
extend our appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing
on the progress made in the implementation of United
Nations peacekeeping operations reform over the past
year, as well as the essence of the work done over the
past two years.

We strongly condemn the cowardly terrorist
attacks in Burkina Faso and extend our sympathy to its
Government and people.

Among the several priorities set out in resolution
2378 (2017) was the need to undertake efforts to fill
the gaps that peacekeeping operations face in terms of
force generation and capabilities. We recognize that a
lot has been done by the Secretariat in this regard. At
the annual Peacekeeping Ministerial in March, Ethiopia
pledged to contribute two fully equipped battalions of
uniformed peacekeepers to fill the gaps identified by
the United Nations. We also expressed our readiness
to accept other individual requests for military and
police officers to be deployed in peace operations.
With regard to recognizing the role of women in peace
and security, we are working to increase the number of
women peacekeepers.

With respect to promoting the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations, which must adequately
respond to peace and security challenges, we have
strengthened our training and capabilities. In our quest
to introduce preventive measures to avert all forms of
abuse and exploitation of civilians, we have made this
a top priority.

It is a great success that the United Nations has
drawn the necessary benchmarks to address challenges
through consistent awareness-raising, the taking of
administrative measures and the putting in place of an
accountability mechanism to be implemented together
with troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/ PCCs). The predeployment and in-mission training
programmes instituted by TCCs/PCCs are also taking
root, and we trust that these efforts are moving in
the right direction to help overcome existing and
future challenges.

I hope that we all agree that a comprehensive
reform of peacekeeping operations requires cooperation
and transparency among all actors within the United
Nations peacekeeping architecture. In this regard, we
need to witness more concrete measures relating to how
all stakeholders will contribute to such reform, as well
as audit efforts aimed at restructuring the peace and
security pillar. The work of the relevant committees
established by the General Assembly - for instance
the Fifth Committee, which is involved in budget
negotiation and the allocation of resources - needs to
be better understood. Matching benchmarked mandate
delivery requirements with the necessary resources is
not a subject that can be deferred. In this connection, the
Security Council needs to explore means of addressing
challenges resulting from serious mismatches.

Ethiopia is committed to the whole-of-pillar
approach in implementing United Nations reform and
believes that integrated political solutions, reinforced
by strong partnerships and the participation of women,
are essential elements of the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We have been
supporting the United Nations Secretariat in its efforts
to successfully implement structural reforms, including
those set out and recommended in the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446).

In that regard, I want to highlight the need to
first reaffirm that Member States' ownership of
the implementation of United Nations security-
pillar reform, including the reform of peacekeeping
operations in the field, remains key for success. It
is very important that we all agree on the essence of
the reforms and appreciate their relevance in order to
ensure efficiency.

Secondly, there is a need to sustain communications
among stakeholders in order to identify any gaps in the
implementation of resolution 2378 (2017), as well as
in the Secretary-General's reform agenda. We believe
that what is expected of each stakeholder is not obvious
and that Member States, the Security Council and
field missions must be adequately informed so that the
gaps and shortcomings associated with peacekeeping
operations can be addressed.

Thirdly, the role and contribution of each actor in
peace operations must be reaffirmed. Over the past
seventy-four years, Ethiopia has been proudly involved
in the peace operations serving humankind and the
objectives of the United Nations. This endeavour has
evolved over time and is now becoming more demanding
owing to extended mandates and constrained resources.
We believe in celebrating the life and efforts of those
who have made the ultimate sacrifice and valuing the
causes they defended. In this regard, while we recognize
the importance of financial and other contributions, it
must be acknowledged that there is no moral or material
ground for equating the expenditures or resources
employed with human life. For that reason, the safety
and security of peacekeepers operating in a dangerous
and life-threatening environment should remain a key
priority for field missions.

At present, TCC/PCCs are forced to shoulder
particularly heavy and difficult responsibilities in
implementing mission mandates, paying the price both
in terms of the human sacrifice and financial burdens
posed by peacekeeping operations. This is not, by any
standard, fair or acceptable. If the overburdening of
TCCs/PCCS persists, we understand that the situation
will become unsustainable and affect efforts to maintain
peace and security throughout the world.

Finally, we want to underscore that engagement
between the Security Council, TCC/PCCs and the
Secretariat will help to enhance the coordination of
missions' leadership and mandate delivery. However,
we all know that the formal triangular consultation
mechanism has yet to truly take root due to certain
established norms in the Security Council. We
therefore trust that the next reform will focus on fixing
the imbalance of cooperation, including reforms of the
Security Council itself.

Let me conclude my remarks by reaffirming
Ethiopia's commitment to the success ofUnited Nations
peace operations.

