The President (spoke in French): Pursuant to the
decision taken at the 5498th meeting, held earlier
today, I acknowledge the presence of the
representatives of Israel and Lebanon at the Council
table, in accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

The Security Council will now resume its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its extreme
shock and distress at the shelling by the Israeli
Defense Forces of a residential building in Qana,
in southern Lebanon, which has caused the killing
of dozens of civilians, mostly children, and
injured many others. The Security Council sends
its deepest condolences to the families of the
victims and to the Lebanese people.

"The Security Council strongly deplores
this loss of innocent lives and the killing of
civilians in the present conflict and requests the
Secretary-General to report to it within one week
on the circumstances of this tragic incident.
the

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the threat of escalation of violence with further
grave consequences for the humanitarian
situation, calls for an end to violence, and
underscores the urgency of securing a lasting,
permanent and sustainable ceasefire.

"The Security Council expresses again its
utmost concern at the Lebanese and Israeli
civilian casualties and human suffering, the
widespread destruction of civilian infrastructure,
and the increased number of internally displaced
persons.

"The Security Council urges all parties to
grant immediate and unlimited access to
humanitarian assistance.

"The Security Council deplores any action
against United Nations personnel and calls for
full respect for the safety and security of all
United Nations personnel and premises.

"The Security Council affirms its
determination to work without any further delay
to adopt a resolution for a lasting settlement of
the crisis, drawing on diplomatic efforts under
way.

"The Security Council remains seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/35.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 8.35 p.m.
06-44899
