The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Ghana and Liberia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lamptey
(Ghana) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
twelfth progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (S/1995/781).

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1995/790, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw attention to the following
revision to be made to the draft resolution contained in
document S/1995/790, in its provisional form. The eighth
preambular paragraph should read as follows:

"Emphasizing the need for all the Liberian
parties to respect and implement fully all the
agreements and commitments they have entered into,
in particular with regard to the maintenance of the
cease-fire, disarmament and demobilization of
combatants, and national reconciliation".

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the following other
documents: S/1995/742, letter dated 25 August 1995 from
the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the text of the "Abuja Agreement to
supplement the Cotonou and Akosombo Agreements as
subsequently clarified by the Accra Agreement"; and
S/1995/756, letter dated 30 August 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Ghana to the United
Nations transmitting the text of a letter dated 28 August
1995 from the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ghana
addressed to the Secretary-General, enclosing the text of
the "Abuja Agreement to supplement the Cotonou and
Accra Agreements as subsequently clarified by the Accra
Agreement".

 

The first speaker is the representative of Ghana. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.


