Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Maintaining global peace and security is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council, as entrusted to
it by the Charter of the United Nations, as well as a
shared responsibility of all Security Council members.
Given the complex challenges to international peace
and security, how should the Security Council fulfil
that mission and play its role? That is a question
that deserves serious consideration. China believes
the following.

The Security Council should perform its functions
in a fair and just manner, as mandated by the Charter.
The Council must uphold the purposes and principles
of the Charter, universally recognized international
law and the norms governing international relations.
It should safeguard the authority and the role of the
United Nations in international affairs, as well as the
sovereignty, independence and legitimate rights and
interests of all countries. The Security Council should
adhere to political settlement as the basic direction.
The Security Council should also be the strongest
advocate for political solutions, resolving differences
and disputes through dialogue and consultation. It
should make effective use of all the tools at its disposal,
including good offices, mediation and peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations, and step up its preventive
diplomacy efforts with the aim of serving the greater
goal of achieving political settlements.

The Security Council should enhance its unity in
order to promote consensus. All of its members must
keep firmly in mind their responsibility for maintaining
world peace and security. They should improve their
unity and coordination, set aside individual geopolitical
considerations, ensure that the Council can function
effectively and uphold the common interests of all the
States Members of the United Nations. The Council
should strengthen its overall planning and coordination
with a view to forging synergies, coordinating and
cooperating with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Secretary-General and the
United Nations development system so that the political
and development pillars can support each other and
so that efforts aimed at achieving lasting peace and
sustainable development can be mutually reinforcing.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their means of delivery poses a real
threat to global peace and security and is a challenge
that we all face. China proposes that we intensify our
efforts in three areas. First, we must champion the
rule of law in order to consolidate and improve the
international non-proliferation regime. The Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
the Biological Weapons Convention, the Chemical
Weapons Convention, Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) and other relevant Council resolutions together
constitute the legal foundation of the international
non-proliferation regime. We must all work diligently
to safeguard its universality, effectiveness and
authority, particularly by preventing terrorists and
other non-State actors from acquiring WMD materials
and technologies.

Secondly, we must take multi-pronged measures to
implement the NPT in a balanced way. Every country
should keep its word, fulfil its responsibilities and
abide by its international obligations. The NPT and
related agreements must be fully and comprehensively
implemented in their entirety. Double standards,
discriminatory arrangements and selective enforcement
are impermissible.

Thirdly, we should improve international
cooperation and enhance every country's
non-proliferation capabilities. It is Governments that
bear the primary responsibility for non-proliferation,
and countries should be supported in their efforts to
develop their non-proliferation policies based on their
national circumstances and encouraged to improve
their non-proliferation and law-enforcement capacity-
building, and conduct more exchanges and practical
cooperation efforts so that together we can strengthen
the weakest links and achieve general security.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
on the Iranian nuclear issue represents a hard-won
achievement for multilateralism that reinforces the
international nuclear-non-proliferation regime and
peace and stability in the Middle East generally. While
no international agreement is perfect, the JCPOA
has had the unanimous endorsement of the Security
Council. The events of the past three years have shown
that it is a viable agreement, and China encourages Iran
to continue to fulfil all ofits commitments. At the same
time, the legitimate right of all countries to conduct
normal economic relations and trade with Iran should
be respected. China calls on the relevant parties to keep
the big picture in mind, think long-term and uphold the
sanctity, integrity and efficacy of the JCPOA.

Since the beginning ofthe year, there has been major
progress with the situation on the Korean peninsula.
China has been working relentlessly to that end, and we
support the important understandings reached between
the leaders of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and the United States at the Singapore summit.
We also support the efforts of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea to
improve their relations. We call on all the parties to take
advantage of the current opportunities to translate this
political consensus into concrete action, and to work
on establishing a peace mechanism and, ultimately,
denuclearization on the Korean peninsula, with a view
to achieving a lasting peace there as soon as possible.

China lives by its commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to
upholding the current international system centred on
the United Nations. We have worked diligently to fulfil
our international responsibilities and obligations. We
must continue to work together to realize peace and
security for all.

In conclusion, Iwant to point out that China has never
wavered in respecting the principle of non-interference
in other countries' domestic affairs. It is a tradition of
Chinese foreign policy, and our observance of it has
been commended by the international community. We
have never interfered, and never will interfere, in any
country's domestic affairs. We reject any unwarranted
accusations to that effect and call on others to abide
by the purposes of the Charter and to refrain from
interfering in other countries' internal affairs.
