Ms. Wallstrom (Sweden): The nightmare of Da'esh
rule is finally coming to an end for the millions of
Iraqis who have been affected. The victory over Da'esh
is a result of the commitment and resilience of the Iraqi
Government and people. I pay tribute to them and to
the Iraqi security forces for their determination. Yet,
in some ways the victory over Da'esh is - as we have
heard already - only the beginning of a long road
ahead. The hard work of healing the wounds of the
survivors, as well as the wounds left on Iraqi society,
must now begin.

Sweden welcomes today's adoption of resolution
2379 (2017), which is an important first step towards
holding those responsible for the atrocities carried
out by Da'esh to account. We welcome the global
advocacy role of the Special Advisor established by this
resolution, as well as the fact that other Member States
can request assistance from the team with the approval
of the Security Council.

Today's resolution is also an example of how
the Security Council can take action in support of
accountability. That is encouraging because to date,
advancing international justice in the Council has
sometimes been difficult, not least with respect to
Syria. Accountability is critical to delivering on the
Council's aims of reconciliation and sustaining peace.
Let me make three short points relating to the resolution
we have just adopted and its implementation.

First, Da'esh has shown an extraordinary cruelty
towards men, women and children. Today, I would like to
remind the Council that women and children have been
used as human shields, executed in public, abducted,
enslaved, raped, sold like livestock and exploited as
suicide bombers. We have heard heartbreaking stories
from Yazidis, as well as stories from people from other
religious groups, that testify to such barbaric acts.
We would like to convey our respect to a courageous
survivor of such acts, Ms. Nadia Murad, who is present
with us today.

Today's action by the Council marks a victory
for the women who have survived Da'esh and who
have bravely spoken out to demand justice. I pay
tribute to their courage. We must now ensure that
the investigative team is equipped with the expertise
and resources necessary to gather evidence of crimes
against women and children, including sexual and
gender-based violence.

Secondly, Sweden was among the first countries to
prosecute suspected perpetrators of alleged war crimes
in Iraq and Syria.

Finally, we urge the Iraqi authorities to put in place
national legislation that ensures all perpetrators of
international crimes are tried in Iraq. All suspected war
crimes must be afforded due process, and investigated
in an impartial and fair way. That is essential for the
maintenance of the rule of law and crucial for the
reconciliation process. Sweden, which is unequivocally
opposed to the death penalty, expects that the
investigative team will not contribute to trials that may
lead to capital punishment, in line with United Nations
standards. We welcome the work of the United Nations
to support the Iraqi authorities' efforts to reform their
justice sector, strengthen the rule of law and the respect
for human rights.

After the military defeat of Da'esh and the end
of its brutal rule, the Iraqi Government and the Iraqi
people must turn their attention to reconciliation and
building an Iraqi State that represents all Iraqis. That
will take political courage and cooperation. They can
rely on Sweden as a committed partner in the upcoming
critical phase.

