Ms. Notutela (South Africa): We thank the Special

Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis,
for introducing the quarterly report on Afghanistan
(S/2012/703). South Africa welcomes the participation
of the Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, Mr. Zalmai
Rassoul, and thanks him for his assessment of the
situation in his country.

Today's debate is occurring in the context oflarge-
scale violence and demonstrations across the Islamic
world. Afghanistan has not remained immune from
these incidents, as borne out by the suicide attack
earlier this week, which claimed the lives of eight
nationals from my country. These incidents, capped
with escalating Violence in Afghanistan over the past
month, have undermined the progress made towards
peace and remind us that much more needs to be done.

South Africa welcomes the continued efforts of
the Afghan leadership, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), regional actors
and the international community to place the country
on a sustained trajectory of peace and sustainable
development. Sustainable peace can be achieved only
through dialogue and reconciliation. The Afghan
Government's persistent initiatives to engage with the
armed opposition and the ongoing calls of President
Karzai for the armed opposition to lay down their arms
are welcome. Intra-Afghan accommodation is the only
solution for securing long-term stability and security,
including outreach to the Taliban.

The framework provided by resolution 1988 (2011) is
important in facilitating this process. We are concerned
that some elements of Afghan society have chosen not
to engage in the reconciliation process. A commitment
to national reconciliation and a peaceful political
solution remain pivotal for the long-term stability of
Afghanistan. The ongoing efforts of the High Peace
Council to promote political outreach activities and
sustainable peace in the country are welcome. An all-
inclusive political process must be inclusive of women,
young people and religious representatives in deciding
the future of their country. The creation of civil society
working groups aimed at mobilizing the largest section
of Afghan society in support of the work of the High
Peace Council is therefore a significant development.
UNAMA's prioritization of providing support to
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process is
necessary to ensuring sustainable peace in the country.

Afghanistan continues to move towards
consolidating its democratic and governance
institutions. We welcome the legal and legislative
framework that is currently being put in place to
ensure fair, transparent and inclusive presidential and
parliamentary elections in 2014 and 2015. In line with
the decisions adopted at the Tokyo Conference, we
welcome President Karzai's pledge during an address
to the special joint session of the National Assembly in
June that, during his remaining two years as President,
he will be committed to further strengthening good
governance, accountability and effectiveness.

In spite of the decrease in security incidents
and civilian casualties during the reporting period,
UNAMA's mid-term report for 2012 indicates that
over 3,000 people were killed and injured, of whom
30 per cent were women and children. Women and
children continue to be disproportionately affected by
the conflict. Civilian casualties affected by the conflict
and resulting from International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) air strikes, as well as anti-Government
use of improvised explosive devices remain a concern.
We wish to reiterate that all armed elements operating
in Afghanistan have the responsibility to ensure that
civilians are protected, and the failure of State and
non-State actors alike to uphold that responsibility
should not go unpunished.

The Secretary-General's ninth report on the
protection of civilians (s/2012/376) underlines the
importance of accountability. We were reminded of
that in the presidential statement on justice and the
rule oflaw adopted in January (PRST/2012/1), in which
the Security Council reiterated its call on all parties to
armed conflict to comply with obligations applicable to
them under international humanitarian law and to take
all the required steps to protect civilians.

The increase in incidents of green on blue attacks
are of concern. As NATO troops draw down, these
attacks erode trust and have the potential to undermine
the smooth handover from NATO to the Afghan
National Security Forces. Incidents of increased
violence directed at women and the challenges that
women continue to face in the economic, social and
cultural sphere are of concern. We are pleased to note
the commitment of the Afghan Government to address
all these challenges. We favor and welcome the launch
in Kabul of the N-Peace Network, a platform aimed at
supporting the leadership of women in building peace.

We also emphasize that security in Afghanistan
should continue to be reinforced at the national level by
efforts at the regional level. We are therefore encouraged
by the ongoing diplomatic and political efforts at the
bilateral and regional levels to assist Afghanistan in
its transition to peace and stability. The recent high-
level meetings between Afghanistan and Pakistan in
Mazar-i-Sharif and Kabul further enhance the peace
process and assist in those endeavours.

There is an inextricable link between development
and security in Afghanistan. In that regard, we
are encouraged by the solidarity and commitment
demonstrated by the international community during
the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan and the summit
on investment held in New Delhi.

Those initiatives are important for consolidating
global support for Afghanistan's development and long-
term economic sustainability, as well as for ensuring
that the gains registered over the past years are not
reversed.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that national
ownership, coupled with international support, is crucial
to achieving political, security and socioeconomic
progress in Afghanistan. UNAMA's role in supporting
the Government in Afghanistan is vital, and we trust that
the reduction of its budget will not have a detrimental
effect on its ability to deliver on its key mandate.

