Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French):
As this is the first time I am taking the floor under
your presidency, Sir, I would like to extend my warm
congratulations to you personally and to your country,
Equatorial Guinea, on your deserved assumption of
the rotating presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February. We are very grateful for your
country's unparalleled leadership in defending Africa's
interests and for its efforts to ensure that the principles
of the Charter are respected by the Council.

I have the honour to express the same thanks to
the other members of the Council for sparing no effort
to uphold respect for the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, and especially for addressing the
situation in Burundi in the Council since 2015. It would
not be out of place to once again express my regret at
the fact that there are still a number of delegations -
although certainly in the minority - who have held on
to the same manifestly fixed positions for more than
four years, instead of viewing the situation in Burundi
with objectivity and discernment.

I cannot help but thank my colleague Ambassador
Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for his constructive
contribution to this debate. We reaffirm our full support
for and cooperation with Mr. Lauber.

I would also like to thank my colleague Ambassador
Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations, for the very
constructive contribution of her briefing to this debate.
If I may, I would like to encourage her participation
from time to time in future discussions by the Council
of the situation of Burundi.

Allow me also, through you, Mr. President, to thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
Mr. Michel Kafando, for his briefing this afternoon.

The purpose of my statement this afternoon is
to share with you, Mr. President, and the members
of the Council an overview of the new developments
at various levels that have taken place since the last
Council meeting on the situation in Burundi, held on
21 November 2018 (see S/PV.8408).

At the political level, the trajectory of peace and
reconciliation and the strengthening of democracy
in Burundi have been positive since 2017. That trend
continued in 2018 and the first two months of 2019.
National mechanisms for the organization of peaceful
elections in 2020 are gradually being put in place. A
Constitution that affirms democratic achievements,
national sovereignty, dignity, inclusiveness,
reconciliation and national cohesion was promulgated
on 7 June 2018 by the Head of State.

The National Independent Electoral Commission
(CENI) has already been set up and is operational.
A dialogue between the approved political parties
was organized in a politically, ethnically and gender-
inclusive manner to reach agreement on the Kayanza
road map leading to peaceful elections in 2020. In the
same vein, inclusive discussions on the revised draft of
the electoral code were initiated and the document has
been analysed at the level of the Council of Ministers.
The reform of the electoral code aims to adapt it to the
new Constitution of7 June 2018. The ultimate objective
is to move towards an electoral code that will lead to
orderly, transparent and peaceful elections in 2020.

At the budgetary level, the Burundian people have
chosen to take full ownership of their electoral process
by financing it with domestic funds without recourse
to external resources, which are often unpredictable
and conditional.

At the organizational level, everything will be
done to create an environment that is conducive to the
holding of democratic, credible, inclusive and peaceful

elections, which would be a guarantee of political
stability in our country. Since the beginning of 2018,
the Government of Burundi has consistently been
making goodwill gestures aimed at creating a general
atmosphere of calm in the country.

Without being exhaustive, I wish to stress the
repeated statements by the Head of State regarding his
decision not to run in the 2020 elections, even though
he has every right to under the current Constitution.
This is a very important political and democratic
gesture that can serve as an example for the subregion
and elsewhere.

The transfer of power from an outgoing President
who has completed his term to the President who will
take office in 2020 will be a watershed moment in
Burundi's political history, because this will be the
first time since the independence of our country, in
1962, that a democratically elected president was able
to complete his constitutional mandate without being
assassinated, as happened in 1993 with the despicable
killing of President Melchior Ndadaye after only 101
days in power.

The freeing of more than 2,000 prisoners last year,
which you, Mr. President, highlighted in your national
capacity, which included young troublemakers and
insurgents from the 2015 events, also falls within the
ongoing trend of reconciliation, social cohesion and
political tolerance in the country.

Concerning the inter-Burundian dialogue, my
delegation wishes to recall that dialogue is a culture
and a cardinal virtue that is anchored in the lives of
the people of Burundi. There is no longer a need
for outside actors to take a leadership role in this
process, which is our very own. It is clear that the
conclusion of the dialogue, which up to now had been
conducted by the subregion, does not mean an end to
dialogue on the electoral process. The current political
consultations under way in Burundi between registered
political parties will continue, in a patriotic, open and
constructive spirit, until the successful conclusion of
the process.

On security, the situation in Burundi is calm, stable
and fully under control. This trend is irreversible. Like
2017, 2018 was characterized by a largely satisfactory
security situation throughout the national territory,
with the exception, of course, of some isolated cases
of ordinary crime such as can also found in other
countries, including those represented here.

Thanks to this peace and stability, regained at a
high cost, the thirty-second summit ofHeads of State of
the African Union, held on 10 and 11 February in Addis
Ababa, welcomed the efforts made by the Government
of Burundi in the process of preparing for the 2020
elections, which included by putting in place, inter alia,
national mechanisms to prepare for those elections as
well as the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, in
keeping with the 2000 Arusha Agreement. The summit
also welcomed the exemplary decision of the Head of
State to voluntarily forgo his constitutional right to run
in the 2020 elections.

The summit also reiterated its many calls on
the European Union to lift the unilateral sanctions
imposed on Burundi. These are politically motivated,
immoral sanctions, imposed in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and of the duty of international
solidarity. The near-automatic renewal of the sanctions
each year, without taking account of the remarkable
progress that has been made since 2015, should by any
line of thinking cease so as to give a chance to frank
and sincere dialogue aimed at a resumption of mutually
beneficial and respectful cooperation.

Iturn now to Burundi's contribution to peacekeeping
operations and to the fight against terrorism at the
continental level. Burundi has contributed more than
6,000 soldiers to United Nations and African Union
peacekeeping operations, mainly in Somalia and the
Central African Republic. The laudable work carried
out by all of our peacekeepers, who have voluntarily
chosen to sacrifice their lives to save those of others,
far from their home countries and in particularly hostile
conditions, must be rightly appreciated.

Among other things, we must refrain from any
differentiated treatment of our troops as a tool of
political pressure. Operational capacity in the context
of the implementation of United Nations peacekeeping
mandates should be the main criterion for the evaluation
of soldiers in peacekeeping missions.

Burundi, which has just been elected as a member
of the African Union Peace and Security Council, will
remain deeply committed, alongside other nations,
to promoting peace by silencing the guns in Africa
by 2020. I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for having chosen to consider this important issue
during your presidency, towards the end of the month,
on 27 February, I believe. This renewed confidence
demonstrated in Burundi by the States members of
the African Union is fresh evidence of the credibility
of Burundian diplomacy and its increasing role in the
maintenance of international peace and security at the
regional and international levels.

On the return of refugees, in 2018 we received
58,262 voluntarily repatriated people returning from
Tanzania, the Congo, Kenya and Uganda, as well as
several thousand others who returned without the help
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR).

The voluntary return movement is tremendous,
averaging more than 1,000 returns a week. By way
of illustration, today alone UNHCR repatriated from
Tanzania 595 Burundians, including 177 families,
through the Mugina border crossing, in Makamba
province, in the southern part of the country. To properly
manage this process, my delegation wishes once again
to reiterate its call on UNHCR and on friends of the
region to intervene with certain host countries who are
holding hostage some exiled compatriots by erecting
artificial obstacles to their voluntary return home,
and to ensure that refugee camps retain their civilian
character, in keeping with the 1951 Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees.

Speaking of the civilian character of refugee
camps, Burundi accepted the public excuses of
UNHCR authorities following the startling discovery
by the Tanzanian authorities of more than 1,500
military uniforms distributed by UNHCR under
unclear conditions in refugee camps in Tanzania. My
delegation hopes that such a questionable undertaking,
which could have destabilised my country, will not
recur.

For its part, the national reconciliation process
is continuing under the leadership of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission. Its mission is to inquire
into and establish the truth about the serious violations
of human rights and humanitarian law committed in
Burundi during the period from 26 February 1885 to
4 December 2008, when the armed conflict in Burundi
ended.

The establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, in line with the Arusha Agreement, is
crucial in our country, above all in moving towards
a Burundi that is reconciled with its past, which was
characterized not only by glorious events but also by
fratricidal wars whose scars remain fresh in many of
our families and communities.

Beyond rewriting the history of Burundi, which
has often been falsified, the Commission must carry
out an important and sensitive undertaking aimed at
healing wounds, restoring the dignity of victims and
expressing gratitude to those who protected others
during the various crises that Burundi has gone
through, slowly but daily working to clear the path
towards national reconciliation in our country. As the
Chair ofthe Burundi configuration ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission so aptly noted, besides national efforts,
this ambitious reconciliation process requires the
support of all.

On the promotion and protection of human
rights, Burundi reiterates its readiness and its will to
cooperate with other countries and the United Nations
in promoting the protection of human rights in Burundi
and elsewhere in the world, based, of course, on the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. This
noble mission will be feasible only through mutually
respectful cooperation, frank and sincere dialogue
among Member States, and the use of mechanisms
accepted by all, such as the Universal Periodic Review.
The dangerous tendency of certain States to seek to
transform the Human Rights Council into a tool for
exerting political pressure and regulating geopolitics
in the countries of the South risks undermining the
objectives set by Member States when the Human
Rights Council was established on 15 March 2006
through General Assembly resolution 60/251.

The drift towards the excessive politicization of
human rights and the policy of selectivity and double
standards run counter to the principles of the universality
of human rights. The Government of Burundi is more
committed than ever. Dialogue and cooperation based
on mutual trust will always be the cornerstone of its
initiatives in the process of promoting human rights.

I cannot conclude my remarks without reiterating
once again what has now become my slogan before
the Council - our usual and legitimate appeal to the
Security Council to remove the issue of Burundi from
its agenda. We maintain that the current political and
security situation in the country in no way constitutes
a threat to international peace and security that
could justify its being arbitrarily maintained on the
Council's agenda.

The series of meetings on Burundi, held on
the basis of resolution 2303 (2016), which is now
essentially obsolete, could become yet another factor

ofdestabilization instead ofpromoting peace and calm. beginning to feel like an eternity for the people of
For four years, a handful of external stakeholders have Burundi. It is time for "1055 who are 311" wavering to
stubbornly ignored these multiple calls for Burundi come down 0" the right Slde ofhlstory.

to be removed from the Council's agenda, and it is The meeting rose at 5.10p.m.
