Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): As others have done, I
would like first of all to thank the delegations of the
United States and of the United Kingdom for their
comprehensive briefings on the situation in Iraq.

We commend the tireless efforts of the Coalition
Provisional Authority (CPA) in pursuing its
commitment to establish a free, democratic and stable
Iraq under the difficult circumstances on the ground
caused by acts of terror, violence and intimidation. And
we note with satisfaction the active cooperation among
the CPA, United Nations agencies and the Governing
Council of Iraq, as called for in the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The 15 November announcement by the Iraqi
Governing Council of a political process to establish a
representative transitional national assembly to assume
full sovereignty in 2004 marks a new stage in the
gradual, speedy and orderly transfer of authority to the
Iraqi people. The new transitional Iraqi administration
will take over the full responsibility of governing by
the end of June 2004. The Iraqi Governing Council sets
a feasible timetable for the electoral and constitutional
process, as called for in Security Council resolution
1511 (2003). It deserves the utmost attention of the
Security Council and other relevant United Nations
bodies that can facilitate its implementation. Those
important new developments, in our view, should be
welcomed and supported by the international
community. They ensure that the day when full
sovereignty will be restored to Iraq will come soon.

We appreciate the efforts of the Coalition
Provisional Authority to transfer to the Iraqis increased
responsibility for their own security and governance
and to strengthen the administrative capacity of the
representative local and national institutions.

Progress on all tracks in Iraq is clearly tied to the
security situation. Security is also a key prerequisite
for the resumption of the United Nations presence in
the country. Therefore, in our view, the international
community should double its efforts to provide the
necessary assistance to ensure stability and security in
Iraq under the provisions of resolution 1511 (2003) and
other Security Council resolutions. Coupled with the
new dynamic envisaged for the political process,
increased international assistance can help to isolate
the terrorists, reverse the current security trend and,
finally, improve stability on the ground.

The violence and terror perpetrated by the same
forces of the past that oppressed the Iraqi people for
decades should not divert the international community
from its strong commitment to help the people of Iraq
to live in peace and democracy. I would like to
reiterate that my country is fully committed to continue
its support for efforts to improve the security and
stability situation in Iraq. The decision to offer support
for the police training programme, announced during
the donors conference in Madrid by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Bulgaria, is another
example of that commitment.

Security Council resolutions provide for a vital
role for the United Nations in Iraq. Facing the
degradation of the security situation, the United
Nations adopted a new approach, enhancing the role of
its local staff in Iraq and the coordination and the
management of its activities from a distance. We hope
that the international personnel have been only
temporarily relocated outside Iraq and that the United
Nations will resume its presence in that country as
soon as possible for the benefit of the Iraqi people.

United Nations agencies have a unique expertise
and performance record in mobilizing civil society and
in drafting constitutional and electoral legislation. In
accordance with the provisions of the relevant
resolutions, the Iraqi Governing Council could draw on
that expertise and experience.

We welcome the forthcoming appointment of a
new special representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, and we will never forget the crucial contribution
of the late Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Sergio Vieira de Mello, in the formation of
the Iraqi Interim Authority.

SANA-869

 

Finally, touching on the humanitarian situation, I
would like to commend the efforts of the Authority
with regard to normalizing the situation with regard to
transport, electricity and water supply. The progress
achieved with regard to the strengthening of civil
society and human rights education and the fully
functioning justice system is also commendable. At the
same time, with a view to healing the humanitarian
situation, the United Nations Development Group
remains, in our opinion, best prepared to act and
deliver aid in cooperation with the CPA. We commend
the consistency and continuity in managing the
relevant humanitarian programmes on the ground,
including the CPA's decision to re-employ the former
local staff of the oil-for-food programme in the
activities supervised by the Development Fund for
Iraq.

