Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Mr. President, allow me
to start by congratulating you on your 40 years of
dedication to diplomacy - an exceptional milestone
that many of us will never reach and that speaks
volumes of your great contributions to the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, Russia and international
affairs. I wish you four more decades in Russian and
international diplomacy. Given your vitality in the
Council, I am convinced that you will easily reach that
goal.

I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
open debate on new trends in peacekeeping. As a
dedicated troop- and police-contributing country for
the past decade and as current Chair of the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
Rwanda appreciates such inclusive interaction
involving Council members, the larger United Nations
membership and the United Nations leadership on
this very timely and important topic. I also thank the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for being here today and for his briefing.

While our discussion here today revolves around
new trends such as robustness, new technology,
inter-mission cooperation and multidimensional
mandates, for the sake of brevity I will focus on three
areas, namely, technology, robust peacekeeping and a
few remarks on regional partnerships.

Rwanda has positively engaged in discussions on
the introduction of new technology into peacekeeping
theatres that could help to mitigate many threats faced
by peacekeepers and civilians alike. As it has been
presented, such technology has the potential to identify
and monitor armed groups and arms trafficking, assist
patrols heading into hostile territory, and assess the
movement of displaced refugees. However, like other
members here today, Rwanda shares valid concerns
that need to be addressed in moving forward. Questions
still exist regarding control of information collected,
confidentiality and third-party impartiality.

The unmanned, unarmed aerial assistance being
used in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is there
on a trial basis. Once its achievements and efficacy
on the ground are confirmed, then we can support
its systemic integration into the requirements of
peacekeeping mandates as the situation of a particular
mission would dictate. In order for that to happen,
however, a comprehensive and enforceable United
Nations framework governing the collection and
dissemination of drone-collected intelligence and data
would be essential in mitigating public and regional
concerns.

Given the nature of current threats to peacekeeping,
Rwanda believes that the deployment of robust
peacekeepers is essential not only to effectively
protecting civilians, but also to their own protection
in increasingly hostile and volatile environments.
However, we cannot expect peacekeepers to engage
in robust peacekeeping tasks without the necessary
preparation and resources. If we do not have the
ability to insert forces and to conduct casualty and
medical evacuations or air lifts, then we have major
problems and should not have deployed in the first
place. Thus, in order for robust peace operations to
work, the peacekeeping community must agree on the
development of robust ideas at the strategic level and
adequately prepare forces at the operational and tactical
levels. In particular, it requires the timely provision of
defence stores, strong regional stand-by capacities and
the timely deployment of enablers.

Allow me to emphasize that while Rwanda supports
well-prepared and well-planned robust peacekeeping
when it is called for, we do not believe that peacekeepers
have a role to play in asymmetric warfare. Rather, all
stakeholders in the region must make a concerted effort
to train and develop asymmetric warfare strategies.
That being said, we should not continue to focus on
military solutions and related strategies while losing
track of the peaceful settlement of conflicts. We need
political robustness now more than ever.

The challenges we have identified in all of these
new trends in peacekeeping are related in any actual
sense not to the Organization's ability or creativity in
enhancing the performance of its mandates, but rather
to the double standards related to using those good
initiatives. It is absurd that there are those who use
these advantages in the way they choose and only when
it fits their interest.

How else can we explain that with the new
technologies and the robust mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), it
has chosen to fight some armed groups, while ignoring
others, such as the longest-surviving group in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo - the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR).
I recall that the FDLR is a movement that committed
genocide in my country 20 years ago and that has been
terrorizing the Congolese people, raping women and
girls, and recruiting children. It is a negative force
that has been the cause of most other rebellions in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Whose interests are those supposedly good
initiatives serving, while the people we are supposed
to protect are still being raped and killed? Rwanda has
called upon the Council many times to hold MONUSCO
accountable. It is known by all that investing resources
where there is no transparency and accountability is a
waste of time and money and bleeds responsibility.

On regional partnerships, Rwanda believes that
when talking about the strategic future of United
Nations peace operations, we must consider the
Organization's ability to function successfully with
partners organizations that can share the burden and
bring their own comparative advantages to the table.
That is especially true on the African continent, where
we have seen critical partnerships in Liberia, Sierra
Leone, Darfur, Somalia, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mali and currently, South Sudan.

While the role of regional organizations is

recognized in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, the added value and increasing role they have
gained in recent years requires less of an ad hoc process
and a more of a streamlined framework within the United
Nations peacekeeping architecture. This will take
time, but it is essential to allowing us to cope with the
inevitable challenges related to resources, preparedness
and the political and operational aspects ofcooperation.
Next month during our Council presidency, Rwanda
will convene a high-level open debate mainly to discuss
the evolution of regional partnerships in peacekeeping.
Their role in helping to secure international peace and
security is rapidly expanding, and the status quo must
be adapted to reflect that evolution.

Let me end by thanking the women and men who
put their lives at risk in the name of international peace
and security, and those who are no longer with us but
whose sacrifice will never be forgotten. It is for their
sake and for that of those whom they protect that we
should strengthen our peacekeeping abilities.

