Mr. Owada (Japan): Japan is deeply concerned
about the present situation in the Middle East. In the face
of a total lack of substantive progress in the peace process
since the beginning of 1997, the sense of frustration
which has come to prevail in the entire region is now
mounting to a dangerous level.

On 3 December of last year, my delegation stated in
the General Assembly debate on the situation in the
Middle East,

"Looking at these worrying developments,
Japan is profoundly disturbed by the serious
setback with which the Madrid process,
launched in 1991 amid the hope of the
international community, and with its blessing,
is being threatened. The danger will be real if
the present precarious situation surrounding the
Palestinian track is not adequately addressed.
The impasse in the peace process, not only on
the Palestinian track but on all the tracks, could
reduce to naught the precious mutual trust that
has been built by the assiduous efforts of the
parties involved over the years." [Ofi'icial
Records of the General Assembly, F ifty-second
Session, Plenary Meetings, 60th meeting, p. 24]

 

My delegation has to state with great regret that this
danger is now becoming real. The recent decision taken by
the Government of Israel to approve the plan to strengthen
Jerusalem by extending its municipal boundaries should be
looked at in the light of this background. It is true that the
Government of Israel contends that the plan to strengthen
Jerusalem is non-political in nature, deals only with
municipal and administrative issues and does not contradict
in any way the provisions of the peace process as achieved
in the agreement signed between the parties, to which Israel
strictly adheres.

However, apart from the fundamental point that this
position is based on a unilateral interpretation of a unilateral
action, which other parties may not accept, it misses one
essential aspect of the whole present crisis. What concerns
us in the international community is that this unilateral
action could lead to a crisis of confidence and reduce to
naught the precious mutual trust that has been built by the
serious efforts of the parties involved over the years, thus
risking the destruction of the very basis on which the peace
process entirely depends.

Faced with this new, controversial development
brought about by a unilateral action by the Government of
Israel, the Government of Japan had to express its concern
in the form of an official statement by the Press Secretary
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 23 June 1998. That
statement contains the following two essential messages:
first, that the Government of Japan, having ardently and
repeatedly called upon both the Israelis and the Palestinians
to engage in constructive efforts to facilitate the peace
process, expresses its regret over this decision taken by the
Government of Israel, as it is expected to cast a negative
effect on the fragile peace process; and secondly, that the
Government of Japan will keep a close watch, with great
attention, on how the Government of Israel is going to deal
with the implementation of this decision.

The Government of Japan has consistently been calling
upon the Government of Israel not to take unilateral action
that could irreparably poison the atmosphere of mutual
trust, which is so essential to progress in the peace process.
The previous decision of the Government of Israel, taken
last year, to construct settlements in J ebel Abu Ghneim, or
Har Homa, in East Jerusalem, was just such an example of
unwise provocation. We in Japan deeply regret that another
such example is now added in the form of an extension of
Jerusalem's municipal authority.

The repeated call of the Government of Japan on
Israel has been based on its firm conviction that mutual

 

trust among the parties directly involved is an
indispensable premise for any substantive progress in the
peace process. In the absence of an essential level of trust
between the parties involved, no compromise proposal,
however balanced and reasonable it may be, can be
expected to command acceptance by both parties.

This is the primary reason that has prompted Japan
to persistently call for maximum self-restraint by all
parties concerned. Unfortunately, there are too many
examples of this kind in the history of this troubled
region, where failure to exercise self-restraint led to the
deterioration of the situation through a loss of mutual
confidence. It is of primary importance that the parties
concerned summon their courage and wisdom to take
concrete steps to implement the commitments they have
already made in Madrid, in Oslo and thereafter.
It is undeniable that the final key to success in the
peace process lies with the parties themselves. As my
delegation stated in the formal meeting of the Security
Council on 5 March 1997 on the situation in the occupied
Arab territories,

"There is a very real danger that the
Israeli decision could lead to a crisis in
which the erosion of the process of peace
might result. If that should take place, the
resulting [loss of mutual confidence] could
destroy the very structure for peace in the
Middle East, a structure so assiduously built up
over the years since Camp David, Madrid and
Oslo." [S/PV.3745, p. 16]

While this remark was made in the context of a
controversy surrounding the construction of a new
settlement in West Jerusalem, there is a striking similarity
between the situation described in that statement and the
present situation. It is all the more regrettable that my
delegation has to repeat these same words today after
more than one year has elapsed, while in the meantime
the atmosphere surrounding the parties, in terms of their
mutual trust and confidence, has further been deteriorated
and poisoned.

The delegation of Japan believes that the open
debate on the situation in the Middle East being held
today serves a useful purpose to the extent that the grave
concern of the international community over the present
developments surrounding the Palestinian situation has to
register unequivocally in the minds of the parties
involved. At the same time, however, we in the

 

international community have to be on our guard not to let
the present precarious situation deteriorate into one which
could get out of our control.

Whatever we do in the context of the United Nations
should be geared towards promoting and expediting the
peace process in the Middle East. Our reaction to the
situation would have to be carefully weighed from the
viewpoint of what is going to be constructive for the peace
process, as against what is not going to be constructive. In
taking action in the United Nations, we should be guided
by the yardstick as to whether the action is conducive to
achieving our goal in the Middle East peace process.

It is my sincere wish that a new, favourable turn of
events in the present situation in the Middle East, to be
realized on the basis only of a common conviction of the
parties involved that peace is indispensable to the survival
of all the nations in the region, will come to prevail through
mutual concessions and reciprocal sacrifices. It is high time
that each of the parties realized that a sustainable peace in
an environment of security can be built only on the basis of
a common spirit of reconciliation and coexistence.

Japan will be happy to actively participate in any
effort to achieve this goal in a revitalized peace process.

