Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Albino Malunga, the Minister for Social Assistance
of Angola.

Like my colleagues who spoke before, I too
would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this public meeting of the Security Council.
The situation in Angola, despite its gravity and
severity, has not been discussed in open format for
quite a long time. This may create a misleading
impression that the United Nations remains uncertain
as to its exact role in the settlement of the Angolan
conflict. We believe that any uncertainty of that kind
must be dispelled. Since the day it became a member of
the Security Council, Ukraine has been advocating a
better-devised and more energetic international policy
towards the conflict in Angola. We hope very much
that today's meeting will contribute to this momentous
task.

It is very important that the Security Council
commitment to improving the effectiveness of the
measures imposed against UNITA, and Canada's
leadership in this endeavour, are producing really
positive effects, weakening the rebel movement and
curtailing its ability to wage war.

The efforts in this area are expected to continue
with the same dynamism. In this respect, Ukraine
welcomes the recent entry into operation of the
monitoring mechanism established pursuant to
resolution 1295 (2000). My Government is prepared to
provide every support to the monitoring mechanism in
discharging its mandate. We also commend the recent
decision by the Southern Africa Development
Community (SADC) to establish a special committee to
monitor the sanctions against UNITA.

At the same time, it has been repeatedly stated
that these efforts will contribute to the establishment of
lasting peace and stability in Angola only if linked to a
wider peace process. My delegation believes that the
Angolan people will benefit only if the United Nations
takes a more assertive stance on the urgency of such a
process.

The Secretary-General's report of 12 July
confirms that although Government forces continue to
make progress in reducing the conventional war
capability of UNITA, guerrilla activities persist in
many parts of the country, perpetuating the prevailing
insecurity among the population.

Taking into account the primary responsibility of
UNITA for the resumed fighting, Ukraine agrees with
the importance attached by the Government of Angola
to its military successes in conventional war against the
rebel movement. However, the sad experience of the
twentieth century proves that, in contrast to
conventional warfare, guerrilla wars may last for long
decades and that in most cases those wars are won with
better results at the negotiating table.

The urgent need for a negotiated settlement of the
conflict is further highlighted by the precarious
humanitarian situation in Angola, which, according to
many sources, continues to deteriorate. In this
connection, my delegation subscribes entirely to the
appeal to all parties to facilitate the delivery of
emergency relief assistance to all those in need.

Certainly we do not underestimate the complexity
of the objective of stopping the war in Angola. Ukraine
understands the position of the Government of Angola
that the current UNITA leader, Jonas Savimbi, can no
longer be considered a trusted counterpart in any
eventual political negotiations.

In this respect, UNITA has to be told that it is in
its interests to put forward a new, unblemished leader,
in whom the Angolan Government can place its
confidence and who will be in a position to guarantee
compliance with any negotiated agreement. In our
view, the United Nations could play a very concrete
role in influencing internal changes within UNITA.
Ukraine also strongly supports the view that the Lusaka
Protocol remains the most viable basis for the
restoration of peace in Angola. In this connection, we
attach great importance to the recent statement by
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos about the validity of
the Lusaka Protocol.
Ukraine strongly supports and associates itself
with the request in the statement made by the United
States on behalf of the troika that intensified efforts be
made to determine the fate of the crews and the
passengers of Russian and Ukrainian commercial
aeroplanes downed under suspicious circumstances
over territory that was controlled by UNITA, as well as
the fate of the other foreign nationals missing in
Angola.

I cannot but use this opportunity to express our
satisfaction with the recent release by UNITA of five
Russian crewmen who had been taken hostage in May
1999.

In conclusion, I join previous speakers in
commending the efforts of Under-Secretary-General
Ibrahim Gambari to explore the prospects for peace in
Angola. My delegation wishes him every success in his
difficult but very important endeavour.

