Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
convey my thanks to the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Louise Frechette, for her presence here today and for
her important statement.

As affirmed in the Security Council two years ago,
it is a tragic fact of our day that in many places where it
is impossible to find food, education or health care, it is
easy to find machine guns, grenades and anti-personnel
mines. If this trend continues, any hope for development,
peace and growth will disappear in many countries.

We therefore congratulate you, Mr. Minister, and the
other members of your delegation on having provided us
with an opportunity to discuss the subject of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants as a critical element in building lasting peace.

Conflicts within States have their roots in weak
Governments, in a history of social and ethnic strife,
economic uncertainty, corruption, a lack of security and
abuse of minorities, all combined with poverty and
hopelessness. Such conflicts can result from one of these
causes or from a combination of several, but they all
require one additional element: access to substantial
quantities of small arms and light weapons. With that
added factor, war has become a way of life for
combatants. It does not matter whether they are on the
side of the insurgents or of the Government; wars of this
kind recognize no ideology. It is even graver that for
many people, especially teenagers, joining militias is the
only possible occupation. All of this has an impact at the
national and the regional levels, affecting peace and

 

security and thus requiring the attention of the Security
Council.

Consideration of this subject requires reexamination of
the concept of security and the creative development of new
ways to make it a reality. It is worth asking what we are
talking about when we refer in the Charter to the need to
maintain international peace and security. In the present
context, there is no doubt that what we seek to maintain is
the security of the human being. It is also worth asking
what we are talking about when we refer in the Charter to
the need to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for the
suppression of acts of aggression. In our view, this refers
to conflict prevention and peace-building.

Human security and peace-building are thus key
complementary concepts. Prerequisites for achieving human
security are the strengthening of democratic institutions,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, good
governance and sustainable development.

In turn, the latter requires that States be able to
reconstruct their economies by gaining access to capital
markets and reasonable outlets for their exports. Peace-
building is an effort to improve conditions from within,
strengthening society's internal capacity to resolve its
conflicts without violence.

In this context, the proliferation of small arms
constitutes a threat to human security in general and to
those societies that seek to rehabilitate themselves. This
does not mean that arms flows must be unconditionally
ended, since the right to self-defence is recognized by the
Charter. The idea is to help prevent and control armed
conflicts. In this context, it is also necessary to support
local efforts to rebuild social cohesion and to restore public
security and the legitimacy of the State as the provider of
security.

It is essential to restore the confidence and well-being
of the societies affected. Your initiative, Sir, to achieve
disarmament, demobilization and the reintegration of ex-
combatants is a good step in that direction.

The task does not end there, however. Post-conflict
peace-building can benefit from cooperation projects in
which one or more countries participate to create conditions
conducive to good governance, economic reform and
export. To that end, regional organizations can prove useful,
complementing the efforts made at the national level.

The experience of Latin America and the Caribbean
has been exemplary in all of these areas. In our opinion,
this is due to the cultural level of the societies affected by
conflict and to the historically acquired conviction that
democracy is the best form of government for the region.

We must strengthen the United Nations capacity to
prevent conflicts, to respond when conflict does erupt and
to provide instruments for post-conflict peace-building.
Peacemaking, peacekeeping and the building of
sustainable peace are vital and interdependent elements of
the same endeavour: the building of a lasting peace that
ensures human security in all societies.

This can become even more concrete only in a
framework of investment, production and secure markets
for the goods that these societies produce. That would
contribute not only to their economic and social
development, but also to enhancing confidence, a
fundamental element of peace.

