Mr. Ladsous: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in
Darfur and the implementation of the mandate of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

I would like to start with the peace process. The
Darfur Regional Authority is preparing strategies and
workplans to progress in the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. While UNAMID
and the United Nations country team are looking at
how they can support this process, concerns have been
raised by the Darfur Regional Authority about the lack
of funding from the Government. In his address to
Parliament on 23 April, the Chairperson of the Darfur
Regional Authority, El Tigani Seisi, stated that unless
funding was provided the process could collapse.

Regarding the security provisions of the Doha
Document, the parties must resolve a number of issues
to move beyond the initial verification of the forces of
the Liberation and Justice Movement (LJM). The LJM
and the Sudanese Armed Forces were to move in
parallel through a process of verification,
disengagement, redeployment, limited arms control and
finally, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
Moreover, in accordance with the agreement, the LJM
2
has requested the Government to provide non-military
logistical support to its verified forces.

Now the Government and the LJM. must decide
how to proceed. Will the Government be ready to move
through the process in parallel with the LJM, or will
the LJM. accept an amendment to the synchronization
of the process? In that connection, it is important that a
time frame be established for the provision of
non-military logistical support. We have, of course,
encouraged UNAMID to work with the parties towards
the resolution of those issues.

On a positive note, as agreed with the LJM,
UNAMID and its partners are undertaking further
screening of LJM. elements to dissociate children
assembled with the Movement's forces.

Prospects for the resumption of negotiations
between the Government and non-signatory
movements do not look good at present. The Justice
and Equality Movement (JEM) and the Sudan
Liberation Army-Minni Minawi - which are both
members, as the Council is aware, of the Sudan
Revolutionary Front alliance - have informed the
Joint Chief Mediator ad interim that they will negotiate
only over national, political and economic reforms.
The Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid has stated
that it is not willing to negotiate until the root causes of
the Darfur conflict have been addressed. For its part,
the Government is willing to negotiate only on the
basis of the Doha Document on issues related to
Darfur.

Regarding internal dialogue on the peace process,
the parties are due to complete in June the Doha
Document information campaign and the canvassing of
Darfuri stakeholders' views on the conditions they
consider important to a credible dialogue. A
preliminary analysis has indicated that the stakeholders
are in favour of such a dialogue, but have concerns
related to equitable representation, freedom of
expression, the security of the participants and the
commitment of the signatory parties to respecting the
outcome. UNAMID will continue to work with the
Government, the LJM. and the Darfuri stakeholders to
address those issues and will work towards
strengthening its monitoring capacity.

Turning now to the implementation of the
protection mandate of UNAMID and, further, to the
incidents outlined in the report, on 17 April
unidentified armed movement forces attacked a place
12-31944
called El Simah near the border of Eastern Darfur and
South Kordofan; Um Dafok, on the border of Eastern
Darfur and the Central African Republic; and Saysaban
in Southern Darfur. While the fighting has since
subsided, the potential for additional clashes remains.
UNAMID has assessed that the incidents are related to
hostilities between South Sudan and the Sudan and, of
course, remains vigilant within its capacity in
monitoring the security situation along the border
between Southern Darfur and South Sudan.

Attempts by UNAMID and humanitarian
agencies to access those areas and other areas affected
by fighting, including Jebel Marra, have been
repeatedly obstructed by Government authorities. At
the most recent tripartite meeting held in Addis Ababa
in February, Government officials committed
themselves to ensuring that UNAMID and
humanitarian agencies had unhindered access
throughout Darfur. In reality, however, UNAMID has
continued to face access restrictions, particularly in
militarily sensitive areas.

In other security incidents, the targeting by armed
groups of South Sudanese in camps in Eastern Darfur
is of concern. On 9, 17 and 18 April, groups of armed
assailants attacked Dinka refugees in three camps near
El Daein, in Eastern Darfur. In response, UNAMID has
increased patrolling in the area and additional
Government police have been deployed to deter such
attacks. This brings me to the subject of the safety and
security of the Mission and humanitarian personnel.

The three fatal attacks on UNAMID peacekeepers
that have occurred since the beginning of the year are
of serious concern. That includes an attack on a
UNAMID convoy in Western Darfur on 20 April that
resulted in the death of a Togolese police officer. I
again express my condolences to the Ambassador of
Togo over that loss. We are also deeply concerned
about the World Food Programme staff member who
was kidnapped in Nyala on 6 March. Of course, I call
on the Government to spare no effort to secure his safe
release. Furthermore, I would strongly urge the
Government of the Sudan to release the two staff
members of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
who have been detained in Eastern Darfur since
24 February.

I will now turn to operational issues and the
review of uniformed personnel. In regard to the police
component, one of the key findings of the review is an
12-31944
increased risk to civilians from violent crimes,
particularly in urban areas and camps for internally
displaced persons (IDP), as opposed to armed conflict.
Further, the review found that formed police unit
operations in outlying areas overlap with military
patrols. It therefore recommends that formed police
unit deployment be reconfigured from outlying to
urban areas and sensitive IDP camps, thereby
increasing their capacity for 24/7 patrolling and
providing the security necessary for individual police
officers to facilitate their community policing work. In
so doing, the overall requirement for formed police
units can be lowered from 19 to 17.

The community policing concept was reviewed in
the light of the trend in some areas towards returns,
criminality in urban areas and IDP camps, and the
potential benefits of co-locating police with military
for security reasons. The review noted that, of the
69 planned community policing centres, 49 are
operational, of which 36 are in temporary facilities or
co-located with team sites. The concept of community
policing will be maintained, but the community
policing centres have not been as effective as was
hoped in facilitating outreach to local populations. That
is due to challenges related to acquiring land for
construction and the requirement for a military or
formed police unit presence to secure individual police
officers.

UNAMID will maintain the 13 community
policing centres already fully constructed, but dispense
with plans to utilize 20 centres not yet constructed. The
others will be moved to team site locations, which in
many cases are close to IDP camps and local
communities. Co-location will alleviate the
requirement for UNAMID troops to provide static
security at community policing centres and team sites,
thus enabling resources to be redirected towards more
proactive protection activities. It will also improve
coordination among military, police and civilian
personnel at the team site level, affording greater
flexibility in assisting IDPs and local communities as
the situation requires.

The impact will be a police component that is
more flexible, more mobile and better able to patrol
where assistance is most needed. The result of these
measures would be a recommended decrease of 663
individual police officers.
3
The review also found that a further reduction of
107 police officers who fulfil functions at mission or
sector headquarters similar to those already undertaken
by civilian personnel, including in the areas of gender,
human rights and child protection, could be made
Without any significant impact on operations.

Turning to the military component, the total
adjustment to the number of currently deployed
military personnel would be 3,260, including 1,600
infantry. The proposed reduction in infantry is due
mainly to improvements in security along the Chad-
Darfur border and in far northern Darfur following
rapprochements between the Sudan and Chad, and
between the Sudan and Libya. The changed security
situation also makes it prudent to redeploy 29 out of a
total of 64 infantry companies from areas where the
security threat has diminished to potential flashpoints
and areas of higher threat. This relates principally to
transferring forces to a relatively populous band that
runs from east to west through the centre of Darfur,
from the border with Chad to the border with
Kordofan.

As deployment is largely complete, the number of
engineering personnel would be reduced by 450 from
the current deployment figure of 981, and the
remaining personnel and assets reconfigured into a
multirole engineering capability that would enhance
the mobility of the force. Moreover, the currently
deployed number of transport and logistics personnel
will be adjusted downward by 525 in the light of plans
to outsource those functions to commercial providers.

With regard to aviation units, a reduction of 200
personnel is recommended in connection with the
proposed redeployment of tactical helicopters. This is
in the light of a decline in the requirement for aerial
fire support due to the reduction in hostilities between
Government and movement forces. Military aviation
support would therefore consist of eight military
medium-utility helicopters to facilitate the changed
needs of the force, conduct aerial surveillance and
enhance the mobility of the reserve units.
In addition, a reduction of 240 reconnaissance
unit personnel is recommended, as the need for them
has diminished now that units are familiar with the area
of operations. Current deployment figures would also
be reduced by 245 signal elements, as units have
deployed with that capacity embedded. The number of
military police would also be reduced commensurately
with the overall reduction in the force.

Additional recommendations for the military
component include elevating the status of the three
sector reserve units to force reserve units to place them
at the direct disposal of the Force Commander, thereby
increasing their mobility and the speed at which they
can respond to incidents. Other measures include
improved military planning and procedures,
coordination and operational control, such as joint
military, police and civil planning at the team site
level, to improve incident responses and conflict
mitigation.

The implementation of the adjustments would be
completed over a period of 18 months, in accordance
with pre-existing rotation schedules. The estimated
cost savings in the 2012/2013 financial year would be
$76.1 million against the mission's budget of
$1.5 billion and approximately $135 million per annum
in subsequent years.

In the months ahead, we will continue to
streamline and strengthen the effectiveness of
UNAMID uniformed personnel. On the political front,
progress has been affected by the internal problems in
the Sudan as a whole and, needless to say, the
hostilities between the Sudan and South Sudan.
Nevertheless, I call on the signatory parties to live up
to their commitment to implement the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur for the sake of the long-suffering
people of Darfur.

