Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I would like to
express my country's appreciation of your personal
leadership, Mr. President, on the topic under discussion
today. We hope that it will be possible to reach
agreement on some of the measures on which there
have been informal consultations. We are disappointed
to note that that has not yet been possible.
Efforts to make the Security Council more inclusive,
transparent and accountable are of essential importance
and need to be discussed with the wider membership.
Progress on this file has been steady, albeit uneven and
certainly slow. The most difficult aspect remains the
inconsistent application of working methods issues that
the Council itself has agreed on over the past years.
We look forward to seeing further improvements on
the implementation of those working methods. In that
respect, it is certainly helpful that the elected members
of the Council work in closer coordination, both inside
the Council and with partners outside of it, such as the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group, of which we are a member.

We very much commend the joint statement
delivered earlier today by our colleague from South
Africa on the issue of the Council's working methods.

The Security Council was not designed as a
democratic organ, given that its permanent members
have the competence to single-handedly block majority
decisions. For that reason, we expect the elected
members to play a dynamic and independent role on
the Council. More precisely, our expectation in electing
them is that they fully and effectively contribute to
the work of the Council; after all, they are directly
accountable to the membership.

For us, subscribing to the code of conduct on mass
atrocities, developed by the ACT group, is a minimum
standard for Council membership and a precondition
for our support in Council elections. However, we also
believe that some of the practice that has evolved in
the recent history of the Council is detrimental to the
active role of elected members. We therefore favour
agreements under which elected members can serve as
penholders on resolutions submitted for the Council's
consideration. We welcome in particular the suggestion
that the delegation chairing the sanctions committee
on a specific country situation should also have a joint
leadership function with the traditional penholder
in drafting resolutions on that situation. More than
anything else, this seems to be an issue of quality
management and common sense. We would also like
to see the chairmanships of subsidiary bodies more
equitably distributed among the Council's membership.
Having permanent members taking on their share
of those tasks is a good way of ensuring a healthier
working relationship in the Council.

We have, for many years, paid particular attention
to the work of the Council on sanctions, rooted in our
commitment to the rule of law and the requirements
of due process. We fully subscribe to the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden and we would
like to thank Mr. James Cockayne from the United
Nations University for his very insightful briefing on
this topic earlier today. The establishment of the Office
of the Ombudsperson 10 years ago was an important and
overdue step, following legal challenges in the courts of
various Member States. The work of the Ombudsperson
has been effective and hardly controversial, contrary
to the expectations of many, yet the Council denies
the Office the appropriate institutional arrangements
and continues to labour over the obvious next step
that is necessary - to extend the mandate of the
Ombudsperson to the remaining sanctions regimes. We
see no good reason for not taking that decision and hope
that the Council will respond expeditiously to the call
of the wider membership in that respect.

We participate actively and regularly in wrap-up
sessions whenever they are organized at the end of a
Council presidency. Those are important opportunities
for us to voice our opinions and ask questions, and they
provide valuable opportunities for the Council to hear
from us, its constituency. We look forward to seeing
further improvements in the format of those meetings
and we welcome the proposals that have been made
in that respect. We hope that those meetings will be
institutionalized to take place at the end of every month.

The format of open debates, such as the one we are
holding right now, is also much talked about. The most
relevant point for us is ensuring open debates that are
organized in such a way that they can help make the
decision-making process more inclusive among Council
members and thereby more legitimate. The easiest way
to do that is by separating the debate from the moment
at which a decision is adopted. That, as we understand
it, is the case today. We thank the Kuwaiti presidency
for leading by example.

In conclusion, the mandate of the Security Council
deals with the core original task of the United Nations.
The effectiveness of the Organization as a whole
therefore depends on the manner in which the Council
carries out its work. Deep political divisions among
the permanent members of the Council, pressure to
reduce funding for necessary peacekeeping operations
and increasing political disengagement are therefore
alarming signals. As Members of the Organization that
are politically invested in multilateralism, we cannot
just sit on the sidelines and occasionally voice our
frustration. We have to claim ownership and, where
possible, step in through action in the General Assembly
when the Council fails in its duties. The creation of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria through the General Assembly illustrates that
that can be done, and done effectively.

The ultimate expression of the Council's inability
to operate is when its decisions are blocked by the veto,
as has happened 15 times in the past five years. We are
therefore of the View that the General Assembly should
be automatically convened every time a veto is cast.
That should be done without prejudice to a possible
outcome of such a discussion. Member States would,
of course, have the option to put forward proposals,
but there is no need for automaticity. We believe
that important value would be added and significant
improvement made in the area of accountability by
holding discussions on vetoed decisions with the
involvement of the entire membership.

