Mr. Hyseni: Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Council for this
opportunity to share our views on the current situation
in the Republic of Kosovo.

It is an honour to speak before the Council today,
less than two weeks after the International Court of
Justice rendered an advisory opinion on Kosovo's
independence. In addition, I will speak about specific
developments in my country during the reporting
period.

I wish once again to extend Kosovo's profound
appreciation to the United Nations and to the Security
Council for the vital role they have played at all stages
of Kosovo's post-war development. The time has come
to replace resolution 1244 (1999) with a new resolution
reflecting the realities created by the independence of
Kosovo and the clear ruling of the International Court
of Justice in its favour. Our request for the replacement
of resolution 1244 (1999) is in line with Kosovo's
ultimate objective of becoming a United Nations
Member. Membership of the United Nations is a goal
we eagerly look forward to achieving as soon as
possible and a natural step after the Court's ruling.

I am very proud of the progress my country and
my Government have made since the declaration of
independence on 17 February 2008. In two and a half
busy years, we have successfully established a
democratic and multi-ethnic State at peace with all its
neighbours and firmly established on its path of
integration into the European Union and NATO. My
country has been formally recognized by 69 nations
around the world, and Kosovo has already entered into
diplomatic and consular relations with over 30
countries. We have signed numerous treaties and
agreements with many countries, and my country was
granted membership in the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank in June 2009.

Our Constitution, which is based on the
recommendations of the Nobel Peace Prize laureate
and former Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
10-47134
Kosovo Martti Ahtisaari, has helped us build up state
institutions in a relatively short period of time. These
are now up and running and fully functional. Being an
excellent example of a modern constitution, it provides
far-reaching protections for ethnic minorities.

Our Government has been working around the
clock to implement both the ideals and the objectives
enshrined in our Constitution and in the Ahtisaari
comprehensive settlement plan. The municipalities of
Kosovo have been afforded a large degree of local
governance under Kosovo's new legal framework.
Both the existing and the newly created Serb-majority
municipalities have been afforded an even larger
degree of local governance. As part of the ongoing
process of decentralization, local municipal elections
have been organized in all Serb-majority
municipalities. I am very pleased to inform the Council
of the heavy turnout at polling stations by members of
the Kosovo Serb community.

The setting up Serb-majority municipality
administrative structures has been successfully
accomplished. The handover of various records to the
decentralized municipalities is well under way.
Members of Kosovo's ethnic minorities, including the
Serb community, regularly participate in the work of
the Parliament, the Government and all the institutions
of the Republic of Kosovo.

We note that the international community has
continued to underscore the illegitimacy of parallel
municipal structures and self-declared municipal
officeholders. I emphasize that we strongly condemn
the actions of the criminal Serb parallel structures in
the North of my country, and the threatening and
intimidation of members of the vast majority of the
Serb community, which is willing to integrate and
work with its Albanian and other neighbours to build a
better future for all of Kosovo.

While the institutions of Kosovo seek to protect
the rights and improve the lives of the members of the
Serb community, the Government of Serbia has been
exploiting and confusing them with calls to reject
integration and cooperation with Kosovo's institutions.
Obviously, Belgrade has been very successful in its
support for the Serb criminal parallel structures in the
North, but Belgrade has failed to offer any assistance
or solution to the problems and concerns of the Serb
community in Kosovo.
Little less than two years ago, upon a request of
the Republic of Serbia, the General Assembly tasked
the International Court of Justice with rendering an
advisory opinion on the independence of Kosovo. At
that time, I said that "it is regrettable that such a
request was made". I said so not because I had any
doubts about the lawfulness and rightfulness of
Kosovo's independence. My concern was that the
Court's proceedings would inevitably have a delaying
impact on many processes related to Kosovo, as well as
to Serbia. Ultimately, it would delay the start of
normalization and reconciliation between our two
countries. The Council will also recall my further
statement on the proceedings of the International Court
of Justice, which I wish to repeat:

"I wish to emphasize our commitment to justice
and our trust in justice, and with that, our trust in
ICJ justice. We are therefore confident that the
ICJ's deliberations and ruling will be fair and
impartial." (S/PV6144, p. 9)

On 22 July, the International Court of Justice
issued its advisory opinion. We welcome the opinion.
The Court found by a large majority that "the
declaration of independence of 17 February 2008 did
not violate international law". The opinion is explicit
and clear and leaves no room for doubt. The
International Court found in Kosovo's favour on all
points. We now look forward to further recognition of
Kosovo. I call upon States that have delayed
recognizing the Republic of Kosovo pending the
opinion of the Court to now move forward to
recognition. Nothing in the opinion issued by the Court
casts any doubt on the statehood of the Republic of
Kosovo, which is an established fact.

It is clear the Kosovo's independence has not set
any precedent. Kosovo is and has always been a special
and sui generic case. Kosovo's independence is in the
interests of the whole of the Western Balkans. The
future of both Kosovo and Serbia lies within the
European Union and NATO. For that, there must be
good-neighbourly relations. That is what we seek. It is
now for Serbia to live up to its responsibilities.

The time has come for Kosovo and Serbia to start
a new chapter of cooperation on a State-to-State basis.
Cooperation between our countries on any issues we
may identify as ones of mutual concern and interest for
our countries is vital to our common European future. I
wish once again to clearly reaffirm the Republic of
Kosovo's willingness to cooperate with the Republic of
Serbia. Cooperation with Serbia, on whatever fronts,
must take place on an equal footing and must be
conducted on a State-to-State basis only.

We have a call to make today. We once again call
on Serbia to let us work and cooperate as neighbouring
countries for the benefit of both our countries. This is
the only path to pursue. Serbia should stop throwing up
more diplomatic roadblocks along that path. This is
what the world is seeking. This is what are common
friends are asking of us. Let us live up to our
responsibilities.

