Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, for this highly significant initiative.
We have often said that arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation need more political attention. In view
of rising arms expenditures worldwide, concerns about
national nuclear programmes and little progress in the
international disarmament forums, we must use every
opportunity to discuss those pressing issues. Today's
event demonstrates that the world's pre-eminent
security forum, the Security Council, gives full
attention to all aspects of disarmament, peace and
development.

Last month, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
outlined five points for progress in the field of arms
control and called for a fresh start not just for
disarmament, but for strengthening our system of
international peace and security. The debate today and
the concept paper presented by Costa Rica
(S/2008/697) are part of such a fresh start.

I would like to raise two issues of importance to
the Austrian Government. The first concerns the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). By
their very nature, nuclear tests are a deliberate threat to
peace and security. Twenty years after the end of the
cold war, the language of threats should no longer be
used today.

The entry into force of the CTBT is long overdue.
As a co-Chair of the Conference on Facilitating the
Entry into Force of the CTBT - an honour we share
with our partner Costa Rica - Austria is actively
working for the early entry force of the CTBT by
sponsoring CTBT conferences and workshops in
different parts of the world. Since 2007 we have
witnessed growing momentum towards the
universalization of the CTBT, as demonstrated by the
recent ratifications by the Bahamas, Barbados,
Colombia, Malaysia and Mozambique, as well as by
the signatures of Iraq and Timor-Leste.

The CTBT Ministerial Meeting of 24 September
2008 in New York demonstrated the widespread
interest in bringing the Treaty into force. I would like
to take this opportunity to call on all States that have
not yet ratified the Treaty to do so as soon as possible.

A second issue of concern to my Government is
conventional arms and, in particular, an arms trade
treaty. Success stories at the intersection of
disarmament, humanitarian law and the rule of law,
such as the Ottawa Convention on Landmines, have
been inspiring examples of the fact that legal arms
control and disarmament not only are an aspiration, but
also can become a reality with the necessary political
will.

A very recent example is the Convention on
Cluster Munitions, which was agreed in May and will
be opened for signature at the Signing Conference in
Oslo on 3 December. As one of the States that have
actively campaigned for the treaty, Austria hopes that
many States will come to Oslo and be part of the
process of banning a weapon that has proved to have
terrible consequences for civilians.

Such success stories give us hope. With more
than 1,000 people dying daily from firearms, regulation
of the trade in conventional weapons, including small
arms and light weapons, should be a matter of the
highest priority for all United Nations Member States.
Irresponsible arms transfers foment violent conflicts,
perpetuate poverty and underdevelopment, and
contribute to violations of human rights and
humanitarian law.

Thirteen years ago, Mr. Oscar Arias Sanchez,
President of Costa Rica, called upon a group of fellow
Nobel Peace laureates to promote an international
campaign for the establishment of an agreement to
control arms transfers, drafting the Nobel Peace
Laureates' International Code of Conduct on Arms
Transfers. From the very beginning, Austria has fully
supported the process towards an arms trade treaty and
hopes that the Open-ended Working Group will
succeed in creating the basis for a robust and legally
binding instrument in 2009.

The multilateral regulation of the nuclear fuel
cycle could be another way to increase confidence and
mutual trust among States, thereby creating an
environment more conducive to arms control and
nuclear disarmament. Austria believes that it is time to
design a framework suited to the nuclear realities of
this century - a framework that places the most
dangerous technologies, enrichment and reprocessing,
under the multilateral control of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Accompanied by fair
and equitable rules of transparency and access, those
States that have opted for nuclear energy could have
access to all the nuclear fuel they need under the
control of the Agency, which would be responsible for
ensuring safety and security. The creation of an IAEA
fuel bank, currently under discussion, could be a first
step in that direction.

In conclusion, Austria wishes in particular to
place on record its full support for multilateralism and
the rule of law, existing international treaties and
conventions, and initiatives for new global security
treaties.

