Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We thank you for having convened this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, at a time when the region is
witnessing unprecedented events. I would also like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing
today on his recent visit to the region.

Today, we meet as the occupation forces and the
Israeli settlers continue their aggression against the
Palestinian people, in particular on the West Bank and
in Gaza, in blatant violation of international law and
agreements and with impunity. A few weeks after the
brutal attack on the Gaza Strip, which left thousands
of people dead or wounded, the majority of whom
were women or children, and caused major damage
to homes and infrastructure, the Secretary-General
visited the Gaza Strip and witnessed the occupation
forces continuing their daily violations of Islam's holy
sites, in particular in Jerusalem. Today, the settlers are
attacking the Al-Aqsa Mosque, preventing believers
from entering it to pray and humiliating them.

Tunisia strongly condemns such practices and
rejects all occupation policies that seek to violate the
Islamic and Christian holy sites on occupied Palestinian
land. The occupying forces continue their settlement
policies despite the international condemnation of such
policies. We all agree that those policies are illegitimate
and a violation of international law.

Mrs. Perceval returned to the Chair.

Such practices, policies and other daily violations
being carried out by the occupying Powers on the West
Bank and in Gaza and Jerusalem, which has been subject
to a blockade for more than eight years, apart from the
humiliation and mistreatment of Palestinian prisoners
and detainees in Israeli prisons, prove undeniably
that Israel persists in imposing the status quo policy,
seeks to buy time so as to change the status quo by
force and obstructs all attempts and initiatives to open
new horizons for peace on the basis of the two-State
solution, the most recent being the mediation efforts
brokered by the United States.

Tunisia would therefore like to reiterate that it is
unacceptable for the current situation to continue. It is
high time for the international community, in particular
the Security Council, to live up to its responsibilities
and put an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
lands and to the illegal practices against the Palestinian
people. It is time to undertake a real change in dealing
with the Palestinian issue within the Security Council,
thereby providing a true opportunity for the achievement
of a peaceful, just and comprehensive solutin on the
basis of the two-State solution and international law
and instruments.

Tunisia would like to reiterate its full support for
the self-determination of the Palestinian people and for
an independent, sovereign, viable and geographically
contiguous State on territory occupied since 1967. That
means a united political entity that encompasses the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem and the Gaza
Strip.

In the same context, we express our support for the
demands of the Palestinian leadership with regard to
the adoption of a time frame for putting an end to the
Israeli occupation, for the declaration of an independent
Palestinian State within the borders that I have just
mentioned and for reaching a comprehensive solution to
all final status issues, including that of East Jeruslaem.
We also call for the protection of Palestinian civilians
in the civilian Palestinian territories to be ensured in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
international law, international humanitarian law, the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and international human
rights law.

Tunisia also reiterates its support for the independent
commission of inquiry established by the Human Rights
Council to investigate the aggression against Gaza.
We look forward to seeing the commission complete
its investigation into the crimes and aggression
perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinian people.
Tunisia calls for the blockade on the Gaza Strip to be
lifted and for all border crossings to be opened for the
free access and movement of people and goods, as well
as humanitarian assistance for the citizens of the Gaza
Strip, in particular following the most recent attacks.

Tunisia welcomes the outcome of the Cairo
Conference on the reconstruction of Gaza. We urge that
all parties to live up to the commitments that they made
at that conference.

Tunisia underscores that a lasting and a just peace
in the Middle East can be achieved only through
the total withdrawal of Israel from all the Arab and
Palestinian occupied territories, including the occupied
Syrian Golan. We express our deep concern about
the deterioration of the situation in Syria and its dire
consequences on both Syria's future and that of the
whole region. We hope that the efforts of the United
Nations Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura will allow us
to reach a political settlement that meets the aspirations
of the Syrian people for freedom and democracy and
safeguards its sovereignty, territorial integrity and
social unity.

