Mr. Laher (South Africa): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis
for introducing the quarterly report (S/2012/907) of
the Secretary-General to the Council. We also thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement on the
situation in his country.

South Africa welcomes the continued progress
registered by the Government of Afghanistan despite
the very difficult and challenging security environment
within which it operates. At the political level, the
upcoming presidential and provincial elections in 2014
and 2015 will be a key step in the further consolidation
of Afghanistan's nascent democracy. In that regard,
my delegation welcomes the publication on 31 October
by the Independent Election Commission of a
comprehensive timeline for the elections, as well as the
draft concept of operations with an indicative budget.

Given the divisive nature of elections in any society,
particularly in post-conflict societies, we encourage the
Government to complete the remaining elements of the
electoral architecture, including the publication of the
outstanding two electoral laws, and to continue dialogue
and public debates to ensure the enhanced transparency,
inclusiveness and sustainability of the elections. South
Africa is pleased by the positive response of the United
Nations to the request for support by the Independent
Election Commission.

Long-term stability and security in Afghanistan can
be sustained only through a process of reconciliation
and nation-building. South Africa is therefore
encouraged by the ongoing work of the High Peace
Council, including the holding of its International Peace
Conference in Kabul on 22 September. My delegation
furthermore welcomes the visit of the High Peace
Council to Islamabad from 12 to 14 November, which
led to the release of a number of Taliban detainees and
the adoption of a joint statement that should further
enhance reconciliation and dialogue. In that regard,
we are pleased with the support provided by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to the High Peace Council and with its efforts to initiate
a track-two dialogue process.

The visit to Washington, DC, and New York of
Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Chair of the Council, is
an important element in communicating the work
and importance of the Council to the international
community. Key in that regard is the fact that the
international community and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) should continue those engagements with a view
to responding positively to the work ofthe Council in its
reconciliation efforts. South Africa reiterates its view
that sanctions should be a flexible tool in the hands
of the Security Council, which should adapt to the
dynamic political situation on the ground. We therefore
welcome the adoption of resolution 2082 (2012) as an
important contribution to the peace process.

Turning to the security situation, while we welcome
the decline in security incidents during the reporting
period compared to the previous year, my delegation
remains concerned about the impact of those incidents
on the civilian population of Afghanistan and about the
continued insecurity that confronts those communities
on a daily basis. With the Government now exercising
control for security in an area in which 75 per cent of
the population resides, it remains critical that Afghan
police and security forces should be well trained and
well equipped to protect local populations. In that
regard, we welcome UNAMA's role in facilitating
and coordinating resources from the international
community to assist Afghan authorities in strengthening
the capacity of female police officers. South Africa
welcomes the increased role of Afghan security
institutions in performing training and oversight roles
previously conducted by the international forces. That
is an important development for sustaining Afghan
ownership and leadership over its security forces.

Political stability and security inside Afghanistan
will depend, by and large, on regional stability. We
are therefore pleased at the ongoing engagement
of the Government with regional States to address
issues of mutual interest, including security and
development. The recent high-level meetings with
Pakistan, Kazakhstan, Turkey and China, as well as the
international conference held in Lithuania on the theme
"Afghanistan and the region: practical approaches for
sustainable development", are encouraging.

Since the Government of Afghanistan relies
on international support to address that country's
economic and development challenges, we welcome the
increase in development assistance. The withdrawal of
the international military presence will, however, have
an impact on the economic and employment situation.
In that regard, my delegation is encouraged by the
ongoing efforts to operationalize the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. It remains important
that Afghan and international stakeholders should
build on that momentum to ensure that commitments
and visions translate into meaningful progress and
improvement in the lives of ordinary citizens, who have
been traumatized by the conflict.

South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
impact of the conflict in Afghanistan on the civilian
population. We are particularly disturbed by the 28 per
cent increase in civilian casualties registered during the
reporting period, compared to the same period last year.
We strongly condemn the targeting of civilians by the
insurgents as a means of intimidation and coercion, as
well as the use of pressure-plate improvised explosive
devices.

The fact that 355 children were killed or injured
during the reporting period is appalling. Most recently
a further 10 young girls were killed in a landmine
explosion while collecting firewood in the province of
Nangarhar, in eastern Afghanistan. There can be no
excuse for such diabolical acts. This is an intolerable
situation, which must be condemned. Equally, the
targeting of schools and health facilities are serious
humanitarian law violations for which perpetrators
must be held accountable.

We further wish to underline that all armed elements
operating in Afghanistan have the responsibility to
ensure that unarmed civilians are protected, and failure
by both State and non-State actors to uphold this
responsibility should not go unpunished. In that regard,
we are concerned about reports that International
Security Assistance Force air attacks continue to result
in civilian causalities, including the killing of children,
as witnessed in October in Helmand province.

In conclusion, national ownership coupled with
international support remains crucial to achieving
political, security and socioeconomic progress in
Afghanistan. For its part, the international community
should continue its supportive role in the country's
move from conflict to stability and prosperity. South
Africa stresses that, given the magnitude of these
challenges, a comprehensive strategy incorporating
security, humanitarian efforts, good governance and
socioeconomic development is required. In that regard,
we wish to underscore the central role of UNAMA
in supporting the Government of Afghanistan and
coordinating international assistance to the country.
The continued role played by bilateral and multilateral
partners remains indispensable.

