Mr. Lowcock: Since the adoption ofresolution 2401
(2018), the Secretary-General has on many occasions
called for its full implementation. However, rather than
implement the resolution of the Council, we have seen
parties to the conflict sustain intense military activity
at an enormous human cost. Today, we have been asked
to provide an update on the humanitarian situation in
Raqqa and Rukban. We have also been asked to cover
humanitarian issues in Syria at large, in particular in
Ghouta, Idlib and Afrin.

Let me start with Raqqa city and Rukban. The
population of those two places total only about 1 per
cent of the number of Syrians in need of humanitarian
help, but their needs are no less important than those of
the 99 per cent of their compatriots needing assistance
in other parts of the country.

On 1 April, the United Nations undertook an
assessment mission to Raqqa. Since the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant was forced out of Raqqa in October,
nearly 100,000 people have returned to Raqqa city.
However, conditions are not conducive to returns, due to
the high levels of unexploded ordnance and improvised
explosive device contamination, widespread and severe
infrastructural damage, and a lack of basic services.
More than 50 casualties of remnants of war have been
reported every week. With the onset of spring, we
are concerned that Children playing outside will be
particularly vulnerable. An estimated 70 to 80 per cent
of all buildings inside Raqqa city have been destroyed
or damaged.

While public services are slowly resuming - with
at least 37 bakeries operating, for example - the city
lacks electricity and mobile communications, and water
is being pumped at only a very limited capacity to the
outskirts ofthe city. As many as 95 per cent ofhouseholds
that have returned to Raqqa are food insecure. Health
services are lacking or severely limited. Some schools
have reopened, although they are lacking school
materials and other supplies. Following the 1 April
assessment, United Nations agencies are planning
deliveries of humanitarian assistance and programmatic
interventions. This response will support the ongoing
activities of the humanitarian organizations already
active inside Raqqa that are providing food, health care
and other basic services. It will also complement the
ongoing response for those displaced and in need across
north-eastern Syria, where nearly 900,000 people are
receiving assistance each month.

In Rukban, some 50,000 people continue to be in
need of sustained humanitarian assistance. Water and
basic health care are being provided from Jordan, but
there is a pressing need for better service provision
and, in some cases, for referrals elsewhere for medical
help. People in that area last received assistance,
delivered from Jordan, in early January. Approval for a
United Nations inter-agency convoy from Damascus to
Rukban was received from the Government of Syria on
18 March. Humanitarian agencies are working closely
with the United States, the Russian Federation and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent to make this delivery possible,
noting the importance of finalizing arrangements for
the safety of the operation, since the current security
guarantees permit movement only to an area some 10
kilometres outside Rukban. Discussions continue on
how aid can be best delivered, providing safe delivery
oflife-saving help to those in need.

The town of Douma and other areas in eastern
Ghouta are now under the control of the Government of
Syria. After years of deprivation under siege, those who
remain in the area still require urgent assistance that
we, as the humanitarian community, have yet to be able
to provide. Access to reach people throughout eastern
Ghouta is critical. The United Nations and partners
are responding to the mounting humanitarian needs
of the 155,000 people displaced from eastern Ghouta
with food, shelter, health care and other assistance and
protection services.
However, for those in the overcrowded sites for
internally displaced persons around eastern Ghouta,
as well as for those who left on buses for Idlib and
Aleppo governorates, the situation is precarious. Of the
155,000 who have been displaced, about 63,000 have
moved north to Idlib and Aleppo, joining the nearly
400,000 people who have been displaced from southern
Idlib since 15 December. As a result, there has been
a 25 per cent increase in Idlib's displaced population,
with 1.2 million of the governorate's 2 million people
now displaced, many of them multiple times. This
extreme situation puts incredible pressure on the host
communities and the humanitarian actors working
cross-border to provide assistance and services.
Fighting among non-State armed opposition groups in
Idlib is further complicating the situation for those in
need in the area. Those remaining in Afrin, as well as
the 137,000 people who were displaced to Government-
controlled Tell Rifaat and the surrounding areas, are also
in dire need of humanitarian aid and must be granted
freedom of movement. This includes those who need
medical evacuation from Tell Rifaat to nearby Aleppo.

Between 2 and 4 April, several Turkish-facilitated
United Nations cross-border shipments consisting of
food supplies, health and other relief items were sent
to assist people in need in Afrin district. On 25 March,
the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
delivered assistance to 50,000 people in need in Tell
Rifaat. Overall, while these are positive developments,
humanitarian partners are still struggling to gain
sustained access to Afrin, and freedom of movement
for internally displaced persons remains very limited.
On 25 March the United Nations also submitted a
request to the Syrian authorities for the deployment
of an inter-agency surge team to scale up the United
Nations operational capacity in Syria. Response to a
request for an additional 17 United Nations staff to
be deployed for a four-week period was received on
11 April, authorizing the deployment of 12 United
Nations staff.

As we approach the conference to be held in Brussels
on 24 and 25 April, we have an immediate opportunity
to make progress on easing the humanitarian suffering
by ensuring that the humanitarian operations are fully
funded. With an appeal that is currently less than
15 per cent funded, I cannot overstate the importance
of sustaining and scaling up the international response.

