The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Germany and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif (Iran)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. von Ungern-
Sternberg (Germany) took the seat reserved for
him at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/589, which contains a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to two letters from the representative of
France contained in documents S/2006/521 and
S/2006/573.

I should like also to draw the attention of Council
members to the reports of the Director-General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency dated 27 February
and 28 April 2006, contained in documents S/2006/150
and S/2006/270, respectively.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Russian Federation,
Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America

Against:
Qatar


The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows: 14 votes in favour and one
against. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 1696 (2006).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


