Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): I would like
to express my appreciation to the Bolivian presidency and
chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for convening this open debate
on global efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) by non-State actors. I also
thank the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs
and the Senior Officer from the Office of Strategy
and Policy of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons for their informative briefings.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

The extraordinary and rapid advances in science and
technology create enormous benefits for humankind,
but they also bring about the risk of misuse, enabling
non-State actors to take advantage of such advances to

gain access to WMDs and making it harder for States
to put in place adequate controls over proliferation
activities. The risk of non-State actors acquiring,
developing and using WMDs and their means ofdelivery
poses a grave threat to global peace and security and is
even more alarming in cases when terrorists and their
supporters have shown their intent and capability to
develop and use WMDs. Toxic chemicals have been
reportedly used as weapons in Syria and Iraq by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, causing serious
casualties and devastating socioeconomic consequences
for civilians and their livelihoods.

The United Nations has been playing an active role
in tackling the threat of the proliferation of WMDs by
non-State actors. It has promoted multilateral diplomacy
in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation,
raised public awareness and assisted Member States
in building and strengthening their capacities to
prevent non-State actors from acquiring and using such
lethal weapons. In that regard, my delegation wishes
to commend the 1540 Committee for its findings
and conclusions in the comprehensive review report
(see S/2016/1038), as well as the Security Council for
adopting resolution 2325 (2016), which has mapped out
a global agenda for the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). We acknowledge the positive contributions
made by Member States to the success of the open-
ended working group during the special sessions
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament.
We also welcome the increased cooperation and
coordination at the national, regional and international
levels in global non-proliferation activities involving
the United Nations and other stakeholders, including
non-governmental organizations and the private sector,
with, as appropriate, their States' consent.

Viet Nam is strongly committed to WMD disarmament
and non-proliferation efforts and actively advocates
for the peaceful use of related technologies. Viet Nam
is a party to, and complies fully with, its obligations
under all key WMD disarmament and non-proliferation
treaties, including the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty, the Biological Weapons Convention, the
Chemical Weapons Convention, as well as the Safeguards
Agreement of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and its Additional Protocol. Viet Nam fully
implements the relevant Security Council resolutions
and actively participates in related initiatives, such as
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and
the Proliferation Security Initiative. At the national
level, we have adopted and enforced appropriate
legislation and have established domestic controls to
impede non-State actors from undertaking, assisting or
financing such proliferation activities.

Viet Nam believes that addressing WMD proliferation
must be coupled with substantive progress on WMD
disarmament. We welcome the ongoing United
Nations conference to negotiate a legally binding
instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading
to their total elimination. We also believe that our
efforts towards the establishment and promotion of
nuclear-weapons-free zones also contribute to the
existing global non-proliferation regime. At the same
time, non-proliferation efforts should not hinder the
legitimate rights of States to acquire, produce and use
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear-related
materials, equipment and technology for peaceful
purposes. It is also important to avoid placing an undue
burden on States with regard to such efforts. Rather,
States, especially developing countries, should develop
their own effective strategies for countering new types
of crime.

In conclusion, I want to say that we believe that it
is high time for us to redouble our efforts, along with
united political will and strong determination, to take
collective action against the grave security challenge
posed by WMD proliferation. In order to fully implement
the global non-proliferation agenda, we need the active
participation and large-scale cooperation both within
and among States.

You can rest assured, Mr. President, of Viet Nam's
commitment to striving for a world free of all weapons
of mass destruction.

