Ms. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let me
first thank Kazakhstan for a very successful presidency.

January 2018 has been our first month on the
Security Council, as part of our split term with Italy.
I welcome this opportunity to reflect on what we, as
a Council, have accomplished and also where we have
made too little progress, or none at all.

Let me consider three issues in this regard:
concerning Afghanistan, the prevention of conflict by
addressing root causes; peacekeeping operations that
are fit for purpose; and accountability and justice.

On the issue of Afghanistan and prevention,
Afghanistan and the Central Asian region have been at
the heart of your programme, Mr. President, and the
need for the Council's continued support ofAfghanistan
is evident. Just this past week, the Council issued three
statements on the terrorist attacks there (SC/13172, SC/13180 and SC/13185). More than 100 people, mostly
civilians, lost their lives. Those heinous attacks only
strengthen our resolve to stand with the Afghan people.

Only an inclusive peace and reconciliation
process - one that is Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned - can guarantee true stability in Afghanistan,
and it is paramount that all countries in the region
take up their responsibility by actively contributing to
that goal.

In this context, the high-level debate held on January
19 (see S/PV.8162) provided a valuable opportunity
for discussion, as did the valuable visit of the Council
to Afghanistan. Members of the Council emphasized
the need for inclusive regional development as an
important factor in preventing conflict and sustaining
peace in Afghanistan.

Conflict prevention and attention to root causes
were also addressed in the work of the Council. The
presidential statement on the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel that the Council adopted just
yesterday (S/PRST/2018/3) refers to the role of women
in prevention and recognizes the adverse effects of
climate change and drought on the stability of West
Africa and the Sahel.

On peacekeeping, last December 15 United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) peacekeepers
were killed in North Kivu. Last Saturday, another
peacekeeper was killed in South Kivu province.
Violence against United Nations peacekeepers is
unacceptable and needs to stop. The people who
are supposed to protect others are being themselves
mercilessly targeted and killed. On 22 January,
Lieutenant-General Cruz published a report that had
been requested by the Secretary-General. In the report,
Mr. Cruz presents clear recommendations on how to
change the way in which the United Nations operates
in high-risk peacekeeping operations. Previous reports
have included similar recommendations. Missions must
be better prepared and more proactive in implementing
their mandate and protecting civilians. MONUSCO is
one of the missions that operates in an environment
where there is barely any peace to keep and where the
notion of the primacy of a viable political process is
almost absent.

In our discussions this month on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, we
addressed similar serious challenges. The credibility of
the Council depends partly on our ability to design and
guide effective peacekeeping operations. That is why
the Kingdom of the Netherlands is planning to organize
an open debate on peacekeeping in March.

On accountability and justice, this month we heard
reports of the renewed use of chemical weapons in
Syria resulting in the killing of more than 20 civilians
in eastern Ghouta. In addition, the indiscriminate
bombardment of civilian-populated areas in Syria
continues, as does the starvation of civilians as a method
of warfare, through the blocking of desperately needed
humanitarian aid, including food aid. What has become
of the hard-won gains in international humanitarian
law in the last century? The lack of compliance with the
Geneva Conventions by parties to the Syrian conflict
erode not only the very norms enshrined in these
Conventions, but also the rules-based international
order. We cannot let that happen.

In 2015, the Council took decisive and credible
action to uphold accountability when it established
the United Nations Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (see S/PV.7501). It had a strong mandate
to investigate and identify perpetrators independently
from the politics in the Council. It established the
use of chemical weapons in Syria by both the Syrian
authorities and Da'esh. We have now considered a draft
resolution to establish a new mechanism, as presented
by the Russian Federation last week. The fundamental
characteristics of any accountability mechanism are the
principles of impartiality and independence. They were
still missing in the proposal that was presented. A new
mechanism should at least have the mandate to conduct
research and identify perpetrators independently of
the Council. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is ready
to continue to work for justice and accountability for
Syria and elsewhere in the world. In that regard, we
welcomed the General Assembly's establishment of an
accountability mechanism for the most serious crimes
committed in Syria, the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 (General Assembly resolution 71/248). Ultimately, the most
appropriate path to accountability and justice would be
a referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court.

In conclusion, we thank the Kazakh presidency
for its conduct of the Council's business during the
month of January and appreciate its efforts to agree
on press elements after most consultations as well
as to encourage Council members to speak in the
Chamber where possible. I would also like to take this
opportunity to wish the delegation of Kuwait all the
best for its presidency in February. We look forward to
working with them.

