Mr. Spatafora (Italy): Allow me to join others in
thanking Special Envoy Jan Eliasson and Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for their very
lucid, focused and clear briefings and, more generally,
for the truly outstanding job that they are doing. It is a
great pleasure to see Mr. Eliasson here and to observe
how, in addressing the situation in the Sudan and
Darfur, he is infused with both passion and
compassion, which is the right chemistry in life,
politics and international affairs.

Because of the restraints on our time, I shall not
repeat what other speakers before me have said,
particularly the Ambassadors of France and the United
Kingdom. But I should just like to say that Italy fully
shares and strongly supports their assessments and
their indications as to the way forward. I think that all
members of the Security Council share the objective of
strengthening the Secretary-General's hand and thus
strengthening his representative's hand. I believe it is
very important that he be aware - as, I am sure, the
people of the Sudan are aware - that all of us support
him in what he is saying and doing, in the messages
that he is sending and in the requests for action that he
is making. I believe that that is what is important.

I was really struck by what Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno said. Usually he is very cool and
understated, but this time he was very, very clear, and
the message was very worrying. If six months ago we
had heard what Under-Secretary-General Guehenno
just said, we would have been worried; but to listen to
what we have just heard only one month from the
transfer of authority, when UNAMID must be
deployed, is quite alarming and puts us into emergency
mode. To hear about alternative options - fallbacks -
one month out from the transfer is really very
alarming. I hope, as has been stated by others, that this
fallback position, is not needed.

The situation of the people of the Sudan - the
suffering of those on the ground - is not the only
thing that is at stake; as Ambassador Ripert said, it is
also the credibility of the United Nations and the
Security Council. That is what is at stake, and we are
perceived by the media around the world to lack the
capacity to address the situation. That is the issue.
I was very pleased to hear Ambassador Mohamad
emphasize the full commitment of the Government of
the Sudan to the political process. That is of
fundamental importance, in my opinion. He also
mentioned unlimited support to the United Nations, the
United Nations Special Envoy and, of course, the
African Union Special Envoy. I feel that this is very
positive.

It is striking that, looking at other issues, what
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno has told us and
what Ambassador Mohamad has told us are really
diametrically irreconcilable: one says the opposite of
what the other says.

We have only one month. If the time limit is to be
respected, all of the differences must be ironed out in
the next 10 days. Otherwise, implementation will be
impossible, even with a gradual approach in the field.
Maybe it is not our job in the Security Council, as
Ambassador Mohamad said, to address the technical
details of all the arrangements. But it certainly is
appropriate for the Security Council to have clarity
about what is going on as we listen to a Permanent
Representative who says the opposite of what the
Under-Secretary-General has said. I think we need
clarity here, and we need to see how to iron out the
details.

As we are really pressed for time, as the
incoming presidency of the Security Council - and if
my colleagues in the Council agree - I feel that it is
urgent for the participants to start next week to work
on the basis of a tripartite mechanism. It would then be
very appropriate during the first week or first half of
next month to have a special meeting to see how the
differences have been ironed out. As has been said, we
cannot afford to lose more time. I am ready and willing
to adapt the programme of work of the Council in order
to have clarity on this point and on this issue, where
our credibility is at stake.

