Mr. Brahimi: I am deeply grateful to the
Secretary-General for the opportunity to work again on
Afghanistan. The challenge, as all members are aware,
is enormous, but I will do my utmost to support the
Secretary-General's efforts to implement the decisions
made by the States Members of the United Nations in
general and by the members of this body in particular.

The ll September terrorist attacks on the United
States of America reminded the world of the reality
that a collapsed and destitute State provides fertile
ground for armed groups and individuals to plan and
prepare unspeakable acts of terror at home and abroad.
The united international reaction to those attacks has,
as a result, transformed the conditions for international
action in Afghanistan.

Before embarking on my mission to the region on
26 October, I had the opportunity to listen to the views
of the members of the Security Council on two
occasions. While in Pakistan and Iran, I spoke with a
wide range of Afghan groups and individuals,
including women and students, as well as people still
living inside Afghanistan. These conversations
reconfirmed the urgency of finding a viable and
durable solution to the crisis. Afghans representing
diverse walks of life and shades of opinion repeatedly
emphasized a common theme. They categorically
condemned the terrorist attacks on the United States
and the fact that Afghan territory has been used as a
staging ground for terrorist activity. At the same time,
they understandably expressed deep concern about the
impact of the military operations on ordinary Afghan
men, women and children.

They are united in the belief that only a legitimate
Afghan Government, representing the aspirations and
interests of all the people of Afghanistan, can muster
sufficient resolve and legitimacy to free Afghanistan
from the grip of international terrorist groups.
Realizing the challenge involved in the establishment
of such a legitimate authority, all the Afghans whom
we met welcomed the current global focus on
Afghanistan and hoped that the international
community would remain engaged in finding a lasting
solution to their crisis.

Iran and Pakistan have a special role in
Afghanistan. Geography, history, language and religion
make for deep connections between each of those two
countries and Afghanistan. They also have legitimate
interests in the emergence of a stable Afghanistan and,
up until now, they have had ties with particular
movements in the country. The Governments of Iran and
Pakistan expressed a clear commitment to finding a
political solution that would preserve the unity and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan and enable Afghans
to choose a broad-based Government that would enjoy
domestic and international legitimacy. The Presidents
of the two countries, General Pervez Musharraf and
Mr. Mohammad Khatami, assured me in no uncertain
terms that, because the see the establishment of a stable
and representative Government accountable to all
Afghans to be in their own national interests, they
would like the United Nations to play a pivotal role in
the process of finding a political solution. The two
Presidents maintained that it was not a good idea for
any outsiders to impose a solution on the people of
Afghanistan and they shared the view that the
international community should help the Afghans to
find that political solution on their own because only
such a home-grown solution would be credible,
legitimate and sustainable.

On terrorism, both Presidents emphasized the
need to find political solutions that would prevent
Afghanistan from being used again as a breeding and
staging ground for acts of terror. They expressed regret
that Afghanistan had been used far too often by people
who have no interest in the well-being of the Afghan
nation.

Yesterday, the Secretary-General chaired a
meeting of the "six plus two" group at the level of
Foreign Minister. The meeting confirmed agreement
that there should be established in Afghanistan a broad-
based, multi-ethnic, politically balanced, freely chosen
Afghan administration representative of Afghan
aspirations and at peace with its neighbours. Given the
rapidly changing conditions on the ground, the group
stressed the need for speed.

Consensus between Afghanistan's neighbours is
essential. Without it, Afghans themselves will find it
extremely difficult to achieve a durable solution free
from undue interference in their own affairs. Of course,
Afghanistan's neighbours alone cannot help the
Afghans to achieve national reconciliation and to
rebuild their country. Here, the international
community at large will need to make a massive
commitment, politically and financially, to the long-
term stability of Afghanistan. It is therefore necessary
to strengthen other mechanisms for multilateral
cooperation and coordination in Afghanistan. At this
juncture, serious consideration should be given to ways
to better utilize a rich pool of skilled Afghans in the
planning and implementation of rehabilitation and
reconstruction projects.

With respect to Afghanistan, the United Nations
has, over the years, convened several groups of
interested countries in addition to the "six plus two"
group, such as the Group of 21, which is comprised of
a broader group of interested countries that also have
either influence or interests, or both, or that have been
directly or indirectly affected by the Afghan crisis and
could, either directly or indirectly, help contribute to
the resolution of Afghanistan's problems. I share the
View of those of its members that believe that the
Group of 21 should be reactivated and reinvigorated,
and we have suggested that it reconvene on Friday.

The United Nations also participates in the
Afghanistan Support Group convened by donor
countries, the Geneva Initiative in support of peace
efforts seeking to legitimize a transition through a Loya
Jirgah, and other initiatives. It is essential that all these
groups and any other groups that Member States may
wish to form on their own develop a common
constructive position with regard to Afghanistan's
political future. The Security Council will naturally be
at the forefront of forging this international consensus
and resolve, not only through the resolutions it adopts,
but, even more importantly, by the actions its members
will take.

Things are changing fast on the ground, as we
have seen over the past few days, especially last night
and this morning, with the Northern Alliance
expanding its control over territory and entering Kabul.
The Secretary-General has this morning asked me to
relay his instruction to Francesc Vendrell, Deputy
Special Representative for Afghanistan, to go to Kabul
immediately security conditions permit, and I have
done so. The Secretary-General has also asked that
assessments by made as soon as possible to allow the
return of our international staff to Afghanistan as soon
as possible. Such an assessment was done earlier for
Faizabad and United Nations personnel are expected
back there in a day or two.

For the longer term, however, the fundamentals
will not change and the strategic objective of our
common efforts will remain the same. It consists of the
need to help the people of Afghanistan establish a
responsible, representative, accountable and stable
Government which enjoys internal and external
legitimacy; is committed to respecting and promoting
the rights of all its men, women and children; enjoys
peaceful and friendly relations with all its neighbours;
and is able to ensure that Afghanistan will never again
be used as a breeding and staging ground for terrorists
or drug-traffickers.

There is agreement among Afghan parties, as well
as at the level of the international community, on the
goal of creating a broad-based Government that would
be representative of all groups in the country,
accountable to its citizens and friendly to its
neighbours, and would enjoy internal and external
legitimacy. The difficulty is in securing agreement
among interested parties to design a series of concrete
steps to reach that goal. The bitter experience of the
last 10 years shows that the solution must be carefully
put together and home-grown so that it enjoys the
support of all internal and external players and so that
no spoilers from either inside or outside will disrupt its
implementation.

Afghans themselves have been talking widely
about how to achieve these objectives. The discussions
in Rome between the former King of Afghanistan and
the representatives of the United Islamic and National
Front for the Salvation of Afghanistan, commonly
known as the Northern Alliance, have raised these
discussions to a new level. Discussions are also taking
place in many other forums both inside and outside
Afghanistan, including within the Cyprus process and
the Peshawar Convention. In these forums, Afghans
have been proposing a series of steps and mechanisms
to establish a transitional administration that would
pave the way for a stable Government.

It is time to bring these existing initiatives into a
common framework and to broaden the process in a
manner that would pave the way for a stable
Government. A common theme of these proposals has
been the emphasis on the convening role of the United
Nations in order to bring the parties together. The
United Nations has been trying to help build a national
consensus for many years, but as was agreed yesterday
at the ministerial meeting of the "six plus two" group,
time is now of the essence. It is essential and urgent
that the efforts of the various Afghan groups be
brought together into a single process.

Consequently, the Secretary-General thinks that
instead of continuing with shuttle diplomacy, going
from one group to another in the various capitals, the
need for nimbleness in finding a political solution now
requires that the Northern Alliance and the
representatives of the existing initiatives meet with the
United Nations as early as humanly possible so that a
common framework can be created and enlarged to
allow for fair representation for all Afghan
communities. This suggestion, made yesterday by the
Secretary-General, was favourably received by the "six
plus two" Ministers. I hope that those members of the
Council who are in a position to do so will encourage
the leaders of the Northern Alliance, the Rome and
Cyprus processes and the Peshawar Convention to meet
with us at a convenient venue as soon as possible.

Based on the ideas discussed widely by Afghans
themselves within these various processes and other
forums, the approach might follow this sequence:

First, the United Nations would convene a
meeting, at a venue to be determined, of
representatives of the Northern Alliance and existing
processes - later complemented by representatives of
other groups to ensure fair representation for all parts
of Afghan society - to agree on a framework for the
process of political transition.

Secondly, the meeting would suggest concrete
steps for the convening of a provisional council, which
would be composed of a fairly large and representative
group of Afghans drawn from all ethnic and regional
communities. The provisional council would be chaired
by an individual recognized as a symbol of national
unity, around whom all ethnic, religious and regional
groups could rally, and could include several deputy
chairmen who would conduct its day-to-day
proceedings. The credibility and legitimacy of the
provisional council would be enhanced if particular
attention were to be given to the participation of
individuals and groups, including women, who have
not been engaged in armed conflict.

Thirdly, the provisional council would propose
the composition of a transitional administration and a
programme of action for the period of political
transition, to last no more than two years, as well as
arrangements for security.

Fourthly, an emergency Loya Jirgah would then
be convened to approve the transitional administration,
its programme of action and its proposals for security,
as well as to authorize the transitional administration to
prepare a constitution.

Fifthly, the transitional phase would result in the
convening of a second Loya Jirgah, which would
approve the constitution and create the Government of
Afghanistan.

The challenge in Afghanistan will be the creation
of good Government. That in turn will depend on the
formulation of clear and fair rules of the game, and
adherence to those rules by all. For the Government to
be sustainable, Afghans themselves must be engaged in
the creation of institutions and good governance.
Working with United Nations agencies and
international and local non-governmental organizations
has given many Afghans wide experience in managing
accountable organizations. There is also significant
capacity among a new generation of Afghans in the
diaspora, particularly in Iran and Pakistan. It is these
Afghans who can help constitute a transitional
administration which would be far more credible,
acceptable and legitimate in the eyes of the country's
population than a transitional administration run by the
United Nations or another constellation of foreigners.
Parachuting a large number of international experts
into Afghanistan could overwhelm the nascent
transitional administration and interfere with the
building of local capacity.

However, without genuine and lasting security,
nothing will be possible, let alone the establishment of
a new Government. Even in a political settlement
among Afghans, parties cannot ensure security on their
own. The pervasive presence of non-Afghan armed and
terrorist groups with no interest in a lasting peace will
necessitate the introduction of a robust security force,
able to deter and, if possible, defeat challenges to its
authority. There are three options for such a force,
presented here in the order of desirability: first, an all-
Afghan security force; secondly, a multinational force;
and thirdly, a United Nations peacekeeping force. The
preferred option is an all-Afghan force, provided it can
be fielded in a speedy, robust and credible manner.

Work to establish such an all-Afghan force should
start as early as possible. However, it is unlikely that it
can be constituted in the near term, which suggests that
serious consideration will need to be given to the
deployment of a national security presence. Provided
that it includes adequately trained and armed units
ready to defend themselves and their mandate, such a
presence could ensure security in the major city and
preserve the political space in which negotiations
towards the resolution of the many problems ahead
could proceed.

An armed United Nations peacekeeping force is
not recommended. The Secretary-General would
require several months to obtain from Member States
sufficient numbers of troops to pose a credible military
deterrent and, subsequently, to deploy them.
Furthermore, United Nations peacekeepers have proved
most successful when deployed to implement an
existing political settlement among willing parties, not
to serve as a substitute for one. Any security force
established in the absence of a credible ceasefire
agreement or political settlement, whether constituted
by Afghans, international personnel or both, could
quickly find itself in the role of combatant. That is not
a role for Blue Helmets.

The need for such security arrangements is even
more urgent for Kabul. The control of the capital of the
country has immense symbolic value. In the wake of
the collapse of the Soviet-backed regime in 1992, the
Islamic resistance groups could not reach agreement
about the nature of political authority, and engaged in a
devastating and long-drawn-out civil war which
destroyed the city. Many Afghans have expressed
determination to avoid another round of such fighting,
and hence are calling for Kabul to be demilitarized and
not to be controlled by a single party. Without a
credible security arrangement, however, no political
settlement can be implemented.

Let me say something, too, about the all-
important humanitarian action, and expand on what the
Secretary-General has already said. It must be
recognized that, whatever the political and security
scenario, a grave humanitarian crisis looms and the
suffering of the civilian population is of an immense
magnitude. We have already informed the Council
about the 6 million people at risk and about our
anticipated difficulties in providing food, clothing,
clean water, non-food items and shelter against the
winter, which has already arrived in many parts of
Afghanistan.

Our challenge is clear: we must ship to the
country, and distribute, at least 52,000 tonnes of food
per month over the next few months. We must provide
or support health care for 7.5 million people and shelter
for over 1 million internally displaced persons
throughout the country, and attempt to provide
assistance and protection for those at risk from conflict
or persecution, including those who become refugees.
We must advocate adherence to international
humanitarian and human rights law by all parties.
Bearing all of that in mind, the United Nations is
engaged in an extremely detailed operational
coordination exercise to identify and concentrate on the
most vulnerable populations.
During the first week of November, the United
Nations and its partners substantially improved the
delivery of humanitarian aid to Afghanistan. The World
Food Programme and its partners succeeded in
distributing over 12,000 tonnes of food per day.
Contracts have been signed with non-governmental
organization partners that will allow us to concentrate
on the highest priority cases of about 3.5 million
people, who must be served before the depths of
winter. We have also succeeded in shipping medical
supplies equivalent to 28 per cent of requirements in
the country so far, and have planned, in detail, to reach
100 per cent coverage in all areas, except those that are
inaccessible for security reasons.

Winterization has been continuing in camps for
internally displaced persons. The events of the past few
days in Mazar-e-Sharif and other parts of northern
Afghanistan have opened up new opportunities -
although new fears have also been raised.

We are reasonably confident that the pipeline
from Uzbekistan will soon be activated and that Mazar-
e-Sharif can become a hub from which many seriously
affected areas of the north and centre of the country
can be reached. For areas that will remain inaccessible
because of weather, terrain and insecurity, in particular,
parts of Ghowr and Badghis, we are making plans for
airlifts of food.

While there have been some improvements, the
challenges are immense. It will be difficult to maintain
this progress as winter intensifies. Even if progress is
maintained, there will still be a humanitarian crisis in
Afghanistan. Of special concern is the almost complete
lack of information on new internal displacement. We
have no accurate picture of the current numbers,
locations or conditions of the displaced who have left
urban centres or conflict areas, especially in the south
and east of the country. The situation on the ground is
changing fast, and there will continue to be basic
problems of access and insecurity that will hamper our
ability to deliver assistance.

There is also a protection crisis in Afghanistan.
People are forced to flee persecution and conflict, but
have nowhere to go. The United Nations continues to
urge all neighbouring countries to open their borders to
those in need of protection, and urges the international
community to share with these countries the burden of
such protection, including the financing of aid for
refugees and the provision of asylum in third countries.

The United Nations will continue to render
desperately needed humanitarian assistance to
vulnerable groups. It will continue with demining
operations and monitor adherence to international
humanitarian and human rights law. In carrying out
these tasks, the United Nations will work alongside
other relief and humanitarian agencies and
organizations. It will also rely heavily on Afghan
nationals who are capable of and willing to participate
in implementation.

United Nations humanitarian agencies for
Afghanistan have made extensive contingency plans
throughout the region. These approaches will be
summarized in a plan of action for the reintroduction of
international staff to resume and expand their activities
once security conditions are satisfactory.

I would like to say a few words about recovery
and reconstruction. The reconstruction of Afghanistan
is going to be key in bringing peace and stability to the
country. It is not something to be undertaken once a
Government is in place, but is at the heart of the
political transition. Participation and reconstruction
will provide Afghans with an incentive to move from
war to peace, and will give them a stake in their
society. Reconstruction will provide opportunities for
the absorption of large numbers of men engaged in war,
and opportunities for Afghan women, who have been
deprived of a voice and participation in society.

World leaders have indicated that this time the
international community will have the will and the
staying power to help Afghans to reconstruct their
country. Reconstruction will focus not only on the
physical infrastructure that has been destroyed, but also
on the creation of institutions of good governance, the
promotion of reconciliation among individuals and
groups and the creation of human capital a issues that
have been so neglected during the years of war and
violence.

Reconstruction efforts will require significant
financial commitments and technical assistance from
the international community.

Given the toll taken on, and the suffering of,
Afghan society, the reconstruction effort will require
imagination, flexibility and coordination on the part of
Afghans and of those who are willing to assist them in
rebuilding their country. International experience has
shown that coordination among actors in the aid system
has been a challenge.

Reconstruction in Afghanistan will require a clear
strategy and the subordination of the interests of
individual agencies or donors to the overall agenda of
peace and stability. This will require agreement and
clear lines of authority and responsibility among the
donors and within the United Nations system.

It will be important to consider the creation of a
single system for the delivery of flows of money,
perhaps through a trust fund that allows for speedy
disbursement; provides simplicity for donors; is
consistent with the political priority determined by the
transitional administration; and makes flows of money
dependent on accountability and transparency in the
use of those funds.

All actors must accept the principle that Afghans
will be in charge and must have ownership of the
process, as long as they adhere to the rules of
transparency and accountability.

Before concluding this statement, allow me to say
the following. The men and women of Afghanistan
have suffered much and have been disappointed often.
They refuse interference, yet they call for help. They
expect much from the United Nations, and they are not
sure that the United Nations will deliver. They do not
understand why their country is being attacked; why
what little infrastructure is there is being destroyed;
and why civilians, including children, are being killed
by stray bombs.

The processes being proposed are not perfect.
The provisional institutions whose creation is
suggested will not include everyone who should be
there, and they may include some whose credentials
many in Afghanistan have doubts about.

But let everyone please remember that what is
hopefully to be achieved is the elusive peace that the
people of Afghanistan have yearned for for so long.
The provisional institutions being discussed, including
the broad-based interim government, are the beginning,
not the end, of the road. They are not going to be there
for very long, and their basic aims are precisely to
restore to the people of Afghanistan their right to speak
freely and to participate, on an equal footing, in the
management of the affairs of their country.

But if it is fair to call on the people of
Afghanistan to be patient and tolerant, I am sure that
the Council will agree with me that the people of
Afghanistan have the right to expect much from the
international community. The Council, the General
Assembly, Member States, other international
institutions, non-governmental organizations and the
public at large must also show the patience and
determination required to see this process through to its
full conclusion.
The people of Afghanistan have endured more
than 20 years of war and misery. The conflict has
spilled over to neighbouring countries. It has
threatened their internal stability and placed a
tremendous burden on their already limited means. I
appeal to all to show the people of Afghanistan that we
are not going to give up on them this time and that we
are going to show genuine solidarity and real
generosity.

