Mr. Paudel (Nepal): Thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on the important issue
of children and armed conflict. We are confident that
this debate will assess the magnitude of the problem
from wider perspectives and help consolidate
international cooperation for the implementation of our
shared commitments.

We appreciate the thoughtful statement by the
Secretary-General in the Council this morning. We also
appreciate the presentations by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and her role in this issue. We
commend Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy and
UNICEF Executive Director Ann Veneman for their
presentations. We were very much moved by the
descriptions of Ms. Grace Akallo on the plight of child
soldiers.

The international community has rightfully been
devoting its attention to the issue of children and
armed conflict for several years. In addition to the
generic conventions, such as the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, there are other international
instruments, commitments and principles devised to
protect the rights of the child. In line with that, we
appreciate the initiatives of the Security Council in
adopting various resolutions, including resolution 1612
(2005), for the protection and promotion of the rights
of children affected by armed conflict.

Children are the most vulnerable sector of the
population in times of conflict. They are easily used
and abused, as they are incapable of judging what is
right and wrong for themselves. Governments, the
international community and civil society must come
up with rapid, effective and coordinated efforts to
prevent heinous crimes against children during
conflict. To that end, our great commitments must be
matched with adequate human and financial resources
on the ground to monitor the situation, rescue the
victims and bring the violators to justice.

There is a clear need for time-bound and tailor-
made action plans for rescuing the victims and for their
reintegration into their family and society in the
aftermath of conflict. We clearly see the need for a
comprehensive approach linked with overall
development policies for the sustained promotion and
protection of the rights of the child.

Since the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in November 2006, Nepal has travelled
quite a distance in its historic political transformation.
For the first time, people are writing their Constitution,
through their elected representatives in the Constituent
Assembly. Writing a new Constitution and guiding the
peace process to its logical conclusion are the two
fundamental tasks ahead of this Government. The
Government of Nepal is committed to fulfilling these
historic responsibilities with the consensus of political
parties and stakeholders.

Nepal, as a signatory to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, has devised the necessary legal
instruments and established a legal and administrative
framework for the promotion and protection of the
rights of the child. The Government of Nepal reiterates
its commitment to releasing combatants who are
minors, ending impunity for crimes against children
and protecting children from sexual violence and other
grave crimes against them, in the spirit of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, as children are the
foundation of the peaceful and prosperous future of our
country.

The Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction has
taken the lead role in the release, reintegration and
rehabilitation of combatants who are minors on the
basis of the broad consensus of the Army Integration
Special Committee and its Technical Committee. To
this end, the Government of Nepal would welcome
cooperation from United Nations agencies, including
the United Nations Mission in Nepal, for the early
release and reintegration of combatants who are
minors.

Allow me to share with the Council the fact that
the Government of Nepal has taken note of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2009/158) in an overall
positive manner and expresses its readiness to work in
collaboration with the international community. The
Government of Nepal is determined to carry out its
responsibilities in the protection and promotion of
children affected by armed conflict, in line with
resolution 1612 (2005).

