Ms. King (Australia): At the outset, I would like
to join the others who have spoken today in expressing
Australia's condemnation of the attack on the United
Nations compound in Abuja overnight. This is the
starkest reminder of the risks faced by United Nations
personnel working in the cause of peace, stability and
development. Any attack on the United Nations is an
attack on all of us. I would like to express our deep
sympathies to the families, friends and colleagues of
those affected, and of course to the Government and
people of Nigeria.

Australia welcomes the opportunity to address the
Council on the topic of peacekeeping operations, and
we thank India for convening this debate.

Peacekeeping remains at the core of the United
Nations. It is the most critical and highly visible
measure by which the Organization is judged. We
would like to limit our remarks to three issues.

First, regular consultations with troop-
contributing countries and police-contributing
countries are an important mechanism to ensure that
peacekeeping mandates are informed by concrete
knowledge of ground realities and that expectations are
realistic and well understood. Consultative meetings
need to be structured, with advance notice of their
scheduling. We welcome the initiatives outlined in
today's presidential statement (S/PRST/ZOll/l7) to
improve those processes.

We also believe it is critical that a range of
stakeholders are consulted in the development of
mandates and throughout the life cycle of a mission.
Informal mission-specific groups can play an important
role. Australia has been pleased to be a part of the Core
2

Group on Timor-Leste, which continues to provide
suggestions regarding support to the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste and to serve as a
useful forum for consultation with stakeholders.

Secondly, it is important that peacekeeping
missions are provided with the necessary resources and
capabilities to take forward their complex roles.
Today's missions need the resources and capabilities to
deal with twenty-first century challenges and
mandates. We need further analysis of different
capabilities that can improve missions' effectiveness.
Critical enablers, such as communication tools and
analytical capabilities, can improve situational
awareness, assist with the development of early-
warning capacities and act as force multipliers.
Aviation assets can provide critical mobility, along
with firepower, but are often in short supply. We
welcome work under way to examine helicopter force
generation challenges.

Of course, the most valuable resource a
peacekeeping mission has is its people and their skills.
Efforts underway within the United Nations to develop
baseline capability standards for infantry battalions,
staff officers and medical support units are an
important step towards ensuring that peacekeepers are
better prepared and equipped. Timely information on
existing capability gaps would assist in ensuring there
is a coordinated and targeted approach to capacity-
building. We look forward to the outcomes of the
impact assessment of the capability gap lists.

Many speakers this morning emphasized the
important linkages between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Australia's own recent experience with
peace and security operations in our own region -
including in Timor-Leste and Solomon Islands - has
placed a premium on the early transition to
peacebuilding, which we all recognize is the only way
to prevent societies coming out of conflict from sliding
quickly back into conflict. Early peacebuilding efforts
require the early deployment of qualified civilian
personnel. We look forward to the forthcoming report
of the Secretary-General on the civilian capacity
review.

Bilateral and multilateral partnerships are an
important part of capacity-building for peacekeepers.
Australia seeks to share its peacekeeping experiences
through capacity-building and training. Our civilians,
police and armed forces work with our neighbours and
11-48209
our partners, including our partners in the Regional
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands, to build
police and military peacekeeping skills.

Our final point relates to providing clarity in
relation to expectations of peacekeepers' roles on the
ground. Peacekeepers are faced with tough decisions,
particularly when it comes to carrying out mandates to
protect civilians. For this reason, Australia has been a
strong advocate for specific protection-of-civilians
training and guidance. The development of
pre-deployment training modules, which include
scenario-based training tools, is a welcome step toward
addressing some of the uncertainties that peacekeepers
face in undertaking their duties. We encourage the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to deliver
those training modules to Member States and the field
as soon as possible.

We believe these tools can be further supported
through guidance for uniformed personnel on the
protection of civilians.

Military personnel in particular can have
important responsibilities when it comes to the
physical protection of civilians and other peacekeeping
personnel, which can require them to use force. We
look forward to the development of guidance on the
use of force, and have been pleased to support regional
conferences on that issue.

Australia believes that it is only through
consultation and burden-sharing on the part of all
parties that the peacekeeping partnership can retain its
strength and ability to address new challenges.

In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge
once again the service of the men and women deployed
to peace operations who are taking forward the vital
work of maintaining peace and security on the ground
for communities affected by conflict.

