Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen (France) (spoke in French):
France welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2319 (2016), which makes it possible to renew the
mandate of the joint mechanism for the investigation
and attribution of the use of chemical weapons in Syria,
known as the Joint Investigative Mechanism, for one year.
This is a time of unity on the Syrian issue which
deserves to be welcomed and which, beyond our
divisions as to the resolution of the conflict, represents
a strong signal of our desire to together bring an end to
the use of chemical weapons in Syria.

Given the latest conclusions of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism , which are compelling, confirming the
use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime and by
Da'esh, and while other cases of use of chemical agents
against the civilian population continue to be reported,
it is necessary to allow the Mechanism to continue its
work. The gravity of the facts established by the Joint
Investigative Mechanism could not leave any room for
political divisions. The Security Council established

the Mechanism unanimously last year, and it is up to
us, out of common agreement, to extend its existence,
which is more justified than ever.

It is also a strong signal sent to those responsible
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Their crimes
will continue to be clearly and rigorously established.
We are therefore responding to a requirement of justice
and, by ensuring the renewal of the Mechanism, we are
sending a message of deterrence to all parties involved
in the Syrian conflict. It is also an expression of the
recognition of the international community for the
remarkable work of the Mechanism.

The renewal of the Joint Investigative Mechanism,
the strengthening of its resources and the continuation
of its work are necessary. That much is clear, but our
action cannot stop there. We cannot tolerate the flagrant
violation of the universal standard of banning the use
of chemical weapons; otherwise, we would bear the
intolerable risk of trivializing such actions.

Given such a serious challenge and given this
violation of the non-proliferation regime, the Council
must take action. We must draw all the consequences
from the conclusions of the reports established by the
Mechanism, and we must ensure that these crimes
will be subject to judicial proceedings and sanctions.
As the French authorities have already said on many
occasions, France hopes that the Security Council will
be in a position to soon adopt a resolution to punish
those responsible for chemical attacks identified by the
Joint Investigative Mechanism.

