Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes your initiative to convene this
open debate today, as well as the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/446) on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Colombia
reaffirms its commitment to the international efforts to
assist Haiti both in the recovery and reconstruction
phases. The Government of Colombia is aware that the
magnitude of the tragedy that affected Haitian society
requires long-term coordinated action beyond the
emergency humanitarian assistance stage.

I wish to highlight the Security Council's
adoption of resolution 1927 (2010), which stresses the
leading role of Haiti's Government in the recovery,
reconstruction and stabilization process, and underlines
the need for the increased coordination of the efforts of
all United Nations entities and, in general, all other
organizations committed to assisting Haiti's recovery.

Colombia welcomes the Council's decision to
give MINUSTAH a leading role in coordinating
international electoral assistance to support the Haitian
Government in conducting the presidential and
legislative elections that will take place on
28 November. My country supports efforts to ensure
that this democratic process will be held in a free,
impartial and inclusive manner.

Despite progress made in delivering emergency
humanitarian assistance and early recovery activities,
the fundamental consequences of the earthquake will
require sustained international commitment. My
Government congratulates the Office of the Special
Envoy for its work to ensure coherence across United
Nations operations in Haiti and to persuade donors and
non-governmental organizations channel resources for
direct budget support for the Government of Haiti.

For its part, Colombia has been coordinating
efforts with the Haitian Government and community
and with other States and organizations working on the
island. The deployment of the Government of
Colombia, with the support of civil society and the
private sector, to provide humanitarian aid to Haiti was
very broad. For Colombia, complementing emergency
and stabilization actions with cooperation and technical
assistance is of the utmost importance in strengthening
and developing the institutional capacities of the
country.

My country continues to move towards the
materialization of its proposal to conduct a pilot
intervention in the town of Cabaret, adjacent to Port-
au-Prince. Based on previous experience in managing
natural disasters, the proposal would implement an
integrated multisectoral development model that would
not only rebuild affected infrastructure, but at the same
time target economic and social development and
strengthen governance, peace and security with the
participation of the affected population and authorities.
Strengthening institutional architecture in Haiti is
as important as contributing to its physical
reconstruction. Strengthening the Haitian National
Police is a step in the right direction and a response to
current challenges, in particular those of protecting
displaced persons and vulnerable groups, fighting
crime and managing the borders. Colombia recently
expanded the number of police officers participating in
MINUSTAH, including 34 police specialists in the
fight against transnational organized crime who are
currently in the field.

Along those same lines, holding credible and
legitimate presidential and legislative elections will
grant the new Government a clear and uncontested
mandate to lead the reconstruction process, and
contribute to the political stability necessary for
recovery and renewed economic and social
development. The international community must
honour its commitment to supporting the electoral
process. The reconstruction of Haiti is a long-term
project that will require strong leadership from the
Government and sustained support from the
international community. The success of MINUSTAH
and its subsequent withdrawal will depend on progress
in the reconstruction and restoration of infrastructure
and the State's capacities to ensure lasting stability.

My delegation wishes to send a message of
solidarity to the Government and people of Haiti and to
express its recognition of their ability to overcome this
devastating disaster and to advance in the
implementation of the Action Plan for National
Recovery and Development, which identifies priority
areas for progress in the recovery and development of
the country. Our task is to welcome the Action Plan as
the road map to guide all actions in the field.

