Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Madam, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, and I wish you every success in the discharge
of your mandate. I also thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her eighteenth report and her briefing today as
well as her relentless efforts to pursue justice and to
fight impunity.

The pursuit of justice across Libya is an issue of
sovereign and national jurisdiction.

However, that does not mean that we will
not cooperate with the ICC. The Libyan national
judicial authorities view the work of the ICC as the
complementary judicial efforts of a partner that
embody a spirit of cooperation and integration between
the national judiciary and international justice. The
Prosecutor has repeatedly underscored that cooperation
on many occasions and in her reports. My Government
understands the Prosecutor's statements regarding the
slow pace of the Libyan judiciary in its prosecution of
certain suspects. That is thanks to the security situation
in Libya, resulting from military confrontations that
alternately escalate and de-escalate in a vicious circle
ofviolence, as well as the unlawful offensive conducted
by the Haftar forces against Tripoli and its suburbs.
We should point out that some of the suspects being
pursued by the national judiciary and the ICC no longer
reside on Libyan territory.

With regard to the judicial aspect, we want to
emphasize the ability of our national judicial system
to prosecute all who have committed crimes on
Libyan territory, which are not subject to the statute
of limitations. We should take into account the fact
that the security situation in Libya continues to enable
the perpetration of many crimes against civilians. We
therefore emphasize that the Libyan judiciary has been
monitoring all of these violations, including an air
strike by Haftar forces on 6 October on an equestrian
club in the Janzour area of Tripoli, which injured many
innocent children, and another carried out in the Farnaj
area of Tripoli on 14 October, which killed three girls
from one family, as well as considerable military
operations targeting many innocent people in more
than one area. Those incidents must be followed up on
and investigated.

In that respect, the Government of National Accord
has repeatedly asked the Council to dispatch a fact-
finding mission to investigate the many violations
and irresponsible actions that have been taken against
innocent people, with a view to establishing the
facts, pursuing their perpetrators and holding them
accountable. In that connection, we reiterate that our
judiciary is capable of carrying out such a mission
if it is given the opportunity to do so. That will be
possible when there is political and security stability
in the country, which the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is pursuing through his efforts to
hold an international conference, followed by a national
congress attended by all the political parties in Libya,
aimed at reaching an agreement that is acceptable to
all parties.

With regard to the concern expressed in the
Prosecutor's report about the situation of illegalmigrants,
the Government of National Accord reiterates that it has
taken speedy measures to protect them. In cooperation
with the International Organization for Migration, we
have moved migrants from the areas of confrontation,
but in spite of that, aircraft of the aggressor force

carried out an air strike on a migrant centre in Tajura,
in Tripoli, killing 53 people and injured 130. We once
again reiterate that the Government then requested that
the Council set up a fact-finding mission to investigate
the matter and to hold the perpetrators to account. The
Government is monitoring all such violations against
hospitals, public facilities and civilian infrastructure,
and we have taken all the necessary measures to protect
civilians and keep them out ofharm's way, especially in
areas of military confrontation.

Abductions, disappearances and arbitrary
detentions have accompanied the aggressor force's
aggression against Tripoli, including the disappearance
of Ms. Siham Sergewa, a member of Parliament, from
her house in Benghazi. Many Libyan and international
parties, including the United Nations, have demanded
that her whereabouts be disclosed and that she
be released.

In conclusion, the Government of National Accord
reiterates its full commitment to resolution 1970 (2011),
especially with regard to the mandate of the ICC. We
hope that the Council will consider the Libyan issue
a priority and will not ignore it, ensuring continued
cooperation with Special Representative Ghassan
Salame in order to achieve peace and stability and end
this impasse. That will require a concerted effort on
the part of all the members of the Council to overcome
their differences, with a view to adopting a binding
resolution to end the hostilities, compel the forces of
aggression to return to where they came from as soon
as possible and seize the opportunity to achieve peace
in my country, Libya, so that we can rebuild the country
and relaunch its development.

The meeting rose at 11.15 am.
