Mr. Nibishaka (Rwanda): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having convened this
important briefing. I should also like to extend my
appreciation to Special Envoy Sellassie for her update
on the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel.

The Sahel region continues to face considerable
challenges, with terrorism and extremism gaining
momentum in the region as a result of porous borders
and weak institutions. We are particularly concerned
at the alarming situation in the north of Mali and at
reports of the pledge of support to the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant from Boko Haram Nigeria, Ansar
Beit al-Maqdis in Egypt and Ansar al-Sharia in Libya,
worrying developments that could further threaten the
stability of the entire region.

The political and security instability of some of
the countries in the region such as in Libya, which has
become a safe haven for numerous armed and terrorist
groups and is on the brink of an all-out civil war, could
further impede real progress in the region. The high
level of youth unemployment, the chronic humanitarian
situation and the impact of the recent Ebola outbreak
in the region are cross-cutting challenges that need
to be addressed through a comprehensive and holistic
approach.

The task of addressing these interlinked challenges
is daunting but not impossible. We already have a
clearly defined approach through the United Nations
strategy for the Sahel, which encompasses governance,
security and an integrative development mechanism.
The real challenge remains the implementation of that
strategy and for it to produce tangible results.

To achieve that, the implementation of the Sahel
strategy must be owned by the countries of the region,
with the strong support of the international community.
We commend in that regard the joint visit last year of
the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the African
Union, the Presidents of the World Bank and of the
African Development Bank, as well as the European
Union. In addition, there is a need to, first, enhance
coordination and synergy between key regional and
multilateral partners so as to maximize effectiveness
and avoid duplication; secondly, to ensure the rapid
disbursement of pledges, which is critical in addressing
the interlinked challenges in the region, particularly
in building self-resilience and ownership; thirdly, to
promote cross-border cooperation between the Sahel,
the Maghreb and the West Africa and central African
regions in the fight against the spread of terrorism;
and, fourthly, building respective national security
capacities as well as supporting the efforts of the
African Union in establishing and operationalizing the
African Standby Force.
As the time frame for the implementation plan of
the strategy is set to end by 2016, we would like to
recommend a review of the strategy and its readjustment
in accordance with developments on the ground.

In conclusion, Rwanda remains committed to
continuing to provide full support to the United Nations
strategy with a view to bringing about long-term peace
and stability in the Sahel region.

