Mr. Laher (South Africa): My delegation joins
others in welcoming the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), Minister Eamon Gilmore, to the Security
Council. We wish to thank him for his briefing on the
work of the OSCE. As Minister Gilmore stated,
Ireland's own experience in conflict resolution can be a
positive influence on its work as Chair of the OSCE.
We have taken note of the challenges that the
OSCE helps to address, from Kosovo to Moldova, to
Nagorno Karabakh and to Georgia. The decision taken
by the OSCE in Vilnius in December last year to
increase its engagement in Afghanistan, in close
cooperation with the United Nations and other
international actors in the region, is also noted.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the area of
peace and security is a priority for my delegation, and
we welcome all efforts to strengthen the relationship
between the OSCE and the United Nations.

South Africa's support for that relationship stems
from our belief that multilateralism is strengthened
through enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
Article 54 of Chapter VIII of the Charter, under which
the OSCE is briefing the Council today, envisaged
strong cooperation between the Security Council and
regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We reiterate, however, that each regional
organization is unique in terms of the challenges it
faces in the maintenance of international peace and
security, as well as the manner in which it addresses
those threats. Moreover, my delegation does not
believe that the efforts of regional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security absolve
the Council of its Charter-mandated responsibilities as
the guardian of international peace and security.

On 12 January, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2033 (2012), which focused attention on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, including in the area of conflict
prevention, resolution and management. Speaking in
the debate preceding the adoption of the resolution,
President Jacob Zuma reaffirmed South Africa's
support for the role of regional and subregional bodies
in peace and security (see S/PV.6702). President Zuma
stated that regional bodies are closer to the situation,
are familiar with the issues and often understand the
dynamics of the conflict. It is therefore our belief that
regional organizations such as the OSCE are in a good
position to advise accordingly on the situation on the
ground and to tackle some of the challenges faced.

In conclusion, we are of the view that the sharing
of experiences between the OSCE and other regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, is vital,
and we hope that such cooperation can be
strengthened. We would like to assure the OSCE of our
support for those efforts.

