Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks the Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), Ambassador Oh Joon, for
his briefing to the Council today. We appreciate the
leadership shown by the Republic of Korea in chairing
the 1540 Committee over the past two years. We also
commend the work carried out by the Expert Group.

The purpose for which resolution 1540 (2004)
was adopted 10 years ago remains fully valid today.
The possibility of non-State actors acquiring weapons
of mass destruction poses a serious challenge to
international peace and security. It was in that context
that Chile handed over to the National Nuclear Security
Administration of the United States in 2010, which
provided significant support, 18 kilos ofhighly-enriched
uranium that had been situated in our country since the
end of the 1950s. That was the last such material on our
national territory.

Today, our fears focus less on the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and more on the possibility of chemical
or biological weapons falling into the hands of terrorist
groups. That has become clear as a result of conflict in
the Middle East. We are concerned by reports of the
use of chemical weapons by non-State actors on Syrian
and Iraqi territory and the seizure of chemical weapons
storage facilities in those countries by terrorist groups.
Any organization or individual using chemical weapons
must be held accountable for such actions.

All Member States must continue to adopt measure
to safeguard collective security. In particular, we
emphasize the need to fully implement resolution 1373
(2001) in order to prevent and curtail the financing of
terrorist groups.

Chile reiterates the need to strengthen cooperation
in the framework of the commitments pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). For our part, we have
harmonized our domestic legislation and endeavoured
to strengthen national capacities in order to meet the
standards of resolution 1540 (2004). Those efforts were
ajoint undertaking of our foreign and defence policies.
We have already submitted five reports in that regard.

Today, we are paying close attention to others'
experience, such as through the peer reviews, which
may assist us in clarifying our ideas regarding a
national implementation plan, about which we have
already reported to the Committee. We have repeatedly
stressed the importance of improving export controls,
highlighting the work being done by customs and border
control officers. Officials of those agencies will need
further professional development through workshops
on experiences and practices, focusing on the needs
of each State. In that context, we have participated in
more than 17 joint activities with the Export Control
and Related Border Security Program of the United
States with a view to improving export controls. We
encourage all members of civil society to participate.

Chile remains firmly committedto theimplementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and, more broadly, to the
global non-proliferation and disarmament architecture,
as shown by our participation in the most recent Nuclear
Security Summit. It is imperative that we continue
working together to make progress in the tasks set 10
years ago. In that regard, every State must identify
its weak points and implementation gaps. We attach
particular importance to the comprehensive review of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) that is to
take place in 2016. My country intends to work actively
over the coming year in the preparation for that review.

