Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to join others in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her briefing.
We welcome the progress that has been made in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the
establishment of a new coalition Government. We
join the Secretary-General in welcoming this sense
of hope across the country, as mentioned in his latest
report (S/2019/776). We also commend his visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in late August and
early September, which showed his support for the
country. Nevertheless, challenges remain, including the
dire situation in Kivu and Ituri provinces. To that end,
I would like to focus on a few points.

First, regional cooperation remains key to
addressing the threat posed by foreign armed groups.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo, like other
countries in the Great Lakes region, has been marred
by conflict and humanitarian difficulties for years. The
root causes of those problems should be addressed. We
welcome the steps that President Tshisekedi has taken
to strengthen relations with neighbouring countries and
that led to a confidence-building meeting in Kinshasa.
We also encourage the signatories to the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region to honour their
respective commitments under it and to work together to
promote lasting peace and sustainable development in
the region. It is time to place the needs of the Congolese
people above the pursuit of partisan interests.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be addressed
as a matter of urgency. While progress is being made
on the political front, it is disheartening that lives
are still being lost to violence and disease. Since
1 June, at least 197 civilians have been killed in Ituri
and at least 230,000 people displaced. Cooperation
between the armed forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) is important to the prevention of
further violence.

The current Ebola crisis in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is now the second-largest outbreak on
record, with 3,050 confirmed cases and 2,100 deaths
since August 2018. Measles, malaria and cholera
continue to claim lives and must be addressed with equal
urgency. We welcome the international conference
on public health to be hosted by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo next month in
Goma. It will mobilize the international community
to provide sustainable development and humanitarian
assistance to the people of the country who are in need.
The Council and the wider membership of the United
Nations should unite and rally behind those efforts.

Thirdly, support for MONUSCO should be
prioritized. As the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General reports, and as is evident from the
report, MONUSCO'S role in the country is crucial and
critical. That is why support for MONUSCO is now
needed more than ever. The current financial situation
at the United Nations should be managed so that it will
not impair MONUSCO'S ability to fulfil its mandate.
Mandates and resources should work together, and
a commitment to a peacekeeping budget should be
followed by the realization of that commitment. For its
part, Indonesia is continuing its support as one of the
countries contributing the largest numbers of troops
to MONUSCO, amounting at the moment to 1,044
personnel, including 28 women peacekeepers, and an
850 person-strong rapidly deployable battalion. Our
peacekeepers continue to engage with the communities
in fulfilling their mandates.

In conclusion, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo needs our help, and we will continue to work
with the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as a friend and true partner, to ensure lasting
peace in their country.

