Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): At the outset, Sir,
allow me to express the appreciation of my delegation
at seeing your great country, the Russian Federation,
preside over the work of the Security Council for the
month of June.

I extend our warmest congratulations to the
Republic of Korea for its outstanding leadership of the
Council's work last month.

I welcome the convening oftoday's meeting devoted
to the consideration of the report of the Secretary-General
on the activities of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
It is no coincidence that the presentation of the report
under consideration (S/2014/403) is taking place today,
on the first anniversary of the signing in Ouagadougou
preliminary agreement on the the presidential elections
and the inclusive peace talks in Mali. This seems to us
to augur well, in spite of the abrupt deterioration in the
security situation in the north of our country following
attacks targeting Malian armed forces carrying out
their mission to provide security for the visit by Mali's
Prime Minister to Kidal on 17 May.

On that day, Malian rebel groups, supported by a
mob ofterrorists, decided to attack the Prime Minister's
delegation and the Malian armed forces protecting him
inside the Kidal governorate. Those mixed armed groups
killed soldiers and coldly executed civilian prefects
and sub-prefects, simply because they symbolized the
attributes of Malian sovereignty in the Kidal region.
They also abducted and kidnapped several civilians,
before releasing them a few days later under pressure
from MINUSMA. In carrying out those actions, they
at least willfully violated the preliminary agreement
and committed serious violations of international
humanitarian law.

The Republic of Mali welcomes the support of
the international community, particularly through
the Security Council's statement of 20 May and the
final communique of the Summit of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) held on
31 May, which condemned the 17 May attack against
the Malian armed forces and reaffirmed the need to
preserve national unity, territorial integrity and the
secular and republican form of Government.

ECOWAS Heads of State and Government further
affirmed that the security threats Mali faced in 2012
were still present. The comingling of those posing the
threats has led to terrorists entering into pacts with
other actors carrying out crimes in the Sahel. They
also make pacts with the rebels. That was eviddent in
the assault against Mali's armed forces on 17 May in
Kidal. Preliminary evidence indicates that the murders
committed against State officials in Kidal bore the
hallmarks of terrorist groups and organizations.

Because "peace has victories no less renowned
than war", we chose peace. In spite of the barbaric
and unspeakable acts that we have suffered - acts
condemned by the international community, including
the Security Council, the African Union, ECOWAS
and several bilateral and multilateral partners - the
Government of Mali is more than ever driven by a
constant concern for Malians to reconcile with Malians.
To that end, Mali is putting all its resources behind
creating the best conditions for national reconciliation,
the restoration of social cohesion and the consolidation
of national unity.

It is in that spirit that His Excellency President
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita did not hesitate for a single
moment, and ordered Malian armed forces to observe
a ceasefire on 21 May, when the Secretary-General
asked for it. That gesture of appeasement greatly
facilitated the signing of the 23 May casefire agreement
between the Government of Mali and the armed
movements and groups, under the supervision of His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, President
of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and Chair of the
African Union. We welcome here his strong leadership
in the fight against terrorism and his desire to make
the Sahel a region of peace, security, development and
shared social well-being.

Since the signing of the ceasefire agreement,
achieved thanks to the involvement of the United
Nations and the African Union, the Government of
Mali has not stopped calling on groups and armed
movements to show good faith and to engage in the path
of dialogue.

To articulate his determination to peacefully
resolve the issue concering the situation in the north of
Mali, President Keita decided to appoint former Prime
Minister Modibo Keita as his High Representative for
the Inter-Malian Inclusive Dialogue. His particular
mandate is to establish and maintain a climate of trust
among all parties involved in the dialogue, to facilitate
exchanges and to contribute to a rapprochement of views
in the interests of the people of Mali. He is authorized
to take any initiative conducive to the conclusion of a
final comprehensive peace agreement.

Also as part ofhis mandate, the High Representative
has already made contacts in Ouagadougou and
Nouakchott with all groups and armed belligerent
groups arrayed against the Government of Mali, so as
to signal the resolute determinaiton ofthe President and
the Government to prioritize dialogue on weapons and
to spare no effort to create the best conditions for the
conclusion of a final comprehensive peace agreement
on the crisis in north of Mali.

The High Representative has also urged the armed
groups and movements to reiterate their commitment to
the Ouagadougou preliminary agreement, which they
agreed to do. He is currently continuing the process of
making contacts with the Government of Mali and the
other national, regional and international actors involved
in the peace process. And he is working closely with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
with other special envoys of regional organizations.

With regard to the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation
Commission, esablished in March 2013 by the President
of the Transition in accordance with article 21 of the
Ouagadougou agreement, the National Assembly
adopted the law on its establishment last March. While
its members are yet to be appointed, the Minister of
National Reconciliation is actively working on that.

It goes without saying that those two
mechanisms * the High Representative and the
Commission - are complementary and mutually
reinforcing. The former is working on the conclusion
of a final comprehensive peace agreement; the latter
is working on reconciling hearts and minds, which of
course is a long-term undertaking.

Mali is willing to consider with its friends, partners
and many supporters any mechanism for emerging
from the crisis effectively and efficiently, in support of
its efforts. It is in that context that Algeria, to which we
pay tribute, undertook, at the request of the President of
Mali, to carry out exploratory consultations among all
armed groups and movements in the north to develop a
common platform to serve as a basic document, among
other things, to hold inclusive inter-Malian talks, which
are slated for the coming days. The Government of Mali
has reiterated its confidence in Algeria and asked it to
continue its efforts so that the talks can lead to a final
comprehensive agreement as soon as possible.

Part of that undertaking included the holding, at
Algiers on 16 June, of the third coordination meeting
for the Inter-Malian Inclusive Dialogue process, with
the participation of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
and heads of delegation of Algeria, Mali, Mauritania,
Chad, the Niger and Burkina Faso, a well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General - our friend
Albert Koenders, who is here and whom I commend for
his active participation and outstanding contribution to
the meeting - and former Burundian President Pierre
Buyoya, High Representative of the African Union for
Mali and the Sahel, who is seated next to Mr. Koenders.

Participants at the meeting welcomed the progress
made under the auspices of Algeria in creating conditions
conducive to Inter-Malian Inclusive Dialogue and noted
the broad convergence of views on the guidelines of the
agreed approach. They also noted that the conclusions
reached by the six armed groups and movements in
northern Mali - on 9 and 14 June, as well as those
adopted by the fourth meeting of the Algeria-Mali
strategic committee on15 June at Algiers - offer a
promising opportunity to be exploited without delay
in order to engage the stakeholders on the path of the
Inter-Malian Inclusive Dialogue.

They also stressed the importance and urgency
of conducting the initial phase of dialogue foreseen at
Algiers, in line with the time line and the modalities
agreed. Finally, participants expressed their readiness
to provide support and assistance to these efforts in line
with the objectives that the international community set
itself in resolution 2100 (2013), the relevant decisions
of the African Union and ECOWAS and the provisions
of the Ouagadougou agreement aimed at preserving
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Mali and
consolidating national unity.

In that context, it was agreed with Algeria that
certain key principles would be respected in the process.
The first principle is that of inclusivity. All partners
with the necessary influence and capacities must
contribute to or be involved in the process. The second
principle is that of transparency. It is agreed that, to
the extent possible, the elements up for discussion must
be shared with all the partners with an interest in the
process. The third principle is the need for coordination
and consistency among all the intitiatives taken with
respect to Mali, and to ensure that these initiatives are
addressed as a whole and that a mechanism is found to
align the efforts launched in Algiers with the need for
enhanced input on the part of the parners, including the
United Nations, which we hope will maintain its central
role in the process.

The Government of the Republic of Mali's agrees
with the Conference of Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS that, in order to help our country to
regain its sovereignty over its entire national territory,
including Kidal, the Security Council should strengthen
the mandate of MINUSMA and give it the means
and personnel to properly carry out its mission of
guaranteeing the implementation of the Ouagadougou
agreement of 18 June 2013. In that regard, we regret
that, a year after the establishment of the Mission and
in an especially volatile context, it does not yet have the
troops or resources necessary to duly fulfil its mandate.

I should now like to share the expectations of the
Government of the Republic of Mali in the context of
the renewal of the mandate of MINUSMA.

With respect to the stabilization of the northern
regions ofMali, my country would like to see the future
MINUSMA mandate contain a clear provision on the
Mission's rapid deployment beyond the major northern
population centres, particularly around the villages
and nomadic lands. This proposal has the advantage
of taking into account the lifestyle of nomads from
the north who prefer to live outside of large cities. It
would fill the security vacuum in the gray or lawless
areas where people are most vulnerable to infiltration
by armed groups that have not signed the the
Ouagadougou agreement and may be affiliated to the
terrorist networks Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
the Mouvement pour l'unicite et le jihad en Afrique
de l'Ouest or Ansar Dine, and other drug-trafficking
groups, as was the case in 2012.

My delegation also wishes to draw the Council's
attention to the need to authorize the conduct of
joint Malian armed forces/MINUSMA operations to
optimally restrict the freedom of movement of armed
groups that are not signatories of the Ouagadougou
agreement and may be associated with terrorists and
drug traffickers. Similarly, Mali seeks MINUSMA
support in order to accelerate the process of cantonment
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), so as to isolate and disarm non-signatory armed
groups affiliated to networks that are wiping out the
security gains made in northern Mali by Operation
Serval and the Malian and Chadian armed forces.

In the same vein, Mali believes that it would be
advisable to include the following elements in the
Council's future resolution on MINUSMA: the solid
support of MINUSMA for the strict implementation
of the ceasefire in all its components, for the return to
the positions held before 17 May, for the revitalization
and reactivation of the follow-up mechanisms of the
Ouagadougou agreement, and for the relaunch of the
peace talks; the strong support of MINUSMA for
the cantonment and DDR of armed groups that have
signed the Ouagadougou agreement; MINUSMA
support for the Malian State in the redeployment of the
administration and the reconstruction of the northern
regions; the substantial reduction of the MINUSMA
footprint in the south to the benefit of the regions
of the north, where there is a real and pressing need
for stabilization and reconstruction; the support of
MINUSMA and the international community for the
coming local and regional elections; the establishment
of the international commission of inquiry provided
for in the ceasefire agreement of 23 May; and the
establishment, in the resolution on MINUSMA, of a
benchmark for monitoring the implementation of the
new mandate.

On behalf of the grateful people and Government
of the Republic of Mali, I pay reverent homage to the
memory of all the brave soldiers, Malian civilians and
friends of Mali who have lost their lives in the fight
against obscurantism, terrorism and violent extremism
in Mali. Furthermore, on behalf of the people,
Government and President of Mali, Mr. Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, I express our deep gratitude to the
French and Chadian authories, the United Nations,
ECOWAS, the African Union, the European Union, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the countries
that contribute troops to MINUSMA. We commend
MINUSMA, its personnel and in particular Special The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
Representative Mr. Albert Gerald Koenders, as well as more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
all Mali's bilateral and multilateral partners, for their invite Council members to informal consultations to
unwavering support at the height of the crisis and the continue our discussion on the subject.

terrorist occupation we have suffered for the past year.

We convey our deep gratitude to them all. The meeting rose at 10'35 a.m.
