Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her presentation of the twelfth report,
as mandated by resolution 1970 (2011).

The political and security situation in Libya
remained critical during the reporting period despite the
efforts of the Presidential Council of the Government of
National Accord. We reiterate our appeal to all political
actors in Libya to pool their efforts in a constructive
fashion with determination, courage and goodwill
in connection with the efforts being made by the
Government of National Accord. The political impasse
has weakened the efforts of the Government to face
the chaotic security situation, the economic crisis and
the growing impunity of terrorist groups and armed
militias against the civilian population.

We take note with concern of the information
regarding Libya presented on 27 September by the
Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Kate Gilmore, during the thirty-third session of the
Human Rights Council, in which she outlined that heavy
weapons continued to be transferred to residential areas
throughout the country, armed groups were acting
with total impunity and thousands of people were
brutally being kept in detention centres. Furthermore,
migrants, refugees and asylum seekers are arbitrarily
being detained, with various reports indicating abuse
perpetrated against those groups - such as summary
executions, torture and other mistreatment, sexual
abuse, extortion and forced labour. That situation
constitutes a flagrant violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law.

However, the institutional and political context
of Libya does not offer the necessary conditions to
investigate and persecute the authors of those atrocious
crimes, which, according to the Statute of the ICC, fall
under national jurisdiction. We believe that conditions
in Libya to apply the necessary judicial process are
currently non-existent. In that regard, we consider the
ICC to be highly important in Libya.

We welcome the information contained in the report
ofthe Ombudsperson of the ICC, by which on 31 August
the Misrata-Tawergha accord was signed. That led to
the return of displaced people and compensation for
affected communities. It is highly commendable that
the signatories to the accord expressed their desire to
achieve peace, justice and reparations and to establish
the rule of law and contribute to efforts that seek to avoid
the repetition of past mistakes for future generations.
We strongly encourage other initiatives of the kind to
improve the lives of the population of Libya.

To conclude, we reiterate our view that only in an
environment of peace and stability can a functioning
judicial system and institutions be established.
Therefore, we reiterate our support for the United
Nations and the international community in the
implementation, together with the relevant actors, of
Libya's Government of National Accord for the sake
of establishing lasting peace as well as accountability
for all those responsible for perpetrating violent crimes
and human rights violations.

