Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this debate on the Ebola virus disease.
I also thank our briefers today, namely, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Mission on Ebola Emergency Response
Anthony Banbury, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General and Senior United Nations System Coordinator
for Ebola Anthony Nabarro and Mr. Thomas Mauget,
Head of the French Red Cross in Guinea, for their
respective briefings. We express our appreciation to
our colleague Ambassador Samantha Power of the
United States for her visit to the affected countries,
for her personal commitment to a better international
response and for her relentless advocacy for health-care
workers operating in the field, who should be treated as
heroes, not pariahs. We also appreciate the kind words
of condolences and sympathy from our colleagues on
the demise of Marcel Rudasingwa, an Ebola response
manager in Guinea. Our thoughts and prayers are with
his family.

Over the past month, the world has witnessed the
unbreakability of the human spirit: people from every
corner of the world willing to forgo their comfort
zones and put their lives in danger to assist populations
affected by Ebola. We have been informed about the
sacrifice of entire communities that have abandoned
their traditional practices for the common good, as
well as about the strong leadership demonstrated
by the Governments of Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea. In that period we have also appreciated the
unprecedented mobilization and effective coordination
of the international response, including through the
United Nations Mission on Ebola Emergency Response
(UNMEER). We are happy to hear that, thanks to all
those efforts, the transmission of the virus is on the
decrease, which raises hope for the eradication of this
epidemic in the near future.

However, as all our briefers today have warned,
this encouraging situation does not mean that we have
sailed away from the danger of Ebola - far from it.
Indeed, as informed by Anthony Banbury and David
Nabarro, the transmission of the virus is still intense,
the response plan remains underfunded, the required
isolation facilities are still needed, the cure is yet to be
available, and the disease is expanding geographically
inside the affected countries and beyond. In this regard,
while expressing concerns about reported cases in Mali,
we welcome the appropriate response of the Malian
Government.

We thank all the countries that play a critical role in
fighting Ebola at its source, either by pledging money,
sending health-care workers or military personnel,
establishing treatment units or providing training. At
the continental level, the recent decision by the African
Union Commission to establish the African Union
Support to Ebola Outbreak in West Africa was an
important move to support global efforts in the fight
against the epidemic.

We fully support the proposed concept of operations
of the African Union (AU) mission, and we pledge our
highest level of engagement with and commitment
to the AU mission's success. We are particularly
encouraged that one of the pillars of the AU strategy
will consist in engaging with media, advocacy groups,
local communities, civil society organizations, social
networks and other relevant actors on the ground to
ensure proper public communication about Ebola.
That communication strategy should especially target
populations in rural and remote areas in the most
affected countries to ensure effective prevention and
fight against stigmatization, which would delay the
eradication of this virus.

Rwanda expresses concern about the socioeconomic
and humanitarian cost of the crisis, including for
education, businesses, national economies and
the livelihood of the affected populations. We are
nonetheless encouraged by the mobilization of
financial institutions and other partners to address the
devastating impact of the virus in the affected countries.
In this regard, we believe that, while addressing the
immediate emergency situation, we should look beyond
this emergency phase and devise strategies on post-
Ebola recovery, in coordination with the Peacebuilding
Commission.

To conclude, let me express the hope that the
international community will maintain the current
momentum, increase its support and contributions and
enhance coordination and information exchange as we
strive for an efficient use of the available resources in
the field. We pledge our continued support to UNMEER
in all its efforts to lead us through this crisis.

