Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing. I also
welcome His Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul to the
Council and thank him for his statement.

Both of those statements presented a clear and
comprehensive picture of Afghanistan today, of its
achievements and of the challenges that still lie ahead.
I will therefore not elaborate on them but will restrict
myself to two points that Portugal deems particularly
important.

The first is the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan.
Portugal believes that the Mutual Accountability
Framework represents a practical and verifiable
cornerstone that, together with the results of the Bonn
Conference and the Chicago Summit, will allow us to
build lasting cooperation between Afghanistan and the
international community, strongly founded on shared
interests and accountability. Implementing the Tokyo
Framework will require, in the short and medium term,
not only especially active statesmanship on the part
of the Afghan authorities but also transparency and
renewed cooperation among Afghan and international
partners in a decisive phase that is not without tensions
and risks.

In the case of Afghanistan, integration and
partnership at the regional level are certainly no
less relevant than cooperation with the wider world.
In that regard, progress in regional integration
initiatives, among which we would like to highlight
the Istanbul Process - as do the Secretary-General's
report (S/2012/703) and the statements we have just
heard - is an encouraging example of what can be
achieved through vigorous Afghan leadership and a
strong commitment to peace and stability.

Secondly, let me raise the issue of human rights. I
would like to underline the particular predicament of
children in the context of the Afghan conflict. Their
specific targeting is particularly odious, and that matter
must continue to receive due attention in the Secretary-
General's reports. Denying children humanitarian
access to health care and vaccination, as has recently
been the case, is a gross violation of their rights and a
crime against the people and the future of Afghanistan.

The efforts of Afghan and international forces to
reduce civilian casualties must be acknowledged. It is
our hope that the transition and further assumption of
responsibility for security by Afghan forces will also
continue to translate into better tracking and mitigation
of civilian casualties, as well as into reliable and clear
accountability mechanisms.

As regards the rights of women, the information in
the report is far from encouraging. Not only do harmful
traditional practices continue to infringe on women's
and girls' rights, but the recent mockery of justice
on the part of the Taliban against a young woman
has rightly caused outrage around the world. The
courageous and sensitive work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in that
area deserves our full support and appreciation. We
call once more on national authorities and international
partners to support implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women and of a national
action plan for women in Afghanistan. I should also note
that the report mentions that efforts to recruit women
police officers are lagging. We urge the Government of
Afghanistan to continue to address the matter, since it
is critical to ensuring access to justice for women and
children.

I will conclude by reiterating my country's support
for the work of UNAMA and its Special Representative.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
is undergoing a reconfiguration process that presents
renewed challenges in a very difficult environment. Its
mission is not yet finished. The Security Council will
continue to follow the Mission's activity closely and
make sure that it will continue to be able to fulfil its
mandate in supporting Afghanistan on its path to peace
and prosperity, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan rightly said.

