We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing. The pandemic has affected the political settlement in Syria, just as it has affected many other processes around the world. But the Special Envoy is determined, and we support him. The Special Envoy is in constant contact with the Syrians on the issue of the next round of Constitutional Committee talks. Some accuse Syrians of avoiding dialogue under the pretext of not being able to meet in person, but these meetings are critical for discussing sensitive details about the future of their country. Leaks or provocations that could emerge from the use of video-teleconference platforms might undermine those efforts. It would be unacceptable if the settlement process were to break down for a lack of confidentiality. We will continue to make efforts through contact with the parties concerned, both in our national capacity and together with Turkey and Iran, within the framework of the Astana format. There are significant differences between the situation on the ground in Government territories and in areas outside of Damascus control, especially in the terrorist-held Idlib and the occupied Syrian territories. In most of Syria, the people and Government are working to restore a normal life. The coronavirus pandemic is an additional challenge. The authorities are taking the necessary measures by testing for the disease, equipping isolation rooms for patients with coronavirus and opening laboratories in Aleppo, Latakia and, eventually, Homs. But suffocating sanctions have led to a deterioration in the socioeconomic situation in Syria. Sanctions impact ordinary Syrians. Our colleagues will not convince us that exemptions remove all problems. That is not true. It is impossible to conduct banking transactions from Syria, including for the purchase of medical equipment. In addition, international humanitarian non-governmental organizations cannot take effective action for fear of being sanctioned. There is ample evidence of that. We therefore again call for the lifting of unilateral sanctions. In Idlib, the ceasefire is generally being maintained, although terrorists frequently attack Syrian army positions. The Russian military, together with its Turkish colleagues, continues to patrol designated areas even as radical groups impede their work, incite provocations and create blockades, thereby confirming the need to separate the moderate opposition from the terrorists. Terrorist attacks are also carried out in other areas, most notably along the east coast of the Euphrates river. The problem of foreign terrorist fighters and other prisoners in the north-east has not gone away. Militants riot in prisons, escape to other countries and beyond the region. We would like to hear what is being done in that regard. We also have not gotten responses to our queries on what is happening in the north-east of the country, where United States forces are present illegally in the Al-Hol camp, as well as in the Al-Tanf area, in the Rukban camp. Stability and security in those areas can be ensured only if they return under the control of the legitimate Government. Attempts to freeze the dividing lines that, unfortunately, have been drawn in today's Syria are unacceptable. Those line should be erased. The joint efforts of Syrians in the Constitutional Committee and the effectiveness of responses to the threats facing the Syrian nation - coronavirus, terrorism and foreign occupation - call for concrete steps to be taken to restore the unity and territorial integrity of Syria. That applies to the inside. The external perimeter should come together to provide humanitarian assistance and enable the post-conflict reconstruction of Syria so as to facilitate the political process without interfering in it.
