Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): The United Nations Civilian
Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) continues to do a
good job in Haiti. The Haitian National Police, which it
assists, also continues to make progress despite several
problems which we hope will ultimately be resolved.
However, the situation in Haiti is marked by the crippling
political institutional crisis that is symbolized by the
absence of a Prime Minister for more than a year. We
therefore share the Secretary-General's assessment, in his
latest report on the work of the Civilian Police Mission in
Haiti, that the consolidation of democracy continues to be
hampered by this reality. This is the core of the problem.

We therefore endorse the strong appeal, in operative
paragraph 6 of the draft before us, urging the authorities
and political leaders in Haiti to fulfil their responsibilities
and to negotiate urgently an end to the crisis in a spirit of
tolerance and compromise. There is no doubt in our
minds that this is the key that will unlock the door to the
solution to the crisis, and it is therefore also appropriate
that this draft resolution correctly apportions the ultimate
responsibility for national reconciliation and the
reconstruction of Haiti to the Haitians themselves.

We have tried very hard to analyse the crisis in Haiti
in terms of international peace and security, but find
ourselves discussing what increasingly appears to be the
internal political, economic and social situation of Haiti.

 

We recognize that the situation in Haiti is complex and
realize that international attention is critical to its survival.
Continued international engagement by all is therefore
essential.

In this regard, may I warmly commend the Friends
group - comprising Argentina, Canada, Chile, France, the
United States and Venezuela - for continuing to provide
solid assistance to the people and Government of Haiti.
However, this attention may now need to focus more and
more on development activities. We felt it appropriate last
year that a transition from peacekeeping to a policing focus
was necessary. There is a need now to switch mechanisms
of engagement and of assisting Haiti from a policing mode
to one which focuses more on peace-building.

We think that the structure now in place, as spelt out
in paragraphs 23 to 25 of the Secretary-General's report,
and organized around the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), is quite appropriate. We agree with
the assessment of the Secretary-General that Haiti indeed
affords an excellent example of United Nations agencies
working effectively and economically together. We may
need to explore further how to really entrench this good
work. The road map for this approach, we believe, is
adequately drawn with this draft resolution, which
appropriately stresses the linkage between peace and
development and affirms that future international assistance
should be considered through United Nations specialized
agencies and programmes, in particular UNDP as well as
other international and regional organizations and all States.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation for a one-year extension of MIPONUH.
We need to put in place a different mechanism that enables
a solid transition into peace-building activities organized
around UNDP. Because this issue continues to entrench
itself as an internal problem, we support the intention
expressed in operative paragraph 11 of the draft resolution
requesting the Secretary-General to make recommendations
on a viable transition to other forms of assistance to Haiti.
My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

In conclusion, we also hope that the energy with
which we continue to promote the Council's attention and
focus on Haiti through MIPONUH will also find expression
when appropriate peacekeeping and peace-building
mechanisms are sought to address the problems in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, and indeed other African
problems.

