Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me to start by
thanking Mr. Mladenov for his thorough briefing.

The difficult realities in the State of Palestine
have been somberly summarized in a report by Human
Rights Watch issued on the occasion of 50 years of
Israeli occupation:

"At least five categories of major violations of
international human rights law and humanitarian
law characterize the [Israeli] occupation:
unlawful killings; forced displacement; abusive
detention; the closure of the Gaza Strip and
other unjustified restrictions on movement;
and the development of settlements, along with
the accompanying discriminatory policies that
disadvantage Palestinians."

Lately, we were also reminded of the extent of
the shocking Israeli practices in Jerusalem and at the
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound: killings, closure and the
disproportionate use of force against worshipers and
civilians, which constituted a clear attempt to escalate
an occupation into a war ofreligions. Those practices are
not only blatant violations of the Charter of the United
Nations, principles of international law and resolutions
adopted by the Security Council - and in particular
of article 4 of The Hague Convention, article 39 of the
Geneva Convention and article 27 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights - to respect
peoples' rights to observe and practice their own
religion. Suffice it to say, these are deliberate attempts
to create new realities on the ground that make the two-
State solution an objective that is practically impossible
to achieve. It is time to hold Israel accountable and to
compel it to cease and rescind all measures to tamper
with the historic status quo at the Al-Aqsa mosque and
its Esplanade.

Today the international community should be
biased to upholding the principles of international
law. It is high time to turn our commitment to the
principle of land for peace into reality by ending the
Israeli occupation and heeding the calls for peace and
implementing the Arab Peace Initiative, which was
adopted in my country, Lebanon, in 2002, and reiterated
by several summits and meetings, the latest being the
Arab Summit hosted by Jordan in March.

Turning to my country, since the adoption of
resolution 1701 (2006), there has not been a single
day during which Israel has not continued to breach
Lebanon's sovereignty by land and sea, in total
disrespect ofits obligation under resolution 1701 (2006).
Let me mention only the daily violations of Lebanese
airspace by Israeli fighterjets. Despite all such flagrant
violations, multiple smear campaigns, false allegations
and threats by Israel to send my country back to the
dark ages, the Government of Lebanon remains firm
in its commitment to the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), not only to preserve the gains of
our collective investment in security and stability, but
rather to multiply them.

It is in that context that my Government yet again
encourages the Secretary-General to expedite his
good-offices efforts and looks forward to receiving
the results of the efforts of the Special Coordinator on
the delineation of the disputed maritime border and
exclusive economic zone between Lebanon and Israel,
while emphasizing that the non-resolution of this issue
shall remain a source of conflict that threatens peace
and security in our region.

Furthermore, my Government will also submit a
request to renew the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for one year
without any changes. Only a capable and efficient
UNIFIL can maintain stability and security in the south
of Lebanon, in particular in the light of the volatile
situation in region. As for the partnership between
the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) and UNIFIL,
my delegation would like to take this opportunity to
express its deep appreciation to all troop-contributing
countries - a good number of them are around the table
today or otherwise present in the Chamber - for their
sacrifices and noble determination to protect civilians
and to ensure full respect for Lebanon's sovereignty.

Our meeting today coincides with the visit of the
President of the Council of Ministers to Washington,
DC, which was preceded by visits to the European
Union and other friendly countries, with the sole
objective of emphasizing the economic, social and
security challenges facing my country and, most
important, to reiterate our calls to assist Lebanon in its
efforts to address the situation ofrefugees and their host
communities and to strengthen the LAF capabilities in
its commendable fight against terrorism.

All of those efforts are deeply rooted in the
importance of protecting and preserving Lebanon as a
model for the region: promising democracy, a liberal
system, leadership in combating terrorism and a beacon
of diversity and coexistence in a region raging with fear
and exclusion. Let right prevail in the Middle East and
for its peoples.

