Mrs. Kassangana-Jakubowska (Poland): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
debate and thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Poland aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of European Union. I would like to add
a couple of comments from my national perspective.

Terrorism has become one of the biggest challenges
to international peace and security, and no region or
country is fully safe from its widespread consequences.

This sad reality should not, however, lead us to despair;
rather, it calls for united and resolute efforts on the part
of the international community aimed at tackling this
common challenge.

We are about to review the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June this year. While
reflecting on our priorities, we must bear in mind that
countering the scourge of terrorism is not possible
through forceful means alone. We have to be aware of
the direct link between security and development.

We cannot be effective in combating terrorism
without tackling its root causes. In that context,
Poland welcomes the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism presented by the Secretary-General. In the
process of its implementation, it is essential to ensure a
high level of coherence with ongoing initiatives aimed
at countering violent extremism conducted by the
European Union and other international organizations.

To address the root causes of terrorism, we need
to reflect also on the issue of the radicalization of
youth, an increasingly challenging aspect of the fight
against extremism. The Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy indicates in its first pillar the socioeconomic
conditions that are conducive to the spread of
radicalism. Unemployment, lack of education and basic
social services, and poor perspectives for personal
development are among the major factors that make
young people so vulnerable to propaganda. Terrorists
offer them the illusion of security and power. The
cynical propaganda of terrorist groups is masterful
in taking advantage of the economic struggles and
idealism of youth.

These factors underlie the phenomenon of the
approximately 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters who
have already travelled to conflict zones. To tackle it, we
need adequate legal mechanisms at the national level as
well as close international cooperation between security
services. In taking these actions, we should remember,
however, that radicalization and violent extremism are
not exclusive to any religion or nationality. All of the
efforts within the hard security area have to be combined
with actions that promote greater levels of social
inclusivity. Ensuring access to education, including the
human rights component, as well as working with local
communities and media, and raising awareness among
young people through programmes on the Internet and
social media seems to us of the utmost importance in
combating violent extremism.
Poland welcomes the actions taken by the Security
Council aimed at cutting off the sources of financing of
terrorist groups. We strongly condemn the looting and
illicit trafficking of cultural properties perpetrated on
an unprecedented scale in Syria and Iraq, especially by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. In this regard,
we call for strict implementation of all relevant Council
resolutions by the international community.

As underlined in the concept note (S/2016/306, annex) prepared for this debate by China, terrorism
is a common enemy of humanity. We need to stand
committed and united to respond to it.

