Mr. Plasai (Thailand): Let me begin by expressing
my sincere appreciation to the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela for having convened this debate and for
the comprehensive concept note for today's discussion
(S/2016/103, annex). I also thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing.

The maintenance of international peace and
security is indeed one of the main purposes of the
United Nations, as stipulated in Article 1 of its Charter.
This purpose is first and foremost inseparable from the
other three purposes mentioned in the same Article. In
our view, therefore, the maintenance of international
peace and security must go hand in hand with the
development of friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights and
the self-determination of peoples, the achievement
of international cooperation in solving international
problems and the harmonization of the actions of
nations in the attainment of these common ends.

In realizing these purposes, Member States must
strictly abide by international law, in particular those
principles of law enshrined in the United Nations
Charter. Let me highlight four of these basic principles
of law that from Thailand's perspective are key
elements of the maintenance of peace and security in
this modern world.

First, one cannot attach enough importance to
the principle of the sovereign equality of all United
Nations Members. It is truly sad that 70 years after
the establishment of the United Nations, we are still
witness to several conflicts around the globe where the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States have been
disrespected, undermined and violated.
Secondly, the Kingdom of Thailand strongly
believes that peace and security are best maintained
through peaceful means, in particular through conflict
prevention, preventive diplomacy and the pacific
settlement of disputes. The provisions of Chapter VI
of the Charter rightly reflect this principle, as they
encompass a whole spectrum of measures aiming to
prevent and deter actions that may disturb peace or pose
a threat to security, and to settle any dispute that might
arise therefrom. The recent successful negotiation on
Iran's nuclear programme and the normalization of
bilateral relations between the United States and Cuba
are good examples of the effective use of measures
under Chapter VI in contemporary world affairs.

Thirdly, the principle of refraining from the threat
or use of force against other States' territorial integrity
or political independence is today more relevant than
ever. Since the signing of the United Nations Charter,
the use of force by any party has been illegal unless
undertaken in accordance with the Charter's provisions.
It is the duty of all of us to ensure full observance of
this principle.

The fourth principle is non-interference in any
other State's domestic affairs. We believe that a State
has primary responsibility for its own domestic matters.
The non-interference principle is of fundamental
importance, and no party may intervene in matters
which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction
of any State in a manner inconsistent with international
law, including the United Nations Charter and the
many regional organization agreements that recognize
this fundamental principle. In this regard, we urge the
United Nations to enhance cooperation with regional
organizations, which by nature are more informed about
events in their area, in order to effectively maintain
international peace and security in a sustained and
inclusive manner.

The Security Council, as a key United Nations body
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
has a crucial role to play. It is the only body that can
authorize action under Chapter VII. It is important for
the credibility of the Organization that the Security
Council work in strict compliance with the purposes
and principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
Chapter VII is not an end in itself; it needs full and
robust implementation by all parties concerned.

The purposes and principles of the Charter were
set in the aftermath of the deadliest conflict that
mankind had ever known to prevent the recurrence of
such a situation for future generations. Between peace
and war, the Kingdom Thailand has made its choice.
We reaffirm our strong commitment to respect these
purposes and principles as well as to do our utmost,
together with the United Nations and its Member States,
to build and maintain international peace and security.

