At the outset, we would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko for his report and his perseverance in fulfilling his mandate and Ms. Irena Hasie for the important information provided. We recognize that youth and women empowerment initiatives are a unifying bridge as they ensure their active participation in the democratic and decision-making processes in their communities. It is timely to recognize the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina from all sectors for their solidarity and unity in facing the current pandemic. It is a sign that unity is strength. However, we concur with the High Representative that for the achievements resulting from unity to be sustainable, it is crucial to respect the country's constitutional and legal framework. That includes strict adherence to international and European standards on human rights and fundamental freedoms. We welcome the news that the appointment of the new Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers at the State level was completed at the end of last year. We take this opportunity to call on the political leadership to appoint the remaining authorities at the federal and cantonal levels. While we acknowledge that this is taking place during a global crisis, talks nevertheless need to be resumed to finalize pending issues, such as the long-awaited elections in the city of Mostar. We are concerned that in the midst of a pandemic, a State budget has not been approved to meet the most urgent needs. In that regard, we would like to acknowledge the international community's readiness to support the fight against coronavirus disease in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the same vein, we would like to stress that, although the fight against the pandemic must be the focus of all efforts and the current situation may affect the holding of local elections in October, the approval of the State budget for the organization of those elections is key. We would like to emphasize the great importance of the progress made so far in stabilizing peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those achievements as a nation must not be threatened in any way. In that regard, we reiterate the invitation to political leaders to refrain from destabilizing rhetoric. It is necessary to move towards open, transparent and constructive negotiations, which will allow prioritization of issues such as integration, good governance, peace and sustainable development. However, in order to move in that direction, it is necessary to understand the importance of fully implementing the General Framework Agreement for Peace. We regret that there continue to be setbacks in the achievement of the 5+2 agenda to close the Office of the High Representative. In conclusion, the Dominican Republic reiterates its recognition of the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and calls on all those responsible for the success of the peace process to offer their support to the Office of the High Representative and European Union-led Operation Althea. Bosnia and Herzegovina, with its two entities - Republika Srpska and the Federation - needs the political will to allow it to consolidate its path to sustainable development. This year we commemorate two important dates: the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide in July and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Let those anniversaries be a reminder to all parties to move towards true reconciliation.
