Ms. Ponce (Philippines): The Philippines aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative
of Viet Nam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.

We thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to share
concrete proposals on how to prevent and respond
to violations committed by non-State armed groups
against children, in particular in relation to peace
processes.

As Council members may know, the Philippine
Government concluded peace negotiations with the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) and signed,
in March 2014, the Comprehensive Agreement on the
Bangsamoro. Subsequently, a Transition Commission,
composed of MILF and Government representatives and
led by MILF, was tasked to draft a basic Bangsamoro
law, intended to be the legal framework and governing
law of the new Bangsamoro entity and territory. This
draft law is now under consideration by our Congress
and Senate.

Recognizing that the welfare of children is integral
to any peace process, this basic law mandates the
Bangsamoro Government to uphold and protect the
fundamental rights of children and to establish special
development programmes and laws for the young people
of the Bangsamoro. It further provides that children,
especially orphans of tender age, shall be protected
from abuse, exploitation or discrimination.

In negotiating with MILF, our approach was always

based on trust, good faith and acknowledgement of
the existence of legitimate grievances. This approach

necessarily anchored a holistic approach that meant

pursuing not just a political settlement, but also a

comprehensive social welfare programme - the

Sajahatra Bangsamoro - covering health, education

and livelihood, and an economic development plan,

both to address the root causes of armed conflict. This

approach allowed us to build trust, which was essential
for MILF to conclude in 2009 an action plan with the
United Nations to eliminate the recruitment and use of
children, and to agree to its extension in April 2013.

The action plan continues to be actively implemented
by them, with UNICEF Philippines commending MILF
for its commitment to addressing this issue. Last
December, MILF military commanders and troops
underwent a series of orientation sessions on the
roles and responsibilities of MILF military leadership
and rank and file in preventing and addressing the
recruitment and use of children, the sanctions if they
did not comply, and the concept of child protection,
including the definition of a child under international
law, grave violations against children, as well as legal
frameworks on child protection. At the end of these
sessions, MILF front and base commanders publicly
commit to ensuring that no children are associated with
their respective commands, and that if there are cases,
these children will be separated from the command
structure. According to UNICEF, 4,151 Bangsamoro
Islamic Armed Forces elements from 26 base commands
and four fronts have received such training.

Our take-away points from our experience are
the following. Peace talks and negotiations must
incorporate the protection of children and provide a
framework for their future from the very start. Equally
important, there must be political will and trust on the
part of both the Government and the non-State armed
group to see the process through. Similarly, military
operations must complement the peace process by
ensuring that continuous human rights training,
particularly on child rights and protection, including
the non-use of education facilities, is incorporated into
their operational strategies and plans. This encourages
similar action on the part of committed non-State
armed groups.

Parallel to these is the need to strengthen and
clarify the national legal framework for the protection
of children. We already had a law - Republic Act
7610, also known as the Special Protection of Children
Against Child Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination
Act - that declared children as "zones of peace" who
should not be recruited as members of the armed forces
or its civilian units, or be used as fighters, couriers or
spies. To ensure its clear implementation, our President
issued Executive Order 138 establishing a monitoring,
reporting and response system composed of civilian,
military and police agencies, which meets regularly
to verify reports on children who are alleged to be
combatants or couriers, guides, spies, medics, cooks or
serving in any similar non-combatant capacity.

Subsequently, these agencies signed a memorandum
of agreement that provides for the development of
an inter-agency action and communication plan on
the prevention and response to grave child rights
violations; the integration of rights of children in
situations of armed conflict into peace negotiations
and other peacebuilding programmes and processes;
and the development of package services, including
education and health services, for children affected by
armed conflict situations. In addition, a bill providing
for the special protection of children in situations of
armed conflict and for penalties for violations thereof
is also pending before our Senate.

Regional and international partners also play an
effective role in monitoring compliance by non-State
armed groups of their obligations under peace processes
and action plans. Their very presence can build capacity
and trust, but it is important that they work in close
coordination and with the approval of the Government
so that specific and contextualized programmes,
including capacity- and confidence-building measures,
can be jointly identified and implemented.

The Security Council may also wish to consider
a stronger focus on the encouragement that delisting
can bring. On the other hand, we also know that not all
non-State armed groups share our values or are open to
action plans. We have seen the rise of extremist groups
that do not seek legitimation by the international order,
but rather seek to destroy it. In these cases, efforts must
focus on accountability and sanctions, including justice
mechanisms. To that end, we need strong domestic laws
that criminalize the recruitment and use of children for
armed conflict, as well as action by the International
Criminal Court.

Finally, documentation can be used not just as a
tool to publicize abuses by non-State armed groups, but
also to publicize the progress they make. Such positive
reinforcement raises the normative and political costs
for them. In this regard, it is important that information
provided by the website of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict
be current and up to date. We note, for instance, that
the information on the Philippines on the website is
still based on the 2013 report of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council (S/2013/419). It also does not
reflect the fact that MILF has signed an extension to
the 2009 action plan, as well as progress made by MILF
since 2013. Again, positive reinforcement would help in
this regard.

