The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

Policing is vital, and as we further consider and
develop our understanding of peacebuilding, it is now
more important than ever, given that police are often
more effective in that context than the traditional
reliance on troops. Mr. Lacroix talked about the State
liaison functions of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur in his introductory remarks
on the Sudan. In that context, I think that as we look
at the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
in the Sudan, a policing component will be vital in
the follow-on mission. It would be good to hear any
comments he may have on that point.

If United Nations policing is to remain effective,
then whether we are members of the Council,
police-contributing countries or police commanders,
we need to listen to the experiences of police officers
on the ground and consider how reform can make a
practical difference. Our German colleague talked
about United Nations policing not yet being at its full
potential, and I agree with that. As the United Kingdom,
we are of course strong supporters of resolutions 2185
(2014) and 2382 (2017) and of the 2016 external review
of the functions, structure and capacity of the United
Nations Police Division, although more should be done
regarding the outstanding recommendations of that
review. We believe that the recent report on policing
by the Secretary-General (S/2016/952) provides an
opportunity to take stock of the various strands of
reform and set out a clear plan for the future. There are
two areas that I want to briefly highlight.

First, the United Kingdom wants to see the full
integration of policing advice into mission planning
processes to ensure that policing expertise is included
in decision-making throughout the life of a mission.
That means, in simple terms, that police experts should
be at the table and should be listened to. That needs to
be underpinned by a strong analytical capability.

Secondly, we want to see United Nations
missions continue to support the development of law
enforcement in host States - we heard from some of
our commanders today about that - and to do that
based on an assessment ofhost State needs and capacity.
We believe that to maximize impact, the police need
to have the right specialists with the right disciplines
in the right places. We therefore encourage the Police
Division to improve efficiency in recruitment and
subsequent deployment. Recruitment can be slow and
bureaucratic. It should be based on skills, capabilities
and expertise. It should be transparent, fair and open,
and it should differentiate between formed police units
and individual police officers or specialized teams. Of
course, police deploying into missions should be trained
to the highest standards. We therefore want to see the
Strategic Guidance Framework setting out the doctrine
for policing finalized as soon as possible, including all
guidance manuals.

I would like to conclude by noting that I was struck
by what Police Commander Yacouba of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali had to say about the relationship with
the population and the importance of human rights
and trust. To succeed in their mission, officers clearly
need to be able to police locally in order to understand
communities. A police officer by definition is an officer
of the place where he or she serves. I believe that trust
is more readily formed if police officers reflect the
diversity of the world to which they are sent to protect.

Like our colleague from Peru, I would be interested
in Ms. Fitah-Kona's views on best practices regarding
the issue of community policing and establishing trust.
As others have said, and echoing what the Commissioner
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei,
Ms. Gahonzire, had to say, we would like to see action
against the obstacles that prevent women from entering
the United Nations Police. I have one specific question
for Mr. Abdounasir, the Commissioner for the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is about
what the most pressing challenges for United Nations
Police are in the context of the recent strategic review
of 24 September, and how he intends to meet them.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

We had a good round of questions and answers
halfway through, and we have had a few more questions
since then. I will again turn the floor over to the
briefers to respond to the questions posed or make
further comments.

I give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.

