Mr. Van Den Akker: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

First of all, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2018/539) and
the strategic review. Our thanks also go to Special
Representative Yamamoto, Mr. Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for
their respective briefings.

As stated previously on several occasions, the EU
strongly acknowledges the crucial role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and all the relevant United Nations agencies
in supporting the Afghan people, while encouraging
peace and reconciliation, monitoring and promoting
human rights and coordinating the international
community's assistance. The EU wishes to have the
closest possible relationship with UNAMA in a spirit
of transparent and open cooperation on the ground
and in international formats for the ultimate benefit
of Afghanistan.

The EU supports President Ghani's peace offer
to the Taliban extended at the February meeting of
the Kabul process for peace and security. The recent
historic ceasefires between the Afghan Government
and the Taliban during Eid Al-Fitr have given the
Afghan people much-needed respite from too many
years of conflict. Popular support for that initiative
was overwhelming. The gathering of Afghans from all
sides - with Government officials, soldiers, members
of the Taliban exchanging Eid Al-Fitr greetings and
attending prayers together - has given a sense of what
peace in Afghanistan could look like. The European
Union commends both parties for honouring their
commitments. President Ghani's decision to offer a 10-
day extension of the ceasefire was another courageous
step to make way for peace negotiations, and we call on
the Taliban to reciprocate.

Meaningful and enduring peace in Afghanistan
requires continuous and inclusive dialogue and
engagement, and the EU is ready to support that process.
In that light, the European Union supports the Kabul
process for peace and security. High Representative
of the European Union Mogherini, at the Tashkent
conference on peace, security and regional development
held on 28 March, offered EU support for peace
negotiations and increased EU assistance for women's
empowerment, regional economic development and the
reintegration of refugees and former fighters. The EU
reiterates the importance of the Afghan Government
and the Taliban moving towards a political settlement,
which has to be Afghan-led and Afghan owned.
Therefore, the Kabul process on peace and security
should be the main international forum and vehicle to
support such talks. Regional actors have an important
role to play in facilitating the process.

The next ministerial conference on Afghanistan,
to be held in late November in Geneva, will be an
important opportunity to highlight linkages between
a future reconciliation process and broader political,
economic and social challenges. The conference will
also take stock of the implementation of the Afghan
Government's reform package committed to at the
Brussels conference on Afghanistan in October 2016.

We support NATO-led Resolute Support Mission
efforts to provide further training, advice and assistance
to the Afghan security forces and institutions.

Respect for human rights and democratic elections
continue to be a focus for the EU's dialogue with
the Afghan authorities and the EU's actions in the
country. Human rights form an integral part of the
structured dialogue between the EU and Afghanistan
under the Cooperation Agreement for Partnership
and Development. In that context, the first meeting
of the special working group on human rights, good
governance and migration was held on 5 May in Kabul,
during which we held a substantial and open discussion
about a wide range of topics in the area of human rights
and good governance. The discussions confirmed
that Afghanistan has sound legislation in place in
various areas, or is about to adopt such legislation
in the near future. What is still lacking, however, is
effective implementation. There is definitely room for
improvement in many areas. During our dialogue, we
identified some of the actions that need to be taken to
ensure progress. Tangible measures against corruption
demonstrating the political will to address the issue are
of particular importance. Likewise, efforts to protect
and further expand girls and women's rights and
enhance their empowerment must continue.

The application of capital punishment remains
a great concern for us, and the EU has underlined its
principled opposition to any form of the death penalty.
It has continued to call for an outright abolition of
the death penalty in due course, beginning with an
immediate moratorium as a first step. On the other
hand, it is positive that the new Afghan penal code
significantly limits the number of crimes to which the
death penalty can be applied.

The upcoming parliamentary and district elections
in October are of vital importance for the stability of
Afghanistan. It is imperative that the elections take place
according to schedule and in a credible, transparent and
inclusive manner, in view of ensuring the credibility
of Government reforms that will be presented at the
ministerial conference in Geneva. The EU notes with
some concern that actions remain to be taken to address
delays in preparation for the elections and that there is
a lack of outreach to the provinces and delays in setting
up fully functional electoral institutions. All efforts
must be deployed now to resolve those difficulties and
make the holding of the elections possible within the
announced time frame. The successful organization of
the elections will be an important prelude to next year's
presidential elections and can provide a firm foundation
on which to begin preparations for that event. The
EU and its States members remain committed to
supporting the Afghan electoral process, and the EU
has pledged €15.5 million to assist the parliamentary
and district elections, together with other members of
the international community under the coordination
of UNAMA.

The EU and Afghanistan are continuing their
comprehensive dialogue on migration. The latest
discussion on the Afghanistan Joint Way Forward took
place on 6 May, at which Afghanistan reiterated its
commitment to the implementation of the Joint Way
Forward and underlined the importance of dignified,
safe and orderly returns and for special attention to be
paid to vulnerable groups. That is something the EU
and its States members agree upon, and we reiterated
the fact that the implementation of the Joint Way
Forward must be continued in a spirit of partnership,
while taking into account each party's sensitivities.

At the same time, the regional dimension of
migration remains high on the EU's agenda and is
being addressed in the political dialogue, as well as
through financial assistance. The EU has made a strong
commitment to address the key challenges of irregular
migration and forced displacement in Afghanistan,
as well as in the region, and to work towards finding
a comprehensive regional solution, while focusing
on the root causes of migration and ensuring the
sustainable reintegration of returned Afghan nationals
within the country. To that end, the EU has continued
the implementation of the two regional programmes
targeting migration and regional displacement in Asia.

From 1 January to 31 March, UNAMA recorded
2,258 civilian casualties in Afghanistan, reflecting
a similarly high casualty toll as compared to the
first three months of 2016 and 2017. The persistently
high levels of violence and its corresponding impact
on civilians remains a deep concern for the EU. It is
extremely worrying that the proportion of women and
children killed and injured remains high. We call on
all parties to protect the civilian population, especially
women and children. Conflict-related violence also
destroys livelihoods, homes and property, displaces
families and limits access to education, health and other
services. We need to continue to protect the vital role
of humanitarian agencies and respect their impartiality
and the humanitarian space in addressing the most
urgent needs of the most vulnerable.

In conclusion, it is important that the international
community remain strongly committed to supporting
Afghanistan in its pursuit of long-term peace, security
and stability. The EU expects that the recent initiatives
of President Ghani and of the Afghan Government will
lead to the establishment of a genuine peace process.
The EU continues to consider UNAMA a key partner
in achieving lasting peace in Afghanistan. UNAMA
has an invaluable role in ensuring the broadest possible
international support for an Afghan-led and -owned
process. The EU will continue to support those efforts
with all the means at its disposal.

