Mr. Christian (Ghana): Allow me to express my
delegation's appreciation to Johan Verbeke, Ricardo
Arias and Peter Burian, Chairmen, respectively, of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267

(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), for their
informative briefings.

The 1267 Committee has made appreciable
progress - boosted, no doubt, by the adoption of
Security Council resolutions 1730 (2006) and 1735
(2006). We believe that by providing an alternative
channel for review by aggrieved listed individuals and
entities, this mechanism will improve the conditions
for transparency and due process and thereby build
confidence in the sanctions regime.

We wish to stress that the idea behind the focal
point is access, simplicity and transparency. It is
therefore essential that we avoid overly bureaucratic
and complicating procedures that would frustrate
petitioners and undermine the very objective of the
new mechanism. Resolution 1735 (2006), by means of
which States were given guidance on the submission of
names for the Consolidated List and the mandate of the
Monitoring Team was renewed, is an important
instrument for the work of the Committee. In this
regard, we wish to express our gratitude to the
Monitoring Team for its invaluable supporting role.

A body such as the 1267 Committee cannot
operate efficiently without reference to targets and
verifiable benchmarks. It is for that reason that we
endorse the proposal in the Chairman's report to
conduct, in July 2007, a stocktaking exercise with the
objective of evaluating the implementation of
resolutions 1730 (2006) and 1735 (2006).

We note with satisfaction the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's focus on monitoring and promoting the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), facilitating
technical assistance to States and maintaining dialogue
with States on the implementation of resolution 1624
(2005).

Within this context, my delegation considers the
Preliminary Implementation Assessments (PIAs) as an
innovative and indispensable tool in the analysis of the
state of implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We
commend the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in the
preparation of the 144 PIAs, and we look forward to
the completion of the PIAs for all members within the
time frame envisaged.

We are of the View that the efforts of the
Committee and the CTED in identifying the needs of
States and facilitating appropriate assistance from

bilateral and multilateral donors should be sustained. It
is important that existing programmes and efforts be
tilted towards identifying the underlying problems and
deficiencies in the target State, instead of focusing on
the extent of report submissions and compliance with
resolutions.

We commend the efforts of the Committees and
the CTED in developing a technical assistance
programme for countries of the Economic Community
of West African States, based on their experience with
the States of the Pacific Forum.

We look forward to the fifth special meeting of
the CTED with regional and international
organizations, on the theme of the prevention of
terrorist movement and effective border security,
scheduled to be held in Nairobi in October 2007. We
are certain that this meeting in Africa will provide a
useful opportunity for countries in the region to engage
in an interactive dialogue - not only with each other,
but also with various experts - on the problems and
challenges confronting them.

Resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006), which
have been widely hailed as landmark decisions,
eloquently demonstrate the determination of the United
Nations and, by extension, Member States to diligently
pursue efforts towards comprehensively addressing the
nexus between the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) and terrorism. Undoubtedly, we
cannot but acknowledge that, three years after its
inception, the 1540 Committee has made significant
strides in the discharge of its responsibilities within the
purview of its mandate.

The various outreach programmes, especially that
of Accra, are worthwhile, given the fact that the
majority of the non-reporting States are in the African
region and other developing countries. Those forums
provide a necessary platform for sensitization and
increasing awareness of the importance of the
resolution, and they create opportunities to encourage
and assist countries to fulfil their obligations. We
therefore welcome the Committee's decision to
continue working with donor agencies to organize
follow-up meetings, and we hope that such events will
address specific challenges confronting countries in the
regions.
Operative paragraph 4 of resolution 1540 (2004),
inter alia, explicitly called on States to fulfil their
requirements within six months of its adoption. Thus,

inasmuch as we welcome the increase in the number of
reporting States, my delegation remains equally
concerned that 55 States - mostly in Africa, the
Caribbean and the Pacific island region - are yet to
submit their first reports. While calling on those States
to faithfully implement their obligations, we would
also urge the Committee, as part of its efforts to
achieve the optimal goal on reporting, to critically
ascertain the constraining factors with a View to
helping them to surmount those inherent challenges.

The idea of international control over the spread
of WMDs to non-State actors will remain a mirage
unless States faithfully adhere to their commitments.
Therefore 2007 should be a year of implementation if
we are to make substantial progress. In that regard, we
urge the Committee to place appreciable emphasis on
the implementation aspect, since resolution 1540
(2004) suffers from an implementation deficit within
and among States. We would be the first to
acknowledge that, given the gamut of control elements
within the resolution and countries' disparate levels of
resources, a satisfactory universal level of
implementation can be attained only through
international cooperation and assistance.

The role of the Committee in that area cannot be
overemphasized, and we commend it for having taken
practical measures towards the organization of forums
on the issue of assistance, the most recent one being
the thematic discussions that were held on 14 May
2007.

While our support for and commitment to the
spirit and letter of the resolutions remain unwavering,
it is our fervent conviction that the ultimate goal of
overcoming the twin scourge of WMD proliferation
and terrorism can be realized only through complete,
verifiable and irreversible disarmament, as well as a
comprehensive resolution of the fundamental problems
that nurture terrorist activities and allow them to fester.

