I thank Minister Le Drian and the French presidency of the Security Council for the opportunity to discuss the important topic of the situation in Mali. I am delighted that we have been joined by His Excellency Foreign Minister Drame of Mali today. Let me also extend our thanks to their Excellencies Secretary-General Guterres and African Union High Representative for the Sahel and Mali Mr. Buyoya for reinforcing the importance of a coordinated international response. We further welcome the commitment of the African Union to Mali and the region, including to deploying African Union forces. Let me assure all colleagues that the United Kingdom remains committed to working with all members of the Council, through the United Nations and the new Coalition for the Sahel, as well as bilaterally, to support progress in Mali. As the Security Council meets this month to look at the progress of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), and indeed to renew its mandate, we, like others, wish to join those recognizing the immense sacrifices made by United Nations peacekeepers working for peace in Mali. In seven years, more than 200 personnel have lost their lives serving in MINUSMA. The scourge of the coronavirus disease now presents an added challenge for those who serve on the front line in this Mission. I wish to join with others and the Secretary-General in paying tribute to all our incredible peacekeepers who have lost their lives, including the two who tragically died recently in Mali due to this global pandemic. The work of peacekeepers saves lives. As we have heard today, MINUSMA continues to have an absolutely direct impact on the ground through its work to support the Malian Government and the signatory parties in implementing the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, emanating from the Algiers process. The recent legislative elections, coupled with the partial deployment of the reconstituted army in the north and the inclusive national political dialogue, including, most important, women's participation, are indeed strong signs of progress. I therefore welcome the Secretary-General's recent report (S/2020/476). As we move forward, we should continue to support MINUSMA and call on the Government of Mali to spare absolutely no effort in fully implementing all the requirements of the peace agreement. In that regard, as we reflect on the twentieth anniversary year of resolution 1325 (2000), it is highly incumbent on each and every one of us to be absolutely committed to women playing a full, integrated, effective and meaningful role at every single stage of this important process. To succeed, revised goals for the north, as set out in the mandate, must be both ambitious and, indeed, achievable. New benchmarks must help to restore State authority and tackle impunity in the centre. Recent reports and allegations of human rights violations must rally MINUSMA to protect civilians and encourage accountability - a point that was well made by Minister Heiko Maas. We will significantly increase our contribution this year through the deployment of 250 United Kingdom troops in a long-range mechanized infantry reconnaissance task patrol group. It is my hope and our belief that this three-year commitment will multiply our success; it will enhance the security and safety of all peacekeepers and embed peacekeeping reform. Lastly, the United Kingdom commits itself to supporting improved mission performance through its bilateral support and training offer to troop-contributing countries. To conclude, although MINUSMA's mandate is complex and the scale of the challenge makes it the most expensive United Nations peacekeeping operation, nevertheless we must positively recognize that we are making progress. As we review that progress and agree the way ahead together, we must remind ourselves that MINUSMA is not itself a permanent solution but a route to a means to an end and to a more sustainable and long-standing solution. The United Kingdom fully supports the efforts to adapt and improve the Mission as we seek to bring lasting peace and stability to Mali. Therefore, despite the volatility in the environment that we have seen through the continued presence of armed groups affiliated to Al-Qaida and the Islamic State, the United Kingdom will continue to support the Mission adaptation plan so as to deliver a more agile, responsive and adaptable force to meet these challenges. The United Kingdom is proud to play its part. At a system-wide level, we will continue to fund the implementation of the peacekeeping intelligence policy, which supports the non-clandestine collection of intelligence. This informs a whole-of-mission approach to planning, which improves both the safety of the Mission personnel and the protection of civilians. Let me assure all Member States that we will continue to fund the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System, which informs decision-makers as part of an integrated policy performance framework. Like others, we remain committed to playing our part in Mali through the United Nations.
