Mr. Baja (Philippines): We congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and we commend the Russian
presidency for its excellent stewardship of the Council
last month.

We also wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting at a time when
significant developments are under way in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - a conflict area
that has claimed some 3 million lives. We note with
particular interest the briefings of Under-Secretary-
General Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Special
Representative Mr. Amos Ngongi and European Union
High Representative Mr. Javier Solana. We welcome
Ambassador William Swing's appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We join the international community in
welcoming the swearing-in yesterday of the four Vice-
Presidents who constitute the Transitional Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, it is
a significant step to unify the Democratic Republic of
the Congo during this critical stage. We wish all the
Congolese parties success in their efforts to achieve
genuine national reconciliation. We encourage them to
maintain the 22-month time frame for the Transitional
Government to usher in the establishment of an elected
Government. We share the Congolese people's goal of
holding credible and fair democratic elections.

My delegation notes that the formation of a
Transitional Government was a swift response to the
call of the recent Security Council mission to Central
Africa, led by France, for the Congolese parties to
implement without further delay the global and all-
inclusive accord on the establishment of a Transitional
Government. Indeed, Security Council missions to
conflict areas - missions which engage in dialogue
with the relevant parties involved in conflict - make
an important and meaningful contribution to steps to
resolve such conflict.

However, the formation of a Transitional
Government is only a first step. Security in the Ituri
region remains fragile. We commend France and the
other countries that make up the International
Emergency Multinational Force (IEMF) in Bunia for
immediately providing security in that area. It is thus
of paramount importance that a security vacuum not
emerge once the IEMF has completed its mandate by
lSeptember. In this regard, the proposal of the
Secretary-General to strengthen MONUC deserves
support. We note the considerable progress made in the
negotiations on the draft resolution to address that
concern. My delegation looks forward to the early
adoption of that draft resolution, under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

We are fully aware that the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is complex and
difficult. However, it is not insurmountable. We agree
with the conclusion of the recent Security Council
mission to Central Africa that the time for war has
passed and that the time has come to carry out the
political agreements of the parties. It is now time to
translate the commitments made in the peace
agreements into reality. The strengthening of MONUC
is only one of the measures to halt the fighting and the
violence in the volatile areas. My delegation would like
to endorse a number of initiatives - initiatives that
have been repeatedly echoed but that have yet to be
implemented - to create a long-term peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

First, an international conference involving the
countries in the Great Lakes region should be
convened. My delegation notes the preparatory work
that has been undertaken in this regard. This would be
a step in the right direction, and it should be vigorously
pursued. Secondly, an agreement on good-
neighbourliness must be forged.

My delegation also notes the briefings given last
week by Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and
Mr. Bertrand Ramcharan, United Nations Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights, with regard to the
investigations made concerning specific incidents
involving gross human rights violations. Every effort
must be undertaken to bring the perpetrators of those
acts to justice.

Finally, more concrete steps should be adopted to
stop the pillaging of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's natural resources. We thus look forward to the
Council's response to the recommendations of the
Kassem Panel report.

