Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your delegation for leading the work of the Security
Council for the month of February. I also welcome the
statement made by the Secretary-General at the start of
this debate.

The issue before us is particularly timely, as we
are approaching the celebration of the seventieth
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations,
and as we face multiple crises that are typically very
different in nature and that show the evolving nature of
the threats to international peace and security. While
the environment is changing, the fundamental pillars
on which the Organization is based are still today as
important and relevant as they were 70 years ago.

As described in the concept note prepared by China
(S/2015/87, annex), respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence, non-interference in
the internal affairs of States and the peaceful settlement
of international disputes are the cornerstones on which
international law and international relations are based.
These are not empty concepts that are devoid ofmeaning
in today's world. They are values and principles that
underpin a system where States - whether large
or small - can live and work in a cooperative, free,
independent and democratic manner, in a secure
environment and for the benefit of their respective
people and humankind in general.

That is why we should avoid expansive and
malleable interpretations that are designed to
undermine and distort the purposes and principles of
the Charter and make them irrelevant; otherwise, we
would be prioritizing a system in which might makes
right, the diversity that we all have is ignored, and the
freedom of societies to determine their own destinies is
curtailed. In that context, Colombia endorses the notion
expressed by China in the concept note, where it says
that,

"Equal and democratic participation must
be upheld in the establishment of international
rules. In particular, small and medium-sized
developing countries, which make up the majority
of the membership of the United Nations, should
participate on an equal footing in the establishment
ofinternational rules related to peace and security."

Moreover, after almost 70 years of experience, we
must once again recognize that, in the maintenance of
international peace and security, there is no general
recipe that is applicable to all cases. We have seen a
gradual trend within the Security Council to address
cross-cutting thematic issues, which has the potential
to simplify the approaches taken to issues that, owing
to their nature, need to be addressed on a case-by-
case basis. We must avoid generalized approaches and
measures that do not reflect specific contexts and do
not recognize the diversity of factors that should be
considered in determining whether or not the Security
Council should consider a situation.

Since the time the Charter of the United Nations
was negotiated, Colombia has promoted cooperation
with regional organizations and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, placing particular importance
on the implementation of Chapters VI and VII of the
Charter. Over these 70 years, the greatest successes
of the United Nations in general and of the Security
Council in particular include some cases in which we
have worked with regional organizations, emphasizing
policy coherence, a common vision, uniformity in the
interpretation of international norms and certainty
with respect to achieving our common objectives. That
is one of the main reasons to reaffirm the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, in particular of
Chapter VIII, as these represent the underpinning of
our common action of cooperation and our unity of
purpose.

While there are differences in the membership,
structure and methods of work of the United Nations and
the many regional organizations, it has been repeatedly
shown that these entities have a privileged position, with
unique access to key actors and exceptional knowledge
and experiences with respect to the situation in their
region. Thus the Charter recognizes their importance
as privileged forums for the settlement of disputes and
their importance as strategic partners in the activities
of the Security Council.

The language of the Charter is clear; it gives
priority to the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
avoidance of coercive measures, using them only as a
tool of last resort. We must work on mechanisms and
working methods that allow for the full implementation
of Chapter VI and the development of modalities that
give priority to the use of different means of settling
disputes peacefully, in an inclusive, impartial, objective
and depoliticized way.
