Mr. Patriota: I also thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for his statement.

The Peacebuilding Commission is pleased
to contribute to the Security Council's interim
consideration of the progress made on United Nations
peacebuilding efforts in the aftermath of conflict.
The periodic reporting by the Secretary-General to
the Security Council and the General Assembly on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict offers an
opportunity to keep Member States and United Nations
operational entities focused on the imperative of joint
and coherent efforts to prevent conflict and situations
of relapse into conflict.

Peacebuilding is an expression of the international
community's recognition that our collective response
to conflict must be multifaceted and sustained over the
long term. In that context, the Commission recognizes
the importance of the main themes set out in the
Secretary-General's 2012 report on peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746), namely, inclusivity,
institution-building and sustained international support
and mutual accountability.

The recent crises in the Central African
Republic and South Sudan remind us that the nature
of peacebuilding requires a careful examination of
strategies for stabilization efforts and their sequencing.
Collective and persistent engagement to address this
systemic and ongoing deficiency must continue.

In my inaugural statement to the Peacebuilding
Commission, on 29 January, I noted that, while
sustaining peace is a central objective of the United
Nations' peace and security architecture, we face the
systemic challenge of the short span of attention and
commitment from the international community to
the complex and long-term challenges to sustainable
peace. The Peacebuilding Commission was indeed
mandated to "extend the period of attention given by
the international community to post-conflict recovery"
(resolution 1645 (2005), para. 2 (c)).

A key feature ofthe Commission's engagement with
Burundi and Sierra Leone since 2006 has been to sustain
attention to the ongoing political and socioeconomic
challenges facing both countries, in which the United
Nations heavily invested to re-establish security,
strengthen governance structures, promote greater
respect for the rule of law, support community recovery
and support the early stages of the respective political
processes. In support of the United Nations leadership
in both countries, the Commission has advised the
Security Council over the years on issues requiring
immediate attention while also working to mobilize
broader support from subregions and international
partners in favour of the long-term political and
socioeconomic dimensions of peacebuilding.

Both countries are approaching the milestone of
transitioning from the Security Council's politically
and security-oriented mandated missions to the
development-oriented presence of the United Nations
country team. An adequate transition from emergency
to development remains essential but is still, to a
great extent, an ideal fraught with challenges. The
change in the nature of the United Nations presence
and mandate on the ground in both countries calls for
calibrated yet sustained attention to ongoing political
and socioeconomic challenges associated with nascent
national institutions and governance practices, and
strong engagement on the development track.

While we continue to insist that peacebuilding must
be nationally owned and that ownership comes with
responsibility, the international community must also
rise to the occasion and continue to help Burundi and
Sierra Leone to stay the course. That is also a consistent
message that the Commission and the respective United
Nations leadership deliver in, and on behalf of, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau and Liberia.

The importance of inclusive political processes
and national institutions and capacities cannot be
overemphasized. In Guinea and in Guinea-Bissau,
the Commission's collaboration with the respective
United Nations leadership focuses on ensuring that,
regardless of the outcome of national elections, political
dialogue should remain inclusive and the political
space should remain available for the opposition to
participate in shaping the future of both countries.
No majority Government can alone face the myriad
challenges facing a society emerging from conflict.
As demonstrated by the painful turn of events in the
Central African Republic, elected Governments that fail
to keep the various societal and political forces engaged
can drive their countries towards untold tragedies. That
is the advice that the United Nations overall and the
Commission jointly continue to extend to the political
leadership in Burundi, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

A crucial aspect of inclusivity relates to the
participation and contribution of women and youth to
the peacebuilding process. While women and youth
endure the tragic consequences of violent conflicts,
they are also strategic agents for societal transformation
and emancipation in post-conflict societies. In a
declaration adopted by the Peacebuilding Commission
last September on women's economic empowerment for
peacebuilding, our ministers recognized that

"the economic empowerment of women greatly
contributes to the effectiveness of post-conflict
economic activities and economic growth"
(PBC/7/OC/3, para. 4).

In Guinea-Bissau, I was impressed by the potential
contribution of women's organizations to strengthening
the economic role of women, thus helping to forge a
more inclusive political culture in the country and
bringing together different identities, religions and
political affiliations. The transformative potential of
greater participation by women in the economic and
political spheres can provide an invaluable contribution
to building more peaceful, democratic and prosperous
societies. The gender dimension of peacebuilding
deserves our continuing attention and unwavering
commitment.

Building or rebuilding institutions in a country
emerging from conflict is the practical expression of
national ownership and the sustainability of peace. At
the same time, institutions take a long time to develop
into an efficient medium for political participation and
for the delivery of security, justice, basic social services
and economic opportunities. The Commission's
observation of the contribution of nascent institutions to
peacebuilding, such as the National Revenue Authority
and the Anti-corruption Commission in Burundi, the
National Youth Commission in Sierra Leone and the
regional justice and security hubs in Liberia, confirms
that institution-building must go beyond establishing
and nurturing organizational structures. The capacity
of the Government to sustain and empower those
institutions to help in rebuilding the social fabric and
generating economic opportunities remains a key
challenge for the countries concerned. Unless there
is a solid commitment from the political leadership,
institutions may fall prey to political manipulation or
other forms of dysfunction. Through its collaboration
with the Peacebuilding Fund and by lending its political
weight in support of the United Nations leadership
and the Governments concerned, the Commission has
supported institution-building related initiatives in
Burundi, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

The Commission can certainly do more to support the
development of strategies and initiatives that prioritize
institution-building and capacity development. In areas
such as natural-resource management, transparent
financial management for development, domestic
revenue-generation and the fight against illicit financial
flows and organized crime, the Commission can serve
as a platform to mobilize targeted technical support,
especially in the context of South-South cooperation.

As the Secretary-General prepares to release
his next report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict, later this year, the Commission emphasizes
the need for deepening analysis, supported by country
examples, of how the United Nations collective
and diversified efforts across the security and
socioeconomic spectrum of post-conflict response
contribute to long-term peacebuilding objectives. There
is a need to know in what ways the United Nations
mandated presence and evolving operational practice
has made a real difference in the countries affected
by or emerging from conflict. The Commission will
benefit from that analysis as it seeks to further deepen,
focus and calibrate its advisory function to the Council
and its support to the United Nations leadership in the
field. That is a critical aspect of the Commission's early
preparation for the upcoming mandated review in 2015.
In the same vein, in light of the Council's presidential
note contained in document S/2003/515, of 28 August
2013, regular informal interactive meetings with the
members of the Security Council will further sharpen
the focus on peacebuilding-related topics, particularly
in the country-specific contexts.

In June 2014, the Commission will convene its
first-ever annual session. The session will offer an
opportunity for Member States, the United Nations
system and other actors to address and focus on a
peacebuilding-related theme with a view to elaborating
how intergovernmental policy and political support can
improve and make a difference for people in countries
emerging from conflict. We trust that this annual
effort can reinforce and help orient the evolving United
Nations peacebuilding agenda, not least by engaging
key partners from regional organizations, international
financial institutions and civil society. A viable
partnership with those actors is no longer a matter of
choice. It is indeed a necessity, and that is where the
Peacebuilding Commission has its special niche.

Finally, allow me a final word on the interrelated
topics of inclusivity, institution-building and mutual
accountability. While keeping a focus on the centrality
of inclusive national development for peacebuilding, let
us not cede to the mental habits of viewing development
ultimately as a technology of security. Our efforts must
remain people-centered. True peace is also built upon
an enlarged sense of development, as emancipation
and fulfilment of multidimensional human aspirations,
including through cultural and social interconnections.
I believe we can put that idea at the very centre of our
peacebuilding efforts, while fostering greater solidarity
and true empathy so as to dispel the logic of providers
and beneficiaries through improved reciprocity and
mutual recognition.

For all of us, there is much to learn from the
struggles of the people facing peacebuilding challenges
in their daily lives. The Peacebuilding Commission
can also be an important platform for connecting
their voice, promoting a network for new encounters
and allowing for an active and horizontal flow of
knowledge and experience. In 2014, we will have plenty
of opportunities to embark on that enriched dialogue.

