Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Syrian issue is a priority concern of the international
community. In the more than two years, more than
7 million Syrians have been displaced from their homes,
with tremendous losses in lives and property. In this
Chamber, on many occasions the Council has discussed
major issues involving war and peace. Neither Syria nor
the Middle East region can afford another war.

In dealing with the Syrian issue, the Council must
bear in mind the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. It must maintain a sense of
responsibility towards the Syrian people and to world
history and ensure that any decision it takes is able to
pass the test of history.

Several weeks ago, dark clouds of war
overshadowed the Syrian issue. Many countries were
gravely concerned. China opposes the use of force in
international relations. We believe that military means
cannot solve the Syrian issue; rather, they would lead to
greater turmoil and disaster.

We are heartened by the Council's unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2118 (2013), drawing the
Syrian situation back on track towards peace and away
from the threat of war, and presenting a new opportunity
to find a political settlement to the issue. This is the
first time that the Council has taken joint major action
on the Syrian issue in more than a year. The resolution
is in keeping with the general direction of the political
settlement of the Syrian issue and reflects the Council's
role and its solidarity. China welcomes the adoption of
the resolution.

China suffered deeply from the use of chemical
weapons by Japanese invaders during the Second
World War. We are firmly opposed to the use of
chemical weapons by any country, group or individual.
Whoever uses chemical weapons should be condemned
by all. China welcomes Syria's recent accession to the
Chemical Weapons Convention.

Resolution 2118 (2013) sets out the overall objective
of the destruction of chemical weapons in Syria and
the road map for the follow-up work. China is ready
to send experts to participate in relevant work and
provide financial support in that regard. We hope
that the parties concerned will maintain their close
cooperation, fulfil their respective responsibilities,
and comprehensively and accurately implement the
decision of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the Council resolution, with the
ultimate aim of achieving a satisfactory settlement of
the chemical weapons issue in Syria.

The humanitarian situation in Syria is deteriorating.
China is deeply concerned. The Chinese Government
has provided more than $11 million in humanitarian
assistance to Syrian civilians in and outside of Syria.
China is now providing ¥15 million of emergency
humanitarian aid to Jordan and will provide more
than ¥24 million in cash remittances for emergency
humanitarian aid to the World Food Programme and
the World Health Organization. Our assistancewill be
used to assist displaced persons inside Syria and Syrian
refugees in Lebanon. We will continue to provide
humanitarian assistance to Syria and its neighbours to
the best of our capabilities.

Political settlement is the only way out for Syria. That
process should take place in parallel with the process of
destroying Syria's chemical weapons. Resolution 2118
(2013) clearly requests the implementation of the Geneva
communique (S/2012/523, annex) and calls for the
convening of the "Geneva II" conference. The relevant
parties in Syria should keep in mind the interests ofSyria
and its people, achieve a ceasefire and the cessation of
Violence as soon as possible, put an end to the crisis
through dialogue, and rebuild the homes of the Syrian
people. China hopes that the international community
will build consensus and promote the early convening
of the Geneva II conference. China will maintain its
support for the mediation efforts of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and Special Representative Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi.

The Syrian issue is highly complex. Neither the
destruction of chemical weapons nor the process of
a political settlement will be smooth sailing. Going
forward, various problems are likely to arise. We
hope that all parties will maintain their patience
and composure, uphold the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, and stick to the path of a
political settlement. As a permanent member of the
Security Council, China stands ready to work with all
the parties and to make unremitting efforts to achieve a
comprehensive, proper and long-term settlement of the
Syrian issue.

