Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela): At the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir,
for the timely convening of this debate on the situation
in the Republic of Haiti. We commend the Secretary-
General's report (S/20l6/753), which was introduced
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Ms. Sandra Honore. We
welcome her and recognize the unflagging work being
done by her, the men and women of the Mission and
other humanitarian workers who tend tirelessly to the
Haitian people every day to safeguard their security
and stability.
We align ourselves with the statement to be made
by the Ambassador of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
its commitment to the present and the future of the
people of Haiti. Our countries are linked by historical,
political and cultural links. We profoundly mourn
the loss of human lives and the material losses due
to Hurricane Matthew. We offer our condolences
and solidarity with the brother nation of Haiti and its
Government. In that regard, in the light of the state of
emergency experienced by Haiti because of the damage
caused by the natural disaster, and at the request of
its Government, on 6 October my country initiated
an airlift of humanitarian aid and a rapid-assistance
team - bringing more than 600 tons of supplies,
including food, clothes, drinking water, blankets,
disposable materials and medical tents - to help the
Haitian people affected by the hurricane.

We encourage the international community to
continue and step up its cooperation with the Haitian
people. We will continue to support our brother nation
in the Caribbean in strengthening its democratic
institutions. We lament the unfortunate coincidence
that the hurricane took place just a few days before the
Haitian people were to once again take part in the first
round of presidential and partial legislative elections.
Once they have overcome the effects of the Hurricane,
the completion of the electoral process will be of
particular importance.

In pursuing the objectives of establishing the
political institutions of Haiti, it is absolutely vital that
all political actors in the country engage in dialogue
and demonstrate their will and determination to
complete the electoral cycle beyond their own personal
interests. In that regard, the Haitian authorities should
continue to encourage their citizens to participate in the
electoral process and respect the decision of the people
in the election. The political tensions of recent months
reflect one of the chronic problems facing that brother
nation - namely, the fragile nature of its institutions.

Since its birth as an independent republic, the
people of Haiti have suffered not only onslaughts
of nature but also the pillaging of its resources and
encroachment on its independence, which have
undermined its development. The colonial heritage
has had a heavy cost on its independence. Throughout
the nineteenth century, the Haitian people suffered
blockades, penalties and debt collected by the former
colonial Power, which undermined and eroded its own
development. Throughout the twentieth century and
up through the twenty-first century, Haiti has been
the victim of invasions and military interventions and
has suffered the scourge of the worst dictators of the
subcontinent. All of that undoubtedly has had a negative
effect on its stability.

Combating poverty and injustice in Haiti,
the poorest country in the Americas, requires the
extraordinary efforts of the countries of the region and
the international community. It is necessary to enhance
the direct support of stable assistance mechanisms to
support the people of Haiti alognside the efforts of the
country's authorities. In that regard, and as was done
after the ruinous 2010 earthquake, we must enhance the
capacities of the United Nations through MINUSTAH
and achieve the stability and development of our brother
nation.

Given the current context, we remain concerned by
the increased number of cholera cases and the deaths
caused by the virus. Hundreds of new cases have been
reported every week since 2010. To date, according to
United Nations figures, more than 9,000 Haitians have
died and more than 750,000 have been infected. In the
first six months of 2016, there were 23,072 new cases of
cholera and 211 deaths, representing a general increase
from the same period in 2015. That highlights the need
to strengthen national health institutions in Haiti and
their capacity to respond this public health issue in
order to prevent cholera from becoming endemic. We
commend the efforts of the United Nations to mitigate
this grave public health problem by acknowledging its
moral responsibility to the victims of the outbreak of
the epidemic that started in 2010.

We welcome the initiative of the Secretary-General
to direct an emergency response to the cholera epidemic

in Haiti and the new focus adopted by the United Nations
in its campaign against its spread. We consider it vital
to approve additional resources to enhance the national
cholera reduction plan, including the mobilization of
a package of assistance that would provide material
assistance and support to the Haitians directly affected
by the epidemic. Moreover, in the humanitarian sphere,
we are concerned over the food and security situation
arising as a result of climate change in the Caribbean,
which has been impacted further by Hurricane Matthew,
which is believed to have destroyed almost all harvests.
In the first half of 2016, more than 3.6 million Haitians
were affected by those climate factors.

We believe that in the current context of political
and institutional uncertainty, which has been
exacerbated by natural phenomena, we must maintain
our assistance and support to the Haitian people.
We therefore believe that the presence of the United
Nations and MINUSTAH remains necessary in order
to assist the Haitian authorities in strengthening the
response capacities of their institutions. We attach
particular importance to ongoing improvements to and
the professionalization of the Haitian National Police,
which will enhance the presence and authority of the
State. It is crucial that we continue to allocate resources
to rapid-impact projects that promote the rule of law,
improve health services and the provision of drinking
water, and increase the security of citizens through the
installation of street lights.

Given the pressing challenges facing Haiti, any
decision regarding the future of MINUSTAH should
be based on security and stability conditions in the
country in the framework of the process of building
institutional capacities and in coordination with the
elected authorities starting February 2017. We commend
the prudent recommendation of the Secretary-General
in his report to extend the presence of MINUSTAH for
an additional six months and to undertake a strategic
assesment mission after 7 February 2017 - once
the newly elected President has taken office and
a new Government is in place - in order to submit
recommendations to the Security Council in April
next year regarding the future presence of the United
Nations, which would include an accurate assessment
of the effects of recent political events and the natural
disaster of Hurricane Matthew.

Venezuela is in favour of a politically and socially
stable, sovereign and free Haiti. Our cooperation with
Haiti expanded in an extraordinary manner under
the presidency of Commandante Hugo Chavez Frias
and continues with the same determination today.
Venezuela and the countries of the Bolivarian Alliance
for the Peoples of Our America worked with Haiti
long before the 2010 earthquake. That cooperation
will continue to strengthen in the future. Furthermore,
in the context of the Petrocaribe energy cooperation
programme, since 2005 we have provided 100 per cent
of Haiti's fuel needs and 20 per cent of of its electricity,
and undertaken various initiatives prioritized by the
Haitian Government, which have had a positive impact
over the past 11 years on efforts to reconstruct Port-au-
Prince and on the economic and social development of
that brotherly country.
Haiti occupies a special place in the hearts of
Venezuelan men and women. The Haitian revolution
provided inspiration to the patriots in the nineteenth
century and the liberator Simon Bolivar, who was
supported 200 years ago by Haitian President Petion
during the Venezuelan War of Independence. A deep
feeling of appreciation and solidarity has motivated
Venezuela's assistance to Haiti.

Finally, my country joins the efforts of the
region and the international community to assist that
fraternal country in overcoming the socioeconomic
problems that have affected it for decades. Today
more than ever, such cooperation must ensure that the
necessary socioeconomic conditions are created to
enable the eradication of poverty and extreme poverty
in the country so that it can achieve political stability
and strengthen its institutions. Those preconditions
are indispensable to efforts to assist Haiti in its
reconstruction and development.

