Mr. Kolby (Norway): I, too, would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing
and for the Secretary-General's report. I would also
like to thank you, Mr. President, for leading our
mission efficiently and for presenting our report. We
found our meetings useful and important, not least our
interactions with President Kostunica and President
Putin.

For two years now, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has made
good progress in implementing resolution 1244 (1999).
Norway commends UNMIK, led by Hans Haekkerup,
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), led by Thorstein
Skiaker, for their efforts, together with our partners in
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the European Union pillars, to create
conditions for a multi-ethnic democratic Kosovo. Our
overall aim must be to promote peace and stability and
to stop disintegration and extremism in the Balkan
region. And much remains to be done.

As a major provider of personnel and assistance
to Kosovo, Norway has a strong interest in the
successful implementation of self-government in
Kosovo, based on the Constitutional Framework and
resolution 1244 (1999). The single most important
challenge is the security situation. As made clear in the
Secretary-General's report and during our mission,
minority communities, in particular Kosovo Serbs,
continue to suffer from ethnic violence and major
crimes. Neither do extremists shun violence against
fellow ethnic Albanians to advance political or
criminal interests.

We therefore firmly support the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General's initiatives to
improve law and order, including through a new police
and justice pillar and three new regulations directed
against extremists. Reports from Kosovo indicate that
the weapons amnesty programme has been a success.

Ongoing programmes providing for assessment
and destruction of small-arms stockpiles should be
expanded to other parts of the region. Norway
welcomes the endeavours of the Stability Pact for
South Eastern Europe in this regard. A main concern is
the trafficking in such weapons. Cross-border police
cooperation must be enhanced. The Macedonian crisis
shows the need for a comprehensive approach. Plans
for regional police training with a focus on all kinds of
trafficking are being developed in the context of the
Stability Pact's police cooperation and training
initiative.

We welcome the willingness of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia Government to cooperate with
the UNMIK police in addressing illegal trafficking, as
expressed to the Council mission. We look forward to
hearing from UNMIK about the follow-up and results.

It is clear to us that closer cooperation with
Belgrade is needed on a range of issues facing UNMIK
in the time leading up to elections. We count on - and
expect - Serb leaders in Belgrade and Kosovo to
support UNMIK's endeavours to implement resolution
1244 (1999). Norway welcomes the positive attitude
of President Kostunica regarding Kosovo Serb
registration. Closer cooperation between UNMIK and
Belgrade is also crucial to resolve the fate of missing
persons of all communities, as well as the release of
remaining political and other prisoners. Judging by our
constructive meetings in Belgrade, we believe that
UNMIK can work with Yugoslav authorities to achieve
progress in the five areas highlighted by President
Kostunica, in order to encourage full Kosovo Serb
participation in the election process.

We expect Kosovar Albanian leaders to shoulder
their share of the responsibility for improving the
security situation so that a real process of return of
displaced persons can commence.

We will do our share and fulfil our commitments
to Kosovo. But this is a two-way street. All involved
must do their part. Creating security and conditions for
return cannot be left to the United Nations and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) alone. It is up to Kosovar
leaders to demonstrate in deeds the political will to
create a multi-ethnic society that is ready for
meaningful self-rule in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). We did not support a community which
had suffered repression and violence only to see
members of that same community inflict suffering on
others. Those who fought for their own rights must
now stand up for the equal rights of others.

There are obviously mutual links between, on the
one hand, Kosovo Serb security and the return of
Kosovo Serbs, and, on the other hand, Kosovo Serbs'
participation in the interim institutions. Therefore,
Belgrade leaders, for their part, should further promote
Serbs' interests by helping UNMIK identify and
influence interlocutors committed to the integration of
Serbs in Kosovo. This is not least the case in
Mitrovica, which is a major challenge. Norway
supports the comprehensive and balanced strategy
outlined by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General during our visit: a persistent
political process, involving close cooperation with
Belgrade, to replace parallel structures in Mitrovica
with confidence-building measures and security
provided by KFOR, UNMIK police and the Kosovo
Police Service, with Serb participation. This must be
carefully conducted, and another exodus must be
avoided by ensuring that Mitrovica Serbs have at least
the same sense of security as they have now.

We welcome KFOR's efforts to deal with the
regional security situation, as outlined by the KFOR
Commander. This includes the increased efforts to
prevent ethnic Albanian extremist activities across the
Macedonian border, as well as KFOR's contribution to
the positive developments in southern Serbia. The
international community's successful cooperation with
Belgrade in the Presevo valley shows that more can be
achieved through political means and confidence-
building measures than by the use of force.

