I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council today, in line with resolution 2495 (2019), of 31 October 2019. We are meeting in exceptional circumstances, as the world continues to fight the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The spread of the virus has not spared the Sudanese people and has already impacted the peace process, as well as our activities in Darfur. Under these dire circumstances, I want to begin by assuring you that the United Nations is fully mobilized to continue to provide support to the Sudanese people. Since my last briefing on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in October 2019 (see S/PV.8654), the Sudanese authorities and people have pushed ahead with the implementation of their democratic transition. Over the past months, the authorities have made progress on increasing women's participation in decision-making, as well as with regard to accountability and on political reforms, in accordance with the Constitutional Declaration signed on 17 August 2019. However, this major change in the trajectory of the Sudan remains fragile and continues to be resisted by some, as illustrated by the outrageous attack on the convoy of Prime Minister Abdallah Hamdok on 9 March. In this regard, I would like to express my sympathy to the Prime Minister and reiterate the Secretary-General's condemnation of this attack and his solidarity and the unwavering support of the United Nations to the Sudan. There has been some progress in the peace talks taking place in Juba between the transitional authorities and Sudanese armed groups under the auspices of South Sudanese President Salva Kiir Mayardit. Due to the measures related to COVID-19, the talks have been taking place indirectly and have moved online since the beginning of April. Final agreements have been signed on the central, northern and eastern tracks of the negotiations. On the Blue Nile and South Kordofan track, an agreement was signed between the Government and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement- North/Malik Agar faction. However, no agreement has been reached with the faction of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North led by Abdelaziz Al-Hilu due to the lack of an agreement on the issues of secularism and self-determination. On the Darfur track, a framework agreement has been signed by the Government and some of the armed groups, but a final deal has yet to be reached and the talks have been extended again until 9 May. Unfortunately, the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction has remained outside of the process, hampering efforts to address the concerns of his supporters in Darfur. Nevertheless, following the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire, the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction has agreed to a de facto ceasefire, while raising concerns about the security and humanitarian conditions in Darfur, particularly in the Jebel Marra region. The Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North/Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction has also responded to the call and declared an extension of the unilateral cessation of hostilities, except for self-defence purposes, to parts of the Two Areas under their control for an additional three months. I encourage all actors to uphold the cessation of hostilities, and reiterate our call for all armed groups to come to the negotiating table and contribute to paving the way towards peace in the Sudan. UNAMID has provided support to the secretariat of the talks in Juba and has endeavoured to increase the participation of civil society from Darfur in the process. Representatives of internally displaced persons, civil society and women's groups have been able to participate in the talks in Juba and convey their concerns, requests and proposed solutions. Their participation made the talks more inclusive, which is a critical element to ensuring sustainable peace. The general situation in Darfur has remained largely unchanged since our last report. However, there were worrying developments in West Darfur in late 2019 and early 2020, when intercommunal clashes left around 65 people dead. These events also left over 46,000 people internally displaced, while an additional 11,000 people fled to Chad as refugees. These developments have illustrated the continued security challenges in Darfur, as well as the weakness of rule of law institutions in the area. Reports that elements of Sudanese security participated in this violence are particularly worrying. At the same time, civil unrest has continued throughout Darfur. The current harvest season has also witnessed a sharp increase in attacks against farmers by pastoralists. Meanwhile, human rights abuses, some committed by uniformed personnel, remain prevalent. These challenges underline the persistence of some of the conflict drivers in Darfur, which may go beyond the scope of the peace process and will require a heavy investment in peacebuilding. In response to the spread of COVID-19, on 16 March the Sudanese authorities announced the closure of all airports, seaports and land crossings until further notice and declared a public health emergency. On 12 April, they also announced a ban on all passenger road transport between cities and states. These closures, coupled with the suspension of all peacekeeping rotations, have had a severe impact on the movement of UNAMID personnel and the ability of the Mission to implement its mandate, including as a result of the reduction in interactions with the populations, community outreach and capacity-building activities. The Mission immediately developed a contingency plan and adopted preventive and mitigation measures by implementing social distancing and remote working arrangements, as well as establishing quarantine areas for uniformed personnel in all team sites. It has also worked with local authorities to increase their preparedness to respond to the spread of the virus to Darfur. Some resources from the State liaison functions are now being used to support the implementation of the national response plan to COVID-19 in Darfur hotspots. The report of the Secretary-General before the Council (S/2020/202) outlines a drawdown and liquidation plan that envisages a sequenced closure of 14 UNAMID bases, the repatriation of 6,550 uniformed personnel and a significant reduction of civilian personnel until the end of the current mandate. That was already an ambitious time frame, but it has become unrealistic in the current circumstances. The pause in the drawdown until the end of May, the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and the suspension of all peacekeeping rotations until 30 June, coupled with the onset of the rainy season in June, have rendered impractical an effective exit of our personnel by 31 October 2020. First, the measures in effect in the Sudan and elsewhere to combat the pandemic will affect the Mission's capacity to operate smoothly and safely. Travel restrictions, mandatory quarantine and limited shipping options have already started impacting the Mission, making it increasingly difficult to conduct even basic logistical operations. While all operational units could cease operations gradually before 31 October so as to ensure the timely closure of the team sites, including in high-profile areas, it will be necessary to extend the drawdown period for several months beyond the end of the Mission's current mandate. 3/26 4/26 Further, the rainy season, lasting from June to October, renders large areas inaccessible, particularly for the types of heavy transportation equipment required to move the troops and their equipment. In view of the infrastructure limitations, the number of personnel, as well as the nature and volume of assets to repatriate or transfer, the drawdown period will need to be extended into the dry season to allow for unimpeded, safe and continuous movement among UNAMID camps, as well as between Darfur and Port Sudan. In all drawdown scenarios, it is important to note that the Mission's capacity to fulfil its mandated tasks, including the physical protection of civilians, will gradually decrease as operations through different camps are discontinued and formed units deployed to these locations are repatriated. For the subsequent liquidation phase, it is recommended to maintain a uniformed presence in El Fasher to ensure the protection of the logistical hub until the completion of activities. The requirements for a responsible drawdown, combined with the need to preserve operational efficiency and cost-effectiveness, will require close coordination between the drawdown of UNAMID and the establishment of a follow- on presence. The structure, mandate and establishment of a timeline of the new presence, once decided by the Council, will significantly impact the sequencing and overall timeline of UNAMID's drawdown. It will define the number of locations to close or hand over, the number of units and equipment to repatriate and the assets to dispose of or hand over to the follow-on presence. The drawdown process must be managed carefully, taking into account the ongoing threats to civilians in several areas of Darfur and the level of anxiety among the most vulnerable populations over UNAMID's exit. Indeed, the Mission's drawdown should not signal that there are no more concerns related to the protection of civilians in Darfur. Conflict drivers persist and some of the largest camps for internally displaced persons remain extremely volatile. The risks of sexual or gender- based violence and of grave violations against children remain acute. It is critical that the departure of UNAMID be accompanied by alternative local and national protection efforts in order to build trust among local populations and internally displaced persons. In that regard, we encourage the Sudanese authorities to engage in such efforts immediately. UNAMID is ready to assist. It is also critical to make progress on the Darfur track of the peace process and that the population of Darfur see peace dividends. Our focus with the follow-on presence in Darfur will be to preserve and consolidate the gains made over the years. In that regard, the new mission would build on the peacebuilding work that UNAMID and the United Nations country team have conducted in the framework of the State liaison functions and reinforce it. The advisory and support role they provide to local authorities and security services could also be reinforced by deploying additional police and military advisers in support of local security committees. The Sudan has entered a new phase of its history. In that regard, it is critical that we create a configuration that would enable us to respond to the needs of the Sudanese people. Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Adviser to the Secretary- General on the Sudan, and I are working on the development of concepts and plans for a possible future United Nations presence in the Sudan, on the basis of our discussions with the Sudanese authorities and the guiding principles in the special report submitted on 12 March on the establishment of a follow-on presence with a Sudan-wide mandate. Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo will brief Council members on the planning process for a possible follow-on presence in the Sudan. Our objective is to achieve a smooth transition to a future United Nations mission that can help the Organization better support the Sudanese people. To that end, making sure that the potential mandates of a follow-on presence has the full support of the Sudanese authorities will be a critical element of the planning process. Their consent is a key aspect of the partnership we envisage with them for the future. Ensuring that all the objectives and mandates of the potential future mission are clearly defined and adequately resourced will also be another crucial aspect of the planning process, as only then would we be able to address the expectations of the Sudanese authorities and the people of the Sudan. Prime Minister Hamdok has asked the United Nations to support the Sudan in this transition and we are ready to do our part. I hope we can count on the Council's support in this critical phase in the Sudan's history.
