Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Let me associate
myself with Ambassador DiCarlo's words of
appreciation for our colleagues who will leave the
Council at the end of this year. I should like also to join
others in paying tribute to Richard Holbrooke, an
outstanding diplomat who will be greatly missed.
Adding to the condolences expressed by the British
Foreign Secretary, I convey the condolences of the
British delegation to Ambassador Holbrooke's family,
the United States delegation and the United States
Government and people.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2010/630) and to the Special Representative
for his briefing.

The United Kingdom is committed to working
with the Afghan Government, the United Nations and
the wider international community towards a more
secure and more stable Afghanistan. While substantial
challenges remain, it is important that we recognize
that progress is being made. This progress is being
achieved in partnership with the Afghan Government.
Increasingly, the solutions to the challenges we face
are Afghan-led and Afghan-owned.

We welcome the announcement of the final
certified results of Afghanistan's 2010 parliamentary
elections and look forward to the inauguration of the
new Parliament as soon as possible. We applaud the
courage displayed by Afghan voters, officials and
candidates before, during and after polling day. The
United Kingdom condemns in the strongest possible
terms the attempts made by insurgents to undermine
the polling process and violence directed against
polling stations and voters. The elections were held
under challenging circumstances. The Independent
Electoral Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission should be congratulated on the
improvements that were made in the conduct of these
elections and their efforts to minimize electoral fraud.

It is important now to focus on longer-term
electoral reform. At the Kabul Conference, the Afghan
Government committed itself to strengthening
Afghanistan's electoral framework. We welcome the
efforts of the United Nations to build support and
momentum for an Afghan-led and realistic reform
agenda, and stand ready to assist where we can,
alongside the wider international community.

Afghanistan was a central theme of NATO's
November summit in Lisbon. The United Kingdom
welcomes the continuing commitment of all 48 nations
contributing to the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and to the cause of a secure and stable
Afghanistan. For its part, the United Kingdom will
work alongside our ISAF partners and the Afghan
Government to realize President Karzai's objective of
transferring lead security responsibility to the Afghan
National Security Forces in all provinces by the end of
2014. The transition process will, of course, be
dependent on conditions in each district and province.

We welcome the proactive approach of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to supporting the civilian aspects of transition through
the prioritization of staffing and the support it provides
to provisional authorities. We look forward to receiving
further details on this subject from Special
Representative De Mistura in due course.

Transition will see ISAF's role evolve away from
combat and towards increased training, mentoring and
support. It is encouraging to see the commitments that
contributing countries have already made to the NATO
Training Mission to Afghanistan. Our training efforts
are critical to increasing the capacity of the Afghan
National Security Forces and making transition
possible. Although pledges have been made to meet
immediate shortfalls in priority trainers, the United
Kingdom will continue to press our international
partners to ensure that the NATO Training Mission
continues to have the resources it needs to fulfil its
objectives.

Civilian casualties are of deep concern to the United
Kingdom. We feel it important to restate the fact that the
large majority of such casualties are the consequence of
actions by insurgents, not pro-Government forces. We
welcome the continued efforts of ISAF and the Afghan
National Security Forces to minimize civilian casualties.

An Afghan-led political process is necessary to
underpin the military progress being made by ISAF
and the Afghan National Security Forces. We welcome
the steps that the Afghan Government has taken in this
regard, including the inauguration of the High Peace
Council to lead peace and reintegration efforts and the
development of an effective and sustainable
reintegration programme. We support this political
process for all Afghans who meet the Afghan
Government's conditions, cut ties with Al-Qaida,
renounce violations and agree to live within the Afghan
constitutional framework.

As the Secretary-General recommends in his
report, it is imperative that the international community
support the Afghan Government in taking forward that
vital work. We look forward to UNAMA's Salaam
Support Group playing an important role in that regard.

Finally, Afghanistan is and will remain a priority
for the United Kingdom. While the challenges we face
are considerable, we are fully committed to the
objective of a secure Afghanistan and will continue to
support UNAMA in its efforts, and Staffan de Mistura
in his very effective leadership, to realize that goal.

