Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me,
first, to express my delegation's thanks to you, Mr.
President, for your initiative in organizing this
substantive debate on a crucial question of the
organization of peacekeeping operations and Council
decisions regarding the scaling back or ending of a
mission. My delegation welcomes this opportunity to
recall that it is to the Security Council that Member
States have entrusted the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
know that the Council has often done a good job. We
know the success stories which give us reason to have
hope in the United Nations. However, let us not forget
the failures, with their human, political and economic
costs.

My delegation welcomes the Brahimi report on
peace operations, and this discussion on ways to
strengthen the capacity of our common institution to
organize and carry out operations effectively and
successfully. We support the recommendations in the
report, because they will make it possible to respond
better to current and future threats.

My delegation shares the concerns forcefully
stressed by your delegation in your working paper, Mr.
President. In many ways, the paper is a useful
continuation of the fundamental debate on reform
begun by the Brahimi report. We agree that we need to
find the right strategy, but we believe that such a
strategy should never result in major risks for the
future of the peoples concerned. The conditions for exit
must be part of any decision we make from the start.
That said, we do not favour exit deadlines, and we call
for strengthening the role of the United Nations in
Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Angola, rather than reducing or simply
withdrawing the operations there.

Like some previous speakers, we believe that any
exit strategy should be based on well-defined
objectives, to achieve which we must develop a
preventive approach, strengthen the Secretariat's
capacity for analysis and early warning, give greater
attention to the real causes of conflict, and ensure that
the root problems are appropriately addressed,
particularly during the peacekeeping and peace-
building stages.

A critical examination of the conditions that have
led the Council to decide on a gradual or immediate
end to a mission teaches some useful lessons about the
forward-looking management of ongoing operations as
well as the conception and execution of operational
plans for future operations. A brief evaluation of
experience over the last few years shows that the
progressive or final shutting down of an operation is
influenced by many factors, including the
accomplishment of a mission's mandate to the
satisfaction of the various parties, in which case it is
natural for the Council to decide to gradually withdraw
and shut down a mission. The United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia and the United
Nations mission in Mozambique are good examples.

A second factor has to do with security. Lack of
confidence by parties to a conflict and rejection of the
United Nations presence by a party to a conflict -
often accompanied by attacks on mission staff and
mission interests - are both reasons which in the past
have led the members of the Council and troop
contributors to raise questions about continuing a
United Nations mission. Under these conditions, the
withdrawal of troops and United Nations personnel was
a solution, but one which had the disadvantage of
letting the country plunge into chaos and causing a
setback to all prospects for a solution to the conflict.
The vacuum caused by the withdrawal of the United
Nations is filled quickly by the enemies of peace. Such
withdrawal have resulted in enormous losses for the
Organization, both in prestige and in material terms.

The third factor stems from the multidimensional
nature of missions, and the fourth factor is financial.

The definition of clear mandate for a mission will
make it possible to translate into operational terms the
conditions necessary for the realization of a just and
lasting peace. This approach has the advantage of
leaving no doubt about the intention of the United
Nations. It also has the advantage of avoiding different
interpretations of the mandate by the various parties to
a conflict. It cannot be overemphasized that an
operation must begin in a timely manner. A lack of
timeliness at this stage would have a bad impact on the
whole implementation process and would reinforce
doubts about the real capacity of the United Nations to
act and respond effectively to possible problems.

Cooperation by troop-contributing countries and
their involvement in the initial phase of the process
should be encouraged. The process of dialogue
between the troop contributors and the Council should
be continued and strengthened. Special attention should
be given to training and capacity-building for troops,
the participation of development agencies in peace-
building, the rehabilitation of infrastructures and
economic and social reconstruction and development
are all very important for the success of a United
Nations peace operation.

In the View of my delegation, these elements
make it possible to respond to the various criticisms
and questions raised by the final or gradual withdrawal
of the United Nations from areas where its presence is
expected to lead peace and security with a View to
harmonious development.

