Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We believe that the Algerian presidency of the Security
Council deserves praise for having organized this open
meeting of the Council on the recent mission that we
carried out to Central Africa, which gives us a
possibility of assessing the results of the mission and to
think together with other Member States of the
Organization about how this Council and the United
Nations as a whole could continue working actively in
order to promote peace, stability and progress in the
Great Lakes region. Before continuing, I would like to
point out that Spain, of course, supports what has
already been expressed by the representative of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union.

The Security Council's mission to Central Africa,
led skilfully by Ambassador de La Sabliere, took place
at a particularly complex time, because, on the one
hand, the key States of the region, such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi, find
themselves in a crucial phase of their respective
transition processes, and on the other hand, it is also
clear that the regional dimension is taking on a
growing importance.

With respect to the transition process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we have to stress
the need for Congolese political forces to reach an
agreement that would make it possible to quickly adopt
a constitutional text as well as approve pending
legislative texts that would lead to holding elections
planned for June 2005. Furthermore, the security sector
reform and, more concretely, the establishment of
unified armed forces and the reform of the police
sector are of particular importance and are urgent at the
moment. Holding elections requires safety conditions
which can only be guaranteed through the deployment
of a sufficient number of troops from the future
integrated armed forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Furthermore, as the mission was able to observe
in Bukavu, the deployment of contingents made up of
Congolese integrated forces is crucial in order to
address the instability in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular, the
provinces of Ituri and the Kivus.

With respect to the situation in Burundi and after
the agreement between the political parties on the new
constitution, priority actions include the quick approval
of pending legislative texts, respect of the electoral
calendar, as well as making significant progress in the
demobilization process. The authorities of Burundi
have to tackle all this, relying on the continued and
effective assistance of the international community.

In any case, as the Council's mission stressed on
several occasions on their visit to the region, elections
are a necessary factor within the transition process, but
this should not be considered an end in itself. Once the
transition period is over in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in Burundi, after the holding of free,
democratic and broadly participatory elections in the
scheduled timelines, we will begin a new and
important phase in which Governments that have
emerged from the elections will have to work actively
in order to promote reconciliation, peace and
sustainable development with the support of the
international community. Experience has shown us that
the period that follows the first elections after a
conflict raises significant challenges, and it is up to
everyone, in particular the victors in the election, to
place national interest before particular interests so that
they may guarantee long-term stability and progress.

With respect to the regional dimension, in recent
times, we have seen important initiatives at the
bilateral, trilateral and multilateral level among the
countries concerned. I am referring to the
establishment of the Joint Verification Mechanism
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda, the completion of the October 2004 tripartite
agreement between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, as well as the signing of
the Dar es Salaam Declaration on 20 November,
following the first summit of the international
conference on the Great Lakes region of Africa. It is
crucial that the States involved, instead of resorting to
any type of unilateral action, should use those
mechanisms and provisions, both to resolve any
dispute and, above all, to promote trust and
cooperation within the entire region.

The countries of Central Africa are facing
important challenges at both at the national and
regional levels. The political will of the States in the
region - of their leaders and their political forces -
to move forward along the path of peace, stability and
development is paramount and irreplaceable. We trust
that the Security Council will continue to provide
support to encourage the processes under way and to
help to lay the foundations for lasting peace in the
region, a necessary condition for the progress and
economic and social development of the peoples of the
region.

