Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to join others in congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. I would also like
to take this opportunity to assure you and, through you,
your delegation of my delegation's full cooperation in
the discharge of your duties during the course of the
month. I would like also to take this opportunity to
thank the Permanent Representative of Nigeria,
Ambassador Joy ngu, and her delegation for her
successful stewardship of the work of the Council
during the month of October. In addition, I would like
to thank the Prosecutor, Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, for
his briefing today. We have also taken note of his
second report to the Security Council, submitted
pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 1970 (2011).

Even at the risk of sounding repetitive, it is
necessary to reiterate that India is not a signatory to the
Rome Statute and not a member of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for reasons that are well known.
It is also important to note that of the 193 Members of
the United Nations, only 119 are States parties to the
Rome Statute of the ICC. Five of the 15 members of
the Council, including three permanent members, are
not parties to the Statute. We do, however, support the
rights and obligations of the States that are members of
the ICC.

The situation in Libya has significantly changed
since the Prosecutor's last report and his briefing to the
Security Council. During the eight months of conflict
in Libya, there were a large number of deaths and
destruction on a massive scale. The proliferation of
weapons has emerged as a major problem, posing a
threat to the stability of Libya as well as to that of the
larger region.

The time has come for the new authorities in
Libya to exert their sovereignty and independence and
undertake an inclusive political process aimed at
achieving national reconciliation, peace, security and
stability in the country. The international community,
including the Security Council and the ICC, should
fully assist the Libyan authorities in that process. That
inclusive approach to national reconciliation, anchored
in State sovereignty, is the only way to overcome the
multitude of problems that Libya faces in the present
ostensible post-conflict scenario.

We have noted that the ICC Prosecutor's
immediate goal is to complete the investigation into the
alleged crimes against humanity and war crimes. The
Prosecutor's Office is also making progress in the
investigations on gender crimes and is examining
information related to attacks on migrant workers. We
expect that the Prosecutor will carry out a thorough and
impartial investigation into all alleged crimes by all
parties to the conflict in Libya. The Prosecutor must
not be influenced by non-judicial considerations and
must focus his attention solely on prosecution, without
diversion due to extraneous considerations. All those
responsible for committing crimes covered under the
Rome Statute should be held accountable irrespective
of which side to the conflict they may belong to.
Political or other non-judicial considerations should
not exonerate anybody from prosecution for the crimes
committed.
Last but not least, it is also important to ensure
that all actions by the ICC Prosecutor should fall
strictly within the ambit of resolution 1970 (2011), in
particular paragraph 6, which concerns the States that
are not parties to the Rome Statute.

