Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I am honoured to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). I would
like at the outset to extend my sincere congratulations
to you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month and wish
you every success. Moreover, I express my gratitude
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We
thank His Excellency the Secretary-General for his
briefing and his efforts in that context.

Today's meeting is of particular importance
because it follows the inhuman Israeli military
aggression against the Palestinian people in the Gaza
Strip, which lasted 51 days. During that time, the Israeli
war machine burned fields, claimed lives, destroyed
infrastructure and indiscriminately targeted elderly
civilians, women and children. It resulted in the death
of more than 2,800 martyrs, including 516 children,
11,100 wounded, and the demolition ofmore than 10,620
houses and residential complexes, including several
assaults on United Nations institutions and premises.
All those actions constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity and will not be forgotten by future
generations. They constitute a flagrant disregard of all
the international community's appeals to Israel to end
such practices, which are truly a stain on humankind's
conscience.

The OIC expresses its support for and solidarity
with the population of Gaza and all the Palestinian
people, and strongly condemns the successive,
continuous and brutal Israeli campaigns against the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. The
Organization of Islamic Cooperation holds Israel solely
responsible, as the occupying Power, for its shameful
killing of innocent Palestinians and destruction of
thousands of homes, buildings and infrastructure, and
holds it fully responsible for all human and material
damages suffered by the Palestinian people in the Gaza
Strip.

The OIC member States stress that the disasters
and consequences caused by the Israeli aggression must
be at the forefront of the international community's
concerns. In that regard, we welcome the Conference
of international donors for the reconstruction of Gaza,
which was held in Egypt, on 12 October. In addition,
we commend the efforts of Egypt and Norway, who
chair the international coordination committee for
aid to the Palestinians. We also emphasize the need to
fulfil the declared contributions, and not to surrender
to disappointment and frustration after Israel destroyed
the infrastructure projects for which the donors had
contributed originally. Moreover, we reiterate our call
for an end to the illegitimate blockade of the Gaza
Strip in order to enable the Palestinian people to live
in dignity, freedom and peace in their native country.

In addition, the OIC reiterates its call for the
immediate implementation of the Human Rights
Council's decision to provide immediate international
protection for the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the
formation of an independent international investigation
commission to investigate all violations of international
humanitarian and human rights laws committed by
Israel.

The OIC reaffirms the Islamic, Arab and Palestinian
identity of occupied Jerusalem and that East Jerusalem
is an integral part of the Palestinian territory occupied
by Israel since 1967, and that its annexation by Israel,
the occupying Power, remains illegal, unrecognized
and condemned by the international community. The
OIC condemns in the strongest terms the ongoing
violations against the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Muslim
worshipers committed by the Israeli occupying forces
and settlers. The OIC stresses that those actions are a
flagrant violation of the principles of international law
and relevant United Nations resolutions.

Accordingly, we call on the Security Council to
put an end to those violations, and to compel Israel,
the occupying Power, to respect the right to freedom of
worship and to preserve the sanctity of the holy places
and the worshipers. Moreover, the OIC condemns
Israel, the occupying Power, for not permitting the
international mission of experts mandated by UNESCO
to reach the occupied city of Jerusalem to investigate
the Israeli violations.

In addition, the OIC holds Israel, the occupying
authority, fully responsible for the consequences of the
heinous crimes practiced by extremist settlers against
the Palestinian people, and calls for the inclusion of
settler leaders and extremist settlers groups, including
the Price Tag and Hilltop Youth factions, on the list
of terrorists and criminals wanted for international
prosecution by the States of the world and international
organizations.

The continuation of illegitimate settling practices
by Israel, the occupying Power, and its seizure of
Palestinian land and the expulsion of its indigenous
Palestinian population are clear evidence of the policy
of ethnic cleansing it practices. That policy undermines
the two-State solution and is a definite confirmation that
Israel is not interested in peaceful solutions and only
applies a policy of fait accompli, continuous occupation
and deprivation of the Palestinian people of their rights.
We call upon the Security Council to take the necessary
measures to stop the Israeli settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territory and to implement the
relevant international resolutions, particularly both
resolutions 465 (1980) and 497 (1981), which affirm the
illegitimacy of the settlement policy and the necessity
of dismantling the existing settlements.
The OIC stresses the necessity for the international
community, especially the Security Council, to shoulder
its responsibilities in maintaining international peace
and security, to take all necessary measures to put an
end to the continuing Israeli occupation of Palestinian
land and ensure Israel's compliance with relevant
international resolutions. If the Council is to avoid
losing further credibility in the eyes of the international
community and the conscience ofthe world, it is time to
adopt a resolution establishing an imperative time limit
to end the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab
territories and compelling Israel to withdraw to the
borders of June 1967, including a withdrawal from the
occupied Syrian Golan and other occupied territories
and to move forward towards implementing the two-
State solution and the achievement of independence for
the Palestinian people. In that regard, we reaffirm our
support for Palestinian efforts seeking to use all legal
means based on international legitimacy to achieve
those goals.

Together with the countless honourable people
around the world, we cannot help but wonder what
obstacles are preventing justice and putting a time
limit for ending the illegitimate occupation, as
stipulated in United Nations for many decades now.
What is the obstacle that prevents resorting to legal
means? The member States of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation welcome the recent decision by
the Kingdom of Sweden and the decision of the House
of Commons of Great Britain to recognize the State
of Palestine, and we call on other countries to follow
suit. The independence of the State of Palestine,
in accordance with the resolutions of international
legitimacy, and the granting to the Palestinian people
of their right to self-determination are long overdue.

The States members of the OIC express their deep
concern at the escalation of the violence, destruction,
murder and other heinous crimes being committed
against the Syrian people as well as the serious
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the
failure to implement both Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) due to the intransigence
of the Syrian regime. Those resolutions stipulated the
unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid to Syrian
civilians. Moreover, we call on all States Members
of the United Nations to fulfil their commitments to
support the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people,
especially since the number of displaced persons and
refugees has reached over 10 million individuals inside
Syria and in neighbouring countries, in addition to
four million in need of urgent humanitarian aid in the
besieged areas.
The States members ofthe OIC emphasize the need
to achieve a negotiated political solution as soon as
possible. In that regard, we call on the Security Council
to shoulder its full responsibility towards the stalled
political solution, and urge the United Nations Special
Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to step up his efforts
to form a transitional Government with full executive
powers, according to the first Geneva declaration, so
as to achieve the aspirations of the Syrian people for
change, freedom, security and stability, and to guarantee
that there be no place in such a solution for those whose
hands are soaked in the blood of more than 100,000
Syrians - that is, those who have committed crimes
against humanity, including aerial bombardment and
the use of fire bombs, missiles and chemical weapons.

