Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from French): It gives me great pleasure, Sir, to convey to you
the congratulations of my delegation on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. I am convinced
that your professional and human qualities will ensure the
success of its work. My delegation's congratulations go
also to Ambassador Nabil Elaraby, who so wisely
conducted the work of the Council last month.

 

The participation of my delegation, as Chairman of the
African Group, in the Council's deliberations on the
situation in Angola, is testimony to the abiding interest of
the whole of Africa in developments in that fraternal
country. As spokesman for Africa in its collective solidarity
with Angola, I feel a special honour as the representative of
Algeria, which has always maintained with Angola a
relationship full of reciprocal esteem and understanding,
which goes back to our exemplary relationship as comrades
in arms in the struggle for the completion of the liberation
of Africa.

Angola, which waged an armed struggle for its
national independence, has not been spared by destiny.
Since 1975, this country has been caught in a fratricidal
conflict which has caused thousands of deaths and which
resulted in considerable material damage which has sapped
the fragile economy and diverted energy from economic
and social development.

Endowed with a variety of natural resources, Angola
has never had the respite necessary to develop them to
fulfil its people's aspirations to well-being. The
post-independence history of that country is a cycle of
human tragedy and material destruction, the result of which
the international community has had ample opportunity to
see: a country so rich in human and material resources
which is now devastated.

The developments of recent years in Angola, with the
commendable support of the United Nations, establish the
conditions for resolving the crisis. The Lusaka Protocol of
4 November 1994 has created promising opportunities for
establishing lasting peace in Angola. Along with the
subsequent arrangements - in particular those concluded
in Libreville between the President of the Republic of
Angola, Mr. Dos Santos, and the leader of the Uniao
Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA),
Mr. Savimbi - the Protocol contributes to a framework
conducive to a peace that will enable the Angolan people
finally to devote themselves to the task of national
reconciliation.

The international community has backed its efforts to
find a solution with the laudable work of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin
Beye, and the deployment of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), which has carried out
its tasks with efficiency and altruism.

The earliest achievements on the ground show that the
peace process is an irreversible reality. The Secretary-
General's report mentions progress in the observance of
the cease-fire, the quartering of the Angolan Armed
Forces, the deployment of UNAVEM. III, the
promulgation of the Amnesty Law, the process of
incorporating the military elements of UNITA into the
Angolan Armed Forces, as well as in the economic and
humanitarian areas, where we have seen an improvement
in food aid programmes, an increase in agricultural
production, greater storage capacities and improved
conditions in merchandise transportation.

The Angolan Government's contribution to this
progress should be stressed, in particular the steps it has
taken to establish a climate of trust in the quartering of
the rapid reaction police and the efforts it has made to
establish an integrated national military institution.

Further progress would have been possible if the
other party, UNITA, had demonstrated the same
constructive will instead of adopting the dilatory attitude
it continues to nurture. This attitude is manifest in
particular in the dubious conditions surrounding the
quartering and disarming of its troops. It would seem,
indeed, that UNITA has not proceeded to the quartering
of its best-trained troops or given up its heavy weapons,
troop transports or communications and engineering
equipment. Here, we must stress the responsibility of the
UNITA leadership for the slowness of the peace process.
It is of great importance that the Security Council send a
clear, firm message to UNITA that it must abide by the
time-frames to which it agreed, in particular those leading
to the establishment of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation. At the same time, it would be
particularly appropriate for countries that have any
influence on UNITA to exert the pressure necessary to
discourage it from using delaying tactics to compromise
the timetable established in UNAVEM. III's mandate.

The situation in Angola poses a challenge to the
international community for several reasons. Political and
military stabilization is important, but it is not enough.
Other, equally decisive questions will determine the long-
term success of the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol and the establishment of lasting peace in the
country. The demobilization and socio-economic
reintegration of former combatants, the demining and
rebuiliding of roads and the rehabilitation of economic
and social activity are all factors that should help to
establish this peace. Hence, assistance by the international
community must be forthcoming in support of the
recovery programme launched by the Government of
Angola, because this is the only way in which Angola can

 

look with any optimism towards the period following 8
February 1997.

That is also why, on behalf of the African Group, my
delegation supports, in the same spirit as the Vice-Minister
without Portfolio of Angola, the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNAVEM. III,
in the profound hope that this new period will see
significant progress in the peace process.

