I will focus today on five areas: first, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19); secondly, the humanitarian impact of the economic crisis; thirdly, the protection of civilians; fourthly, humanitarian access; and, lastly, our assessment of the humanitarian situation as 2020 draws to a close. The number of reported COVID-19 cases in Syria continues to rise, although limited testing in all parts of the country makes the extent of the outbreak impossible to assess with any certainty. Bed occupancy rates of 100 per cent are being reported in Sweida, Homs and other governorates, but we also know that many people who are sick are reluctant to seek in-patient treatment. The number of reported cases in schools, which are often overcrowded and often suffer poor or damaged infrastructure, more than tripled during November. The World Health Organization and UNICEF are working with education providers to strengthen COVID-19 preventive actions in schools. Beyond the immediate health impact, we are extremely worried about the secondary effects of the pandemic, including on access to education. An analysis recently by Save the Children found that an estimated two thirds of children in northern Syria are out of school. Apart from COVID-19, teachers say that children are dropping out because of rising poverty. That brings me to my second point, which is the impact of the economic crisis. As my Deputy told the Security Council last month (see S/2020/1147, annex 1), even subsidized prices of essentials have surged. Prices of subsidized bread have doubled, and prices of subsidized diesel have more than doubled, since September. Both remain in short supply, and reports continue of long queues at bakeries and petrol stations. The market price of a standard reference food basket is higher now than at any point since price monitoring by the World Food Programme (WFP) began in Syria in 2013. More than 80 per cent of displaced families across the country now say that their income does not cover their needs. Families in which women are the primary breadwinners are even worse off. They make 30 per cent less, on average, than other displaced families. The impact on the most vulnerable is clear from the data. In the north-west, child stunting increased by 5 per cent this year. We estimate that 34 per cent of children in north-west Syria - more than one in three children under the age of five - suffer from stunting. In areas of displacement in the north-west, up to 37 per cent of mothers are also malnourished. My next point is the protection of civilians from hostilities in recent weeks, putting civilians at risk in the north-west and increasingly in an area such as Ayn Issa. We all know the immediate and devastating human cost of military escalations in Syria. I echo the calls of the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy for a nationwide ceasefire. Infrastructure that is indispensable to civilians' survival must also be protected. Allouk water station again stopped pumping water on 3 December as a result of a disruption in the power supply to the station. That is the fifteenth disruption this year, and it affects almost half a million people in Al-Hassakeh, forcing them to resort to potentially unsafe alternative sources of water. Humanitarian organizations are trucking more than 2,000 cubic metres of water to the area every day and are working to scale up further, but that is neither enough nor sustainable. A solution therefore must be found to ensure an uninterrupted water supply from Allouk. In the meantime, safe access to water and electricity installations must continue for the technical teams. In the north-west, water shortages also continue to be reported in Al-Bab city and surrounding areas, affecting 185,000 people. Electricity from Turkish providers last month increased pumping at local wells, but supply continues to fall short of needs. Water supply from the Ayn Al-Bayda pumping station to Al-Bab could meet those needs and should immediately resume. My next point is humanitarian access. In October, a humanitarian organization delivering WFP food assistance in north-east Syria was instructed by the Syrian Government to stop distributing food aid to around 220,000 people in non-Government controlled areas of Raqqah governorate. Distributions to all areas were able to resume earlier this month after a two-month disruption. Moreover, in the north-east, in late November, local authorities suspended operations of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC) in Al-Hol and Al-Roj camps, which together accommodate some 65,000 people, which disrupted food distributions and waste management, as well as some health-care services. SARC activities resumed on | December. Those incidents exemplify how vulnerable humanitarian operations in the north-east are to disruption. When aid is suspended, those most in need are the ones who suffer, and such suffering is needless. International humanitarian law requires that all parties allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for civilians in need. In addition, three children died in a fire at the camp in Al-Hol last week, reportedly caused by a kerosene cooker. That tragic incident once again underscores the challenging conditions at Al-Hol. It is simply no place for children - tens of thousands of children - to grow up. Tent fires usually increase in the winter, as families try to keep warm with whatever means available to them. Unfortunately, we have to expect more such incidents in the coming months. As another year comes to an end, families in Syria remain without respite after almost a decade of conflict. Millions have been displaced and impoverished. Millions have suffered trauma and deep personal loss. Even as active conflict in some areas has subsided, economic decay and the compounding impact of COVID-19 are driving deterioration in people's lives and experiences. Food insecurity and malnutrition are expected to rise significantly, as is the overall number of people in need of humanitarian assistance. An escalation of hostilities would be all the more devastating against that backdrop. As we have briefed the Council for the past few months, one immediate concern is getting winter assistance to families, as temperatures are now dropping. Distributions are under way, with plans to reach more than 3 million people identified as those most in need. Current funding, however, will only allow us to reach 2.3 million of those 3 million people. I thank the donors who are supporting the effort, but more is needed.
