Mr. Bougacha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I
am pleased at the outset to announce that Tunisia is
delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of
Arab States in New York.

I thank you, Sir for convening this debate and
commend your able leadership of the Council for the
month of October. I also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
on behalf of the Arab Group, for his briefing.

Over the past decades, the Security Council has
adopted dozens of resolutions on the Palestinian
question in particular and the Israeli-Arab conflict
in general. However, they are yet to be implemented.
That has allowed Israel, the occupying Power, to
continue its aggressive and repressive policies against
the Palestinian people, its systematic Violations of
holy sites and its expansionist settlement activities,
thereby defying international will, rejecting peace and
disregarding the relevant United Nations resolutions.

This situation has prolonged the conflict and
deepened the suffering of the Palestinian people. It has
raised tensions in the region and threatened regional
and international stability, peace and security, which
are at the heart of the Security Council's mandate. The
region and the world cannot enjoy peace, stability and
security without a comprehensive and just solution
to the Palestinian question that would allow the
Palestinian people to regain their legitimate rights,
notably their right to self-determination and to establish
an independent State on their territories, based on the
4 June 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as its capital, and
enable the settlement of all final status issues in line
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the two-State solution.

In order to achieve those goals, there must be
an international desire for peace. The Security
Council must assume its historical responsibility for
maintaining international legitimacy and compelling
Israel to respect the United Nations resolutions, end
its occupation of the Palestinian and Arab territories,
cease its expansionist settlement activities and lift the
unjust blockade on Gaza.

The stalemate continues in the peace process as
Israel continues to block all initiatives aimed at reviving
it. The intransigent Israeli policies have led to serious
escalation as Israel continues to impose a fait accompli
and flout all relevant terms of reference, including by
attempting to change the historical and legal status of
Jerusalem, the occupied Syrian Arab Golan and the
occupied Lebanese territory, as well as by violating
the sovereignty of Lebanon by air, land and sea. In
furtherance of that policy, the Prime Minister of Israel
announced last September his intention to annex parts
of the occupied West Bank, in flagrant defiance of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant United Nations resolutions, which would
lead to further Violence and escalation in the region.
The Arab world remains committed to peace as a
strategic choice. However, that does not mean accepting
Israeli occupation and aggressions indefinitely or
the continued Israeli attacks on and killings of the
Palestinian people. It does not mean accepting violations
of international resolutions, attempts to change the
historical and legal status of Jerusalem and other Arab
and Palestinian territories or attempts to pre-empt the
final status negotiations.

The Arab States renew their commitment to their
principled positions, as announced by their leaders at
various international and regional forums, including the
most recent, the thirtieth summit of the League of Arab
States in Tunisia and the fourteenth Islamic summit of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in Mecca.

The Arab Group in New York would like to stress
once again the following points.

First, we reject all unilateral policies and measures
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the
historical, legal and demographic status of East
Jerusalem and to violate Muslim and Christian holy
sites in the city. We call on the countries of the world
to not recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel
and not move to their embassies there. We support
the historical Hashemite custodianship of the Muslim
and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, and we believe
that the Jordanian Jerusalem Waqf Council is the only
legal authority over the Al-Aqsa Mosque in terms of
management, maintenance and organization of entry
and exit.

Secondly, we again condemn the so-called Jewish
nation-State law, which perpetuates racism and denies
the rights of the Palestinian people, especially their
right to self-determination.

Thirdly, we call on the international community,
especially the Security Council, to assume its
responsibility in providing the necessary protection
to the Palestinian people, in line with the Geneva
Conventions and the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including those of the Security Council and the General
Assembly - most importantly resolution ES-10/20, of
13 June 2018. We also call for the implementation of
the Secretary-General's recommendations, issued in
accordance with that resolution.

Fourthly, we call on the international community
to continue supporting the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East in order to allow it to carry out its mandate and
overcome its current financial difficulties.
The Arab Group reiterates that it stands ready to
support any serious efforts to revive the peace process,
end the occupation and reach a comprehensive and
just solution to the Palestinian question, including the
Israeli-Arab conflict, in accordance with the relevant
international terms of reference, the Madrid principles
and the Arab Peace Initiative. That solution should
follow a timetable that would lead to an agreement on
the final status issues with international guarantees,
including the status of Jerusalem.

The Arab Group stresses that any effort or initiative
to settle the conflict that does not take into consideration
the aforementioned terms of reference and the two-
State solution will fail to make any progress towards
the settlement of the conflict. The Arab Group affirms
once again that it stands with the State of Palestine in
its endeavours to become a full-fledged Member of the
United Nations.

In conclusion, the Arab Group is committed
to respecting international legitimate resolutions,
international law and international humanitarian law.
We call for intensifying international efforts to ensure
the implementation of the relevant Council resolutions,
promote peace in the service of international peace and
security and enable the peoples of the region to live
safely and peacefully.

