The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kusljugie
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/920, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to documents S/2004/915, S/2004/916
and 8/2004/917, which contain letters dated 19
November 2004 from Germany, the Netherlands and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, respectively, addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Brazil, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Pakistan, Philippines,

Romania, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1575 (2004).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.10 am.

