Mr. Danon (Israel): I am appearing before the
Council today at a particularly troubling time for my
country. Over the past few weeks, Israelis sitting in
a restaurant were massacred while having dinner, a
young girl was stabbed to death in her own bed and
a father was killed and buried by his 10 children after
he was shot to death while driving home for Shabbat
service with his family. These vicious acts of terrorism
did not take place in a vacuum. They are a direct result
of the continuous Palestinian incitement.

Last week, while the Palestinians were embarking
on the latest murderous wave of terror, the Quartet
issued their report on the major threats to achieving
a negotiated peace. From their report, we learn that
Palestinian Authority officials have not condemned
terror attacks against Israelis. I quote, "streets, squares
and schools have been named after Palestinians who
have committed acts of terrorism". The report also noted
that officials from Abbas's own Fatah faction referred
to these terrorists as "heroes and a crown on the head
of every Palestinian". There is a direct line between
the incitement to hatred spread by Abbas's Palestinian
Authority and the despicable acts of terrorism taking
place in Israel.

The hateful rhetoric of the Palestinian leadership
begins at the top. In his recent speech to the European
Parliament, Abbas himself repeated an outrageous
lie that Israel seeks to poison the Palestinians' water
supply. He said, "certain rabbis in Israel have said very
clearly to their Government that our water should be
poisoned in order to have Palestinians killed". That
Vicious slander is rooted in centuries-old fabricated
accusations against Jews for poisoning wells. It is a
blood libel, pure and simple. No press release can undo
the damage or revoke the call to Violence sent with
these hateful words.

In the very same speech, Abbas even went as far
as to blame all terrorism in the Middle East - in
fact, all terrorism in the world - on Israel, saying,
"Once the occupation ends, terrorism will disappear;
there will be no more terrorism in the Middle East
or anywhere else in the world." Apparently, if it were
not for Israel, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham
would not behead innocents in Syria or murder dozens
of people in Istanbul and Bagdad and a terrorist would
not have massacred 50 people at a lesbian, gay, bisexual
and transgender nightclub in Orlando. With the endless
stream of incitement coming from the Palestinian
leadership, it is no surprise that those words of hate
translate into acts of Violence against Israelis.

Less than two weeks ago, Israelis witnessed a
particularly cruel and Vile act of terrorism. Early in the
morning, a 17-year-old Palestinian broke into the home
of the Ariel family, locked the door and proceeded to
stab 13-year-old Hallel to death. Hallel, an innocent girl
who was sleeping late after dancing at her recital the
night before, was killed in what should be the safest
place known to any child - her own bedroom, her
own bed.

What can drive a young boy to pick up a knife and
repeatedly stab a 13-year-old child sleeping in her own
bed? The hateful act of that 17-year-old terrorist is the
direct result of years of indoctrination in Palestinian
Authority schools, hate broadcasted on official
Palestinian Authority television and, more recently,
calls to kill Jews in Facebook posts and Twitter feeds.
As the Quartet's recent report rightly points out, the
international community must send a clear message
to the Palestinian leadership: stop inciting and start
talking. Israelis want and pray for peace, but we cannot
make any progress unless the Palestinians put an end
to terror and incitement and finally agree to direct,
face-to-face negotiations.
Yet, time after time, the Palestinian leadership has
failed on both counts. Prime Minister Netanyahu has
said repeatedly, including only two days ago, that he
would meet with President Abbas any time to work to
end the conflict. Yet, Abbas has made it clear that he
has no time to talk peace. It is therefore no surprise
that, when the President of the European Parliament
invited Abbas to meet with the President of Israel,
Reuven Rivlin, in Brussels last month, Abbas refused
the opportunity. Talking peace with Israel's President
was not on Abbas's agenda for his visit to Europe.
He was too busy spreading vile lies and peddling
anti-Semitic conspiracies.

Unfortunately, Abbas's refusal to negotiate is
incentivized by some in the international community.
Plans for international initiatives that seek to impose
a solution on the two sides send exactly the wrong
message. They tell the Palestinians they can achieve
all their goals while continuing to encourage terror and
refusing to even talk with Israel. Let me be clear - the
only way to achieve peace for the region is by building
a strong foundation. This foundation must consist of
three pillars: an end to all terrorism and incitement,
an end to the Palestinian refusal to recognize Israel as
the nation-State of the Jewish people, and Palestinian
willingness to directly negotiate with Israel. Any
attempt to bypass direct talks will only encourage the
Palestinians to continue to avoid real negotiations.

It is troubling that the Quartet report repeated the
fiction that Israeli construction in Judea and Samaria is
an obstacle to peace. When Israel froze construction in
these Jewish communities, it did not get peace. When
Israel uprooted every Jewish town and village in Gaza,
11 years ago, it did not get peace; it got war. Some
today may try to balance their criticism of Palestinian
terror by condemning Israeli construction. Some might
even criticize construction while ignoring Palestinian
terrorism. Israel strongly rejects any attempt to draw
moral equivalence between construction and terrorism.

We have gathered to discuss the Middle East. It
requires us, today, to discuss one of the main causes
of instability and chaos in the region - the activities
of the internationally recognized terror organization
Hezbollah. Exactly 10 years ago, on 12 July 2006, the
terrorist group Hezbollah, a proxy of Iran, unleashed
a carefully planned attack against Israel. This
unprovoked attack instigated a 34-day war. For 34 days,
the citizens of Israel were forced to run for their lives
at the sound of the siren and spend their nights sleeping
in bomb shelters.
When the war ended, the Council, in this Chamber,
pledged that Hezbollah would no longer be allowed to
threaten Israel and hold the people of Lebanon hostage.
Resolution 1701 (2006) required "the disarmament of
all armed groups in Lebanon, so that there will be no
weapons or authority in Lebanon other than that of the
Lebanese State".

I have the unfortunate task of informing the
Council today that, 10 years later, the situation has
gone from bad to worse. The implementation of those
critical requirements of the resolution never happened.
The Government of Lebanon never stopped Hezbollah
and Hezbollah never stopped its military build-up.

Moreover, the world simply stopped paying
attention. When resolution 1701 (2006) was adopted,
Hezbollah had 7,000 rockets. Today, they have
over 120,000 rockets and missiles. This is a larger
arsenal than that of all European NATO countries
combined. In simple terms, there are more missiles
hidden underground in the 10,000 square kilometers
of Lebanon than there are above ground in the over
4 million square kilometres of all the European NATO
allies combined. For years, in speech after speech and
in letter after letter, Israel has warned the Council of
the dangers of the illegal smuggling and the continued
build-up in southern Lebanon, but these warnings have
fallen on deaf ears. The results are plain for all to see.
Hizbullah has transformed the villages of southern
Lebanon into terror outposts, placing rocket-launchers
next to schools and hospitals and storing missiles in
living rooms.

We have decided to share with the Council our
latest intelligence about Hizbullah's activities I would
ask Council members to turn their attention to the last
page in the hand-out that has been distributed in the
Chamber. It contains an aerial photograph of the village
of Shagra in southern Lebanon, just a few kilometres
from the border with Israel. Shagra is a village with
a population of 4,000, and consists of over 1,100
buildings. One out of every three buildings in Shagra
has been turned by Hizbullah terrorists into military
positions. I ask representatives to look at the example
marked "one" in yellow. It shows a Hizbullah rocket-
launcher, an infantry position and ammunition depots.
The terrorists chose to hide their positions in-between
homes and to place them just a few metres from the
three schools shown in blue. In the example marked
"two" in yellow, representatives will again see a rocket-
launcher, arms depots and an infantry position. The
blue square that these weapons of war are next to is a
mosque - a holy house of prayer. Council members
can see it with their own eyes. These are actual pictures
that were taken only recently.

This is exactly what we mean when we say that
Hizbullah is committing a double war crime. Not only
is it attacking Israeli civilians, but it is using Lebanese
civilians as human shields to defend its terror activity.
We are dealing with a terror group that operates as a
State within a State. Hizbullah is a threat to Israel,
to Lebanon and to the entire region. This is not the
assessment of the State of Israel alone. It is the official
stance of the Secretary-General. As the Secretary-
General warned in his report on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006),

"Should Hizbullah's possession of arms or attempts
to procure sophisticated weapons provoke conflict,
the consequences are potentially very grave for
Lebanon and for the region" (S/2016/189, para. 66).

Ten years have passed since resolution 1701 (2006)
was adopted, and Hizbullah has only enhanced its
military capabilities. The longer the Council ignores
this threat, the more dangerous it becomes to the entire
region. The United States, the European Union and
the League of Arab States have already condemned
Hizbullah's terrorist activities. It is about time that
the Council recognized Hizbullah as a deadly terrorist
organization and begin to act accordingly.

There is one regional Power that openly supports
Hizbullah. The lifeline of Hizbullah flows directly
from Tehran. Hizbullah Secretary-General Nasrallah
recently confessed to this fact in his own words:

"Hizbullah's budget and expenses come from
the Islamic Republic of Iran; our allocated money
is coming to us in the same way we receive the
rockets with which we threaten Israel."

And Hizbullah is not the only terror organization on
Iran's payroll. In fact, over 60 per cent of the budget
of the military wings of Hamas and Islamic Jihad also
comes from Iran. It is clear that behind the Ayatollah's
smile campaign, Iran remains the driving force for
hostility and the engine of instability in the Middle
East.

Let me be clear. Should Iran's proxy, Hizbullah,
make the miscalculation that it did 10 years ago in
2006, Israel will be ready to defend its citizens in the
most Vigorous and forceful way possible. For the sake
of the integrity and credibility of this institution, and
for the sake of stability in the region, we expect the
Council to demand that the Government of Lebanon
fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) and remove the
Hizbullah terrorists from southern Lebanon. Doing so
would not only be the right thing to do, but would also
distance the prospects of war and increase the chance
for long-lasting stability in our region.

