Archbishop Auza: The Holy See thanks the
presidency of the Dominican Republic for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
with particular reference to Israel and Palestine.

In his message for the 2019 World Day of Peace,
focused on the theme "Good politics at the service
of peace", Pope Francis compared peace to a delicate
flower struggling to blossom on the stony ground of
violence. Such an image vividly captures the enduring
situation between Israel and Palestine, where we know
how fragile peace is and how its tenuous existence is
constantly threatened by harmful rhetoric, provocations
and attacks, violations of human rights and unilateral
actions hampering efforts towards a resolution,
bringing about untold suffering and causing the deaths
of innocent, defenceless civilians.

In such a context, the Holy See continues to appeal
fervently to both Israeli and Palestinian authorities to
resume dialogue and undertake a journey of peace that
can put an end to a conflict that, for over 70 years, has
rent the land that is not only home to those two peoples,
but also of great historical and cultural importance
for the whole world and a spiritual home for the three
monotheistic religions of Judaism, Christianity and
Islam. With regard to its religious significance, the
Holy See seeks international guarantees for the Holy
City ofJerusalem, as recommended by the 1947 General
Assembly resolution 181 (II).

Notwithstanding the fundamental importance of
the holy places, there is the risk of transforming what
is a territorial and political conflict into one about
religion and identity. That must be avoided so as not
to compromise further the search for a much-needed
political solution. It therefore remains essential that
those who hold political office use their authority in
a responsible manner, while overcoming disputes
by engaging in an open and honest dialogue to
secure genuine and lasting peace, rather than simply
maintaining an illusory peace that is, in essence, only
a balance between power and fear. Genuine and lasting
peace, on the other hand, is the fruit of a political
project grounded in the mutual responsibility and
interdependence of human beings - one that goes
beyond the difficulties that characterize these times of
mistrust rooted in the fear of others or of strangers or
anxiety about one's personal security.

A responsible political project spares no effort to
protect the lives of all citizens, regardless of origin or
religious affiliation, thereby creating the conditions
necessary for a worthy and just future for all. In
that regard, it is important not to lose sight of the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and the other occupied
territories, as well as to highlight the generous response
of the international community to the financial deficit
faced last year by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Assistance to those most in need must always go before
political considerations, and aid to Palestine refugees
must be allowed to continue unimpeded as long as the
situation remains unresolved.

With reference to the grave humanitarian crises
affecting several parts of the Middle East, it seems
appropriate in this forum to reiterate Pope Francis' own
remarks made in reference to the generous welcome
and solidarity offered by Lebanon and Jordan - made
possible not by what is in excess, but by the sacrifices
of their citizens - to alleviate the suffering of
those affected by conflicts in the region, including
Palestinian refugees.

In his recent address to the diplomatic corps on
the occasion of the traditional exchange of New Year's
greetings, Pope Francis stated:

"The Holy See expresses the hope, too, that
dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians will
resume, so that an agreement at last can be reached
and a response given to the legitimate aspirations
of both peoples by ensuring the coexistence of
two States and the attainment of a long-awaited
and desired peace. A united commitment on the
part of the international community is extremely
important and necessary for attaining this goal, as
also for promoting peace in the entire region".

