We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing and welcome the participation of the representatives of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan in our discussions today. Over the last few weeks, the Security Council has received letters from each of the three countries detailing their perspectives on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. What is no doubt clear from the letters and the interest in this matter is that the Nile River is an extremely important resource for the African continent, specifically those three countries - Ethiopia, as the origin of the Blue Nile, the Sudan, where the confluence of the White and Blue Niles is found, and Egypt, where the Nile flows into the Mediterranean Sea. The River is a source not only of development but also of survival for all riparian States, and, as a shared natural resource, it is essential that there be cooperation on its utilization. The construction of the dam has been under way for almost a decade and is expected to usher in a new era of development, not only for Ethiopia but potentially for the entire subregion as well. It will be the biggest hydroelectric dam on the continent and should therefore be celebrated as a symbol of much-needed development and not become a source of conflict and disagreement. The Security Council discussion today is taking place under the agenda item "Peace and security in Africa". This is a clear recognition that the issue of the Renaissance Dam affects the African continent. The President of the Republic of South Africa and Chairperson of the African Union (AU), Cyril Ramaphosa, convened a meeting of the Extraordinary African Union Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government on 26 June, inviting the leaders of all three countries concerned to participate and discuss developments pertaining to the Renaissance Dam. The Bureau was represented by the Presidents of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Kenya and Mali. The Prime Ministers of Ethiopia and the Sudan and the Chairperson of the AU Commission were also invited to participate in the meeting. The meeting was characterized by a positive and constructive spirit that clearly showed the willingness of all the parties to find a mutually acceptable agreement on all outstanding issues pertaining to the Renaissance Dam. Importantly, the Bureau of the AU Assembly recognized the potential of the dam project for the African Union and committed to a process facilitated by the AU Chairperson. We welcome the three parties' undertaking at the meeting to refrain from making any statements or taking any action that might jeopardize or complicate the AU-led process aimed at finding an acceptable solution on all outstanding matters. While noting that most of the issues in the tripartite negotiations between Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan have already been resolved, the Bureau of the AU Assembly agreed to augment the tripartite committee dealing with the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam issue, which consists of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan, with the participation of observers. The observers will be South Africa, in its capacity as Chairperson of the AU, members of the AU Bureau and experts from the AU Commission. The committee will address all outstanding technical and legal issues and will present its report to the Chairperson of the Bureau in one week. Furthermore, the Bureau of the Assembly and the participating Heads of State and Government agreed to reconvene in two weeks to consider a report on the outcome of negotiations on the outstanding issues concerning the dam.The Bureau of the African Union Assembly and participating Heads of State and Government have requested the Security Council to take note of these developments and of the fact that the African Union remains seized of this matter of concern to the continent. It is therefore important that the Security Council respect the continental efforts and provide space for the parties, through the agreed upon mechanisms, to find a solution that will ensure a peaceful and prosperous future for these three neighbourly countries.
