Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): The mission was
successful, and one of the main reasons is that we had
very good leadership in the person of Ambassador
Jones Parry. The mission was timely; we visited
countries where action was needed to break deadlocks
and to make peacekeeping or peace-building situations
more effective. We went to deliver messages from the
Security Council, which can be accomplished either
through our presidential statements or through direct
contacts with the main stakeholders - particularly
with the peoples of these countries. That is because
peacekeeping and peace-building must be carried out
principally by the main actors: the peoples of the
countries that we visited. I think we managed to deliver
those messages.

In the case of cote d'Ivoire - where the
peacekeeping operation seemed to be more endangered
by the deadlock that persisted with the continuing lack
of dialogue between the Government of President
Gbagbo and his opposition - I think I can say that the
meeting we held with all the stakeholders with whom it
was possible to meet during a day-and-a-half-long
mission also attained that objective. Right now, some
results are beginning to emerge in C6te d'Ivoire.
Thanks to the messages and to the firmness with which
they were delivered, the deadlock has been broken and
United Nations Radio - which is very much needed to
pass on United Nations messages to the people of C6te
d'Ivoire - already seems to be back on the airwaves
since we left cote d'Ivoire. Moreover, the dialogue
between President Gbagbo and his opposition seems to
be under way in Abidjan, which means that our
mission seems to have produced the results we had
intended: making the peacekeeping effort and our
investment in peace effective and making our results
tangible. That can be accomplished only through the
firmness we demonstrated in delivering the messages.

We went to West Africa to say that we needed a
different environment throughout the region. The

messages that were delivered - whether they
concerned child soldiers or the trafficking in small
arms and light weapons - were communicated in a

way that enabled us to express clearly the Council's
concerns about those problems.

We had the opportunity to meet with the leaders
of the peacekeeping operations in both Liberia and
Sierra Leone. That was one of our key concerns, since
peacekeeping can be more seriously affected in those
two countries by the lack of progress in the first
country we visited, C6te d'Ivoire. The processes now
under way in both Sierra Leone and Liberia -
particularly the process of disarming former
combatants - seem quite well established. We hope
that we have sent the correct messages and that we can
continue to assess progress in the future when we look
at specific mandates.

There is a situation that is of some concern to us:
in Sierra Leone, the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) seems to be more or less ending its
mandate. We need to seriously consider this situation,
where the objectives that we defined have not yet been
fully attained. I am sure that it will be reviewed
properly in the Council at the appropriate time. The
current situation requires more peace-building in order
to complete the peacekeeping operation. Unless that is
handled properly, we may face a situation that we
could have avoided. But such a situation can still be
avoided.

The country we left with more hopes is Guinea-
Bissau. The fact that, in a happy coincidence, the
Council mission visited Guinea-Bissau at the same
time as the Economic and Social Council served to
reinforce a message that peacekeeping and peace-
building, or country-building, go together. In Guinea-
Bissau, there has been very clear progress, judging
from the situation we saw there last year. That progress
can be reinforced only if there is commitment by the
international community; here, the way must be
pointed out by the Council.

It was also fortunate that, during the mission's
stay in Guinea-Bissau, a mission of the International
Monetary Fund was reviewing the situation in the
country. The assessment - which was shared with
members of the Council - is that there is a clear effort
aimed at improving the governance of the country, and
that it is being taken seriously by the newly elected
Government. We had meetings with members of civil
society; with parliamentarians, particularly the
President of Parliament; and with the main political
parties. There is cohesion on what needs to be done. In
particular, there is hope that the Council, representing
the international community, will be prepared to
reward Guinea-Bissau if there is constancy and
perseverance in attaining the objectives that have been
defined.

Another important factor that was a key to our
success was that we had the opportunity to meet with
the leadership and the main stakeholders of these
countries, including - as already indicated by
Ambassador Jones Parry - the leaders of two of those
countries, President Obasanjo and President Kufuor,
and representatives of the Economic Community of
West African States, a subregional organization that
has been paying a very high level of attention to the
need to maintain peace and stability in the region in
order to enable its economies to develop. ECOWAS is
an organization that was created particularly to deal
with economic development, but it has taken peace and
stability seriously and is fully engaged with the
Council and with the international community to bring
about the solutions that are required either to break
deadlocks or to provide the right answers to problems
whenever they occur.

We will have the opportunity to discuss this, but
the report which has been eloquently presented here
this afternoon by Ambassador Jones Parry illustrates
very well what we did for seven days. Although we
spent just one day in each capital, in that one day quite
a bit was achieved that may make our Council more
effective and even more the key organ responsible for
peace and security in a region that very much needs it.
The Council is moving in that direction.
