Mr. Akasaka (Japan): I would like to express, on
behalf of the Japanese Government, our gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for travelling from Ireland to New
York in order to chair today's public meeting on the
situation in East Timor. We sincerely appreciate the
leadership of Ireland on this important matter.

My appreciation also goes to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, and to the Chief Minister of the
Transitional Government of East Timor and the other
members of the delegation for their presence at this
meeting today.

At the outset, I would like to thank Secretary-
General Annan for putting together the report on the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). The Government of Japan
welcomes this report, which is the valuable result of
the work done in New York and in Dili over the past
several months.

It would have been desirable if the report had
been more detailed with regard to the shape of the
United Nations presence in the post-independence
period. But we understand well that making accurate
assessments of the situation on the ground and drawing
up an optimal and feasible plan based on those
assessments are not easy tasks. I am therefore grateful
to Mr. Vieira de Mello, who has provided us today with
additional details to supplement the Secretary-
General's report.

It is important that the Security Council provide,
at an early date, as clear an indication as possible with
respect to the continued presence of the United Nations
in the post-independence period. This is necessary in
order to give assurance and encouragement to the
people of East Timor, as well as to those countries
which have a strong interest in the political stability
and economic and social development of East Timor.

As rightly pointed out in the Secretary-General's
report, the follow-on mission should include a military
component, a civilian police component and a
component for civil administration. In this context, the
Government of Japan supports the Secretary-General's
concept of a United Nations mission in the post-
independence period.

We hope that, based upon the further accelerated
work of the Secretariat in the coming weeks, the
follow-on mission will be endorsed in the form of a
Security Council resolution by the end of next January,
when UNTAET's mandate is to be renewed. It is
advisable that discussions commence promptly on
detailed and concrete plans for these components,
including the level and modality of funding.

I am pleased to see that the process towards
independence is making steady progress thanks to the
efforts not only of the people of East Timor, but also of
the international community and the United Nations,
particularly of Mr. Vieira de Mello and his entire
UNTAET team. Obviously, UNTAET and the East
Timorese will be required to make further efforts in
order to successfully achieve independence in May
next year. But the progress made so far provides all the
parties concerned with a solid basis on which to plan
for the future.

The efforts of the East Timorese themselves are
crucially important for their nation-building in the
post-independence period. After all, it is the people of
East Timor themselves who are responsible for their
future.

A clear sense of ownership on the part of a
recipient is also essential in order to make foreign
assistance truly effective for the development of the
country concerned. It is evident that independent East
Timor will continue to need international assistance.
The donors' meeting on East Timor scheduled to be
held in Oslo in December will be important in this
context. The Government of Japan is ready to play a
substantial role in ensuring that the meeting is
productive.

But that meeting is just one, albeit important, step
in the long and difficult process of nation-building that
the future Government and the people of East Timor
will have to pursue in the coming years. With this
recognition, I would like to conclude my statement by
assuring the people of East Timor that the Government
of Japan will remain a partner as they tackle the
challenging but rewarding task of nation-building.

