Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your outstanding presidency of the Security Council
during the month of March. I should also like to thank
you for having taken the initiative of organizing a
public wrap-up meeting on the Council's deliberations
this month and for permitting Member States not
members of the Council to express their views on the
African dimension of the Council's work.

My delegation attaches the highest importance to
conflict prevention in Africa through the enhancement
of coordination and cooperation among United Nations
bodies, programmes and specialized agencies, the
international financial institutions and the international
community as a whole with a view to resolving the
underlying social and economic causes of conflict in
Africa.

With regard to conflict prevention, my delegation
would also like to mention the importance of
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Although we express our support for the
right of all States to import, produce and possess such
weapons for the needs of legitimate self-defence and
security, we believe that the spread of illicit light
weapons is an obstacle to the peaceful settlement of
disputes and contributes to prolonging conflict. We
hope that the Second Biennial Meeting of States to
Consider the Implementation of the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, scheduled for July 2005, will yield fruitful
results. Along those lines, we believe that States
Members of the United Nations should seek to bring to
a successful conclusion the deliberations of the Open-
ended Working Group to Negotiate an International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace in a
Timely and Reliable Manner Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons.

We appreciate the tireless efforts of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to confront
emergency situations in Africa. The close cooperation
between Member States and the Secretariat helps to
strengthen the United Nations peacekeeping capacities,
but those efforts alone will not ensure the success of
peacekeeping operations unless they are accompanied
by appropriate adaptation on the part of all actors and
partners.

In that regard, Tunisia supports more advanced
and interactive consultations through the consultation
mechanism between the Secretariat, the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries so as to
enable Member States to be better informed about the
situation on the ground in a complete and regular
fashion. It will be necessary in the future to give
greater consideration to the concerns of the troop-
contributing countries, whose opinions should be more
than advisory.

The Tunisian delegation believes that United
Nations cooperation with regional organizations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter is of prime importance. In
that respect, my delegation would again emphasize its
interest in cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union, particularly in order to improve the
latter's institutional capacities.

Africa is currently host to three quarters of the
Blue Helmets who are deployed throughout the world.
Africa's efforts to take control of its own fate call for
increased support from the United Nations and the
international community. We believe that the recent
establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, aimed at creating a regional conflict-
prevention policy, will greatly help African States.

However, international efforts to strengthen the
collective peacekeeping abilities of African countries
do not absolve the international community of its
collective obligations under the United Nations
Charter, which confers upon the Security Council the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that context, my
delegation welcomes the peace and reconciliation
efforts that have been launched in Somalia and fully
endorses the opinions expressed regarding the need to
evince due interest in the situation in that country. We
call on the United Nations in general and the Security
Council in particular to shoulder their responsibilities
for maintaining peace and security in that fraternal
country.

We wish to stress that the end of the mandate of a
peacekeeping mission does not mean that a solid peace
has been established. Lasting peace can be established
only if we address the deep-rooted causes of conflicts
and create the political, economic and social bases for
long-term peacebuilding. The international community
must work in unison to that end. The proposal under
discussion to establish a United Nations peacebuilding
commission deserves our full attention.

While we prefer that conflicts be settled
peacefully, we acknowledge that some extreme
situations require the imposition of sanctions in the
interest of maintaining international peace and security.
However, given the trend towards ever more frequent
recourse to sanctions, which tend mostly to affect
African countries, we would emphasize that the
Security Council's prerogatives in that area should be
exercised in conformity with the United Nations
Charter and international law.

Tunisia is proud to belong to Africa and is most
especially interested in anything that can help to reduce
tensions on the continent and to resolve conflicts.
Since 1960, my country has participated in
peacekeeping missions in the Congo and is currently
involved in four such missions in Africa. We are
prepared to continue to do so, within our means,
because we believe that the solution to Africa's
problems is primarily the responsibility of the African
countries themselves. However, the international
community as a whole and the Security Council in
particular must also continue to play their full role.

