Mr. Sychov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Allow me
first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting and for allowing us to address the Council on such
an important matter.

The Government of the Republic of Belarus welcomes
the efforts made by Ambassador Fowler of Canada,
Chairman of the Security Council sanctions Committee on
Angola. We welcome his efforts to establish an effective
mechanism for putting pressure on UNITA in the interest
of stabilizing the situation in Angola. The importance of
today's meeting was underlined by the statements made
here by the United Kingdom Minister of State, Mr. Hain,
and by the Angolan Minister for External Relations,
Mr. Miranda, and by other representatives in the Council.

In the view of the Belarus Government, Ambassador
Fowler's idea of establishing this panel of experts to
thoroughly investigate the implementation of the sanctions
against UNITA was a new and unusual step. It will
certainly help mobilize further efforts of the international
community to ensure strict compliance with the sanctions
regimes imposed by the Security Council.

The Panel's report presented to the Council today is of
fundamental importance. The facts and recommendations
contained therein must be studied most carefully, and
relevant measures should then be adopted both by the
Members of the United Nations and by the Council.

At this stage, I would like to offer a few preliminary
comments on the report. Belarus is one of the States that
the Chairman of the Expert Panel, Ambassador Mollander,
visited in early February of this year. I would like to note
that the Government of the Republic of Belarus allowed
Mr. Mollander's Panel the opportunity to study
comprehensively the work of the border and customs
authorities of Belarus, the work of the Foreign Ministry and
the system of export controls imposed to comply with the
provisions of Security Council resolutions involving
Angola.

The Government of the Republic of Belarus prepared
detailed answers in response to the follow-up questions that
were asked by the Panel while it was in Minsk. Since the
Panel had not set any specific time-frame for the
submission of the information, our response was made
available to the Chairman of the sanctions Committee and
of the Panel Chairman, Mr. Mollander, immediately after
the competent authorities in our Republic had prepared
this response. Ambassador Fowler discussed this today.

At the same time, we are sorry to see that the
Panel's report does not note the unwavering and strict
commitment of the Republic of Belarus to comply with
the sanctions regimes imposed by the Security Council.
Nor does the report reflect the fact that the Panel did not
uncover any violations by Belarus of the provisions of the
Council's resolutions. In this connection, we would like
to note that additional information was submitted on 29
February - exhaustive information on all the questions
that had been asked by the Panel - and the Expert
Panel's report was issued on 10 March. We hope that
subsequent documents from the Panel of Experts and
from the Security Council will contain the relevant
information in this regard.

In conclusion, allow me once again to emphasize
that the Republic of Belarus always has, does and will
strictly comply with all decisions of the Security Council,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter and other
international legal instruments. The Government of the
Republic of Belarus intends to cooperate tirelessly with
the Sanctions Committee, the Panel of Experts and the
Council as a whole in the hope of achieving a political
settlement to the conflict in Angola.

