Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Protection of civilians in
armed conflict is topical and thus my delegation expresses
its gratitude to you, Mr. President, for having arranged
this briefing in this format. The introductory remarks by

 

Mr. Sommaruga, Ms. Bellamy and Mr. Otunnu have indeed
enriched our deliberations, and we are most grateful.

Today civilians, especially women, children and the
elderly, are deliberately targeted by combatants and are
perpetual victims of indiscriminate shootings and anti-
personnel landmines. The cruel and degrading treatment,
physical and psychological torture, killing and mutilation of
civilians are well-known characteristics of armed conflict.
Inciting of ethnic animosity by hostile media has also
become a common phenomenon. Human suffering as a
result of displacement is on the increase. On the other hand,
displaced persons fleeing into neighbouring countries
continue to place a huge social and economic burden on the
host countries, especially in Africa.

It is obvious from the briefing we received a while
ago that the situation of children is even more perilous. The
statistics of displaced children cited here are truly alarming.
Over 13 million children are internally displaced. Those
who manage to escape the bullets of belligerents often have
no place to hide. They are pursued by the scourge of
landmines and are either killed or scarred for life. Not only
are children easy targets; they are increasingly being used
to kill other children. Girls are traumatized through rape.
They become instant mothers by being forced to bear
children or having to assume the role of parenthood
because their parents have been murdered.

Recruitment and deployment of child soldiers who are
often orphans of the same conflict is preposterous, for they
become ruthless and as such wreak vengeance on their
adversaries. Enmities and hatred are inculcated in them, and
unless measures are taken to curb this practice, societies
with this breed of soldiers are heading for disaster.

In a word, what we have heard today is that there are
no children in war and thus there is no childhood in armed
conflict. Therefore banning the recruitment or the use of
children in hostilities must be made an international
commitment.

In the past, civilians in armed conflict regarded United
Nations premises as safe havens, and those fleeing hostility
knew they could be safe under the blue and white flag.
Today all that has changed. Shootings at United Nations
premises and other properties, as well as at United Nations
personnel, will become fair play unless we act decisively.

Motivated by human considerations to protect the
victims of armed conflict, humanitarian agencies are
themselves victimized or face accusations of giving aid to
rebels, and their neutrality and impartiality become
contentious. In a worst-case scenario, they are refused
access to the victims of the conflict, expelled or their
properties are confiscated. Thus, all efforts should be
made to encourage parties to a conflict to allow safe
access by humanitarian agencies to the victims of conflict.

My delegation wishes to call on all parties to
conflicts to observe the provisions of the pertinent Geneva
Conventions and the additional protocols and to respect
the neutrality of the civilian populations. Implementation
of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction is imperative. There are
numerous instruments to address this problem. What is
needed, therefore, is a collective political will to enforce
them.

The Platform for Action adopted at the Fourth World
Conference on Women, which took place in Beijing in
1995, among others, addressed women and armed
conflict. Not only does the Platform for Action depict the
horror women and girls go through in armed conflict, but
it gives concrete actions to be taken by Governments in
order to reduce excessive military expenditures and
control the availability of armaments. Let me reiterate that
this is one of the commitments we all made at that
Conference.

In fact in this regard the Conference on Women
addressed the heart of the problem - proliferation of
arms and their impact on armed conflict. The uncontrolled
inflow not only of small arms but of all types of
sophisticated arms into areas of conflict needs to be
addressed. Is it not ironic, for example, that in Africa
there is a shortage of food but an abundance of
sophisticated arms? Therefore, just as we call upon
belligerents to stop the fighting, so too must we undertake
measures for all weapons-producing countries not to
transfer anti-personnel landmines and arms, whether by
sale or grant, to regions where armed conflict is
imminent.

Furthermore, and equally important in our view, it is
the responsibility of all Member States to ensure that their
citizens are not used as mercenaries. Indeed, protection of
civilians in armed conflict is pertinent, but what is even
more crucial is for the world to come to sanity and stop
armed conflict.

