Mr. Melkert: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to introduce the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2011/435) on the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). This
comes at an important time when the Council will be
considering UNAMI's mandate renewal next week.

"Are you optimistic or are you pessimistic?" has
been the question I have been asked most by many. As
we know, events tend to shape intents at least as much
as the other way around. In most of what I have
witnessed in Iraq there is ground for cautious
optimism, provided that determined leadership within
the country and a stronger spirit of cooperation in the
region with Iraq prevail.

In some important aspects, Iraq is at the heart of
fundamental changes in the region. The Iraqi system of
Government incorporates a power-sharing
Constitution, guaranteeing the participation of women
and minorities and nurturing a culture of ongoing
constitutional debate. Regular elections have taken
place, conducted in line with international standards.
2

While drawn out, Government formation has indeed
progressed. Meanwhile, Parliament is taking an
increasingly important role in decision-making. And in
a departure from decades of authoritarian regime,
negotiations between all parties have become the
predominant feature of political life. In the words of
Foreign Minister Zebari, speaking of Iraq and the
wider region: "The time of the single-party State and
the ruling party is over This era is at an end."

In the slipstream of events in the region,
demonstrations have been recognized as a legitimate
way to express opinions or grievances, although all too
often the practice of freedom of expression is under
considerable pressure. Still, the Government and the
Council of Representatives have embarked on a true
debate about the policies that need to be put in place in
order to modernize infrastructure and the economy,
improve social services delivery and combat
institutional lethargy and corruption.

Iraq's economy, meanwhile, continues to grow at
a rate of over 10 per cent, with oil revenues at a higher
level than projected and updates on proven reserves
reconfirming Iraq's prominence in global oil
production for a long time to come. Total foreign direct
investment in 2010 increased by almost 50 per cent
against the previous year, up to a level of just over
$42 billion. Areas that have benefited include
construction, transportation, electricity, industry, oil
and gas, water and sanitation, health and agriculture.
At the same time Iraq's poverty index remains high at
22.9 per cent. Such inequality poses an instability risk
for the future.

These political and economic facts matter in a
country that has suffered much during three decades of
war and oppression. Reconstruction, institution-
building and bringing back knowledge all take time.
There have also been setbacks as armed opposition
groups continue to try to undo positive developments,
most notably in waves of kidnappings and
assassinations targeting civil servants, holders of
political office, academics, doctors and activists,
undoubtedly impacting State- and society-building at
this crucial time. These and other acts of violence,
which unfortunately have not subsided in recent
months, emphasize once more the need for determined,
jointly shared political action against the perpetrators,
Wherever they may derive their support from.
11-42035

Consolidating and further strengthening the
indisputable gains will require a keen understanding of
the need to resolve pending issues. The key to this
remains the implementation of the November 2010
Erbil agreement that brought the signatures of Prime
Minister Al-Maliki, Kurdistan Regional Government
President Barzani and Iraqiya leader Allawi together
under an agreed power-sharing arrangement. As
appointments of ministers in the security ministries are
still pending and the National Council for Strategic
Policies has not yet been formed, there is
understandable concern about whether the post-
election spirit can prevail. In this context, as stressed in
the report before the Council, the Secretary-General
calls on Iraqi political leaders to put aside their
differences and move swiftly to agree on the way
forward.

It is important to note that on 10 July all leaders
of the main political blocs met at the invitation of
President Talabani in order to step up efforts to
revitalize the spirit of consensus and look at ways to
implement the Erbil agreement. Discussions also
focused on the issue of the expiration of the bilateral
status-of-forces agreement between Iraq and the United
States. However, the indications at my most recent
meetings do not provide grounds for optimism about a
breakthrough any time soon.

Another issue that would benefit from consensus
between parties is the mandate and selection of the
next Independent High Electoral Commission in the
course of next year. UNAMI stands ready to advise the
Council of Representatives on the procedure that will
be essential to consolidating independence and
standards for organizing elections in the coming
period.

I am pleased to report that UNAMI has continued
to facilitate dialogue within the framework of the
standing consultative mechanism. Importantly,
interaction among key leaders within Kirkuk province
has been positively affected by a new power-sharing
arrangement between key representatives of the
Kurdish, Arab and Turkmen components. Furthermore,
UNAMI hosted all Council of Representatives
members elected in Kirkuk as part of ongoing
consultations on the conditions that would enable the
delayed Provincial Council elections to take place in
the near future. Discussions have further focused on
power sharing in Ninewa, the conditions for
conducting a census and the future of the combined
11-42035
security mechanism, which, under the auspices of
United States Forces-Iraq, has contributed significantly
to cooperation and coordination between the Iraqi
security forces and the Peshmerga.

Maintaining security stability is important in the
short run, provided that genuine efforts are made to
address the underlying issues that have been a source
of political controversy. The Mission is committed to
helping stakeholders find common ground and
mutually acceptable solutions to these and other issues
in order to resolve the status of Kirkuk and other
disputed areas. It is of great interest to Iraq and the
international community that these overall positive
experiences be consolidated and strengthened. With
that purpose in mind, I visited the coordination centres
of the combined security mechanism in the provinces
of Kirkuk, Ninewa and Diyala in order to enable
UNAMI to advise and assist, as per its mandate, the
Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government on the future of the mechanism and the
possibility of continued international engagement, if
requested.

While Iraq's internal affairs continue to require
additional efforts to strengthen stability, the regional
context requires attention as well. With Kuwait, Iraq
shares not only a border but also a history and a future.
Earlier this year, a breakthrough was achieved as a
consequence of mutual visits by the respective Prime
Ministers, and by the subsequent work on a
comprehensive bilateral agenda under the auspices of
their Foreign Ministers. Their decision to form a Joint
Ministerial Committee is an important step towards
finding viable solutions to their outstanding bilateral
concerns, including those that have recently generated
public discussion.

Notwithstanding those bilateral efforts, which I
hope will be successful, Iraq, as the Secretary-
General's report indicates, must demonstrate to the
Council tangible and expeditious progress in
implementing its outstanding Chapter VII obligations
pertaining to Kuwait. These include missing Kuwaiti
persons and property, as well as the Iraq-Kuwait
boundary maintenance project and citizens' relocation.
The Secretary-General has also consistently reminded
the Iraqi Prime Minister that a letter from him
reaffirming Iraq's commitment to its land and maritime
boundaries with Kuwait under resolution 833 (1993) is
an essential confidence-building measure. In this
context, the Secretary-General's High-level
3
Coordinator and I both remain committed to assisting
Iraq and Kuwait in bringing closure to these long-
standing Security Council mandates.

The implementation of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework, formulated to
support the National Development Plan, remains
ongoing, with two main pillars: a $33-million private-
sector development programme and a $55-million
public-sector one. Noteworthy in that context is the
essential support that the United Nations Population
Fund recently provided to the Government for the
successful completion of the dwelling and household
part of the census.

On the human rights front, several initiatives
were launched at the national and regional levels. In
early June, the draft national action plan on human
rights was discussed at a conference hosted by Prime
Minister Al-Maliki in the Council of Representatives.
During the discussions, more than 100
recommendations were incorporated into the plan.
They cover issues affecting women's rights, children's
rights, minorities, the rule of law, freedom of
expression, internally displaced persons and refugees.
In the Kurdistan region, its Parliament passed a law
combating domestic violence in the region. While these
are positive developments, efforts must continue to
ensure that fundamental rights and freedoms are
protected, notably with regard to the role of the media,
and that conditions in detention facilities comply with
international conventions.

For UNAMI, last week was an historic week of
transition from years of support by United States forces
to enhanced cooperation with the Iraqi security forces,
and I would like to commend the Government for its
strong commitment to the protection of United Nations
staff. At my completion of a two-year period as the
guest of the Iraqi people, I would like to conclude with
some personal observations.

From the international perspective, there is every
reason for strongly welcoming the return of Iraq as a
full and respected member of the international
community. As historically all parts of Iraq are
inseparably connected to their neighbours, it remains
true that what goes well in Iraq will be of tremendous
benefit to the wider region. Steady economic
development in Iraq will reinforce regional and
international stability. Addressing major political,
social and economic challenges could significantly
contribute to reducing the space for extremism,
including by distributing Iraq's wealth more fairly
among its people. Conversely, it is true that what goes
well in the region is of benefit to Iraq as well.
Sustained engagement on the part of the international
community will help to create the space needed to tap
into the vast potential of more diverse and integrated
economic development and to achieve a level of social
progress that will ultimately define the future of the
region.

Underscoring what the Secretary-General has
said in his report, I therefore urge all countries in the
region to step up their engagement with Iraq with a
view to quickly resolving outstanding differences and
identifying concrete areas of cooperation in the
political, security and development fields that could be
beneficial for all concerned. UNAMI, with the support
of the Security Council, is prepared to do all it can to
support such efforts.

Looking inside Iraq, I have been privileged to
witness the genuine progress that has been made to
replace a horrific past of ethnic confrontation with a
future where coexistence and common interest define
the interaction between Arabs and Kurds. For Iraq and
for the wider region, it is truly significant to note
achievements in the Kurdistan region that are a great
asset to stability and confidence-building. This
generates hope that common sense will prevail in
addressing still significant but not insurmountable
issues regarding the disputed areas, including Kirkuk.
The key will be the readiness of all parties to respect
mutual concerns relating to past confrontation and
injustices, while substituting for these the recognition
that pluralism should be recognized in power-sharing
arrangements serving the common interest. As long as
the parties in Iraq consider this helpful, I would
strongly recommend maintaining international
engagement so as to facilitate the processes that may
gradually transform disputes into mutually acceptable
solutions.

Real progress has also been achieved in replacing
a ruthless dictatorship with institutions and
representatives mandated by constitutional principles
and practice. While many challenges remain in the
process of ingraining human rights and democracy
fundamentals into the minds and actions of all
stakeholders, it is hard to see how this change could be
reversed. The change, however, has come at an extreme
cost, which is still tangible and visible on a daily basis
in the victims and the damage, despite the eight years
that have gone by. Developments in the region are
showing that change must, and eventually will, come
primarily from within. The new Iraq will be a real
opportunity for all Iraqis only if their leaders are
decisive in their action, allies do not turn away in their
support, and its sovereignty is respected. For the
foreseeable future, the United Nations will be well
placed to remain a trusted partner in this endeavour.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Government of Iraq, including Ambassador Al Bayati,
the Security Council and the Secretary-General for the
confidence they have vested in me over the past two
years in support of my efforts as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to carry out
the important mandate entrusted to UNAMI. I also
thank the brave and able staff of UNAMI and the
United Nations country team for their efforts in
supporting the people of Iraq under difficult and
challenging conditions.

