Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to join in
thanking Mr. Benon Sevan for his comprehensive
briefing this afternoon on the process of phasing out
the oil-for-food programme.

It is clear from Mr. Sevan's report that the current
situation in Iraq has affected the winding down of the
oil-for-food programme. A number of problems
currently exist in Iraq, as is evident from news reports.
As in Afghanistan, the primary problem is security,
which has necessitated the reduction of staff in Iraq.
The security problem has also negatively impacted
humanitarian activities in Iraq.

Pakistan joins in condemning the recent attacks
on humanitarian organizations in Iraq, particularly the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and
on other targets. These attacks have increased the sense
of insecurity of the people of Iraq. We extend our
condolences to the bereaved families of those who have
lost their lives.

The security situation has also curtailed the
capacity of the United Nations to engage with the
Coalition Provisional Authority and with the Iraqi
ministries to contribute to the decision-making process
and, ultimately, to help the Iraqi people voice their
preferences and their aspirations.

We have taken note of the actions initiated by the
Office of the Iraq Programme to complete the transfer
of the oil-for-food programme to the Coalition
Provisional Authority by 21 November. We would be
interested to know when the Office of the Iraq
Programme will be able to complete the review of the
contracts to determine their relative utility. Will the
Coalition Provisional Authority and the Iraqi ministries
be asked to provide their inputs in that review? Will
there be a new procedure for the implementation of the
contracts that are thus identified? The representatives
of the Coalition Provisional Authority may also wish to
throw light on these issues.

With regard to inspection and authentication
procedures, Mr. Sevan expressed concern in his report
regarding slow cooperation by the Coalition
Provisional Authority, particularly regarding the
provision of information about contact points within
ports or an update concerning any arrangements made
to confirm the arrival of goods. We hope that those
issues too can be addressed by the Coalition
Provisional Authority as soon as possible.

We would like to know what will be the status of
the United Nations local staff - the Iraqi staff -
involved in oil-for-food programme activities. Is it the
intention that their services should be continued after
the termination of the programme? We would be very
interested to receive answers to those questions.

