Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): For the past two
years, I have had the honour to serve as the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia and the
Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa.

Regarding the 751 Committee on Somalia, the
information we have considered has indeed been
consistently sobering as well as troubling. The reports
of the Monitoring Group have documented the
worsening security situation in Somalia. They have
been unsparing in describing the widespread violations
of the arms embargo by land, air and sea, which has
continued unabated for the past 16 years.

The Monitoring Group has consistently reported
on the general state of lawlessness and the lack of
accountability that prevails in Somalia. Recently, the link
between piracy, kidnapping and ransom payments in
financing embargo violations committed by armed groups
has received increased attention. In recent months, the
number of piracy incidents has increased dramatically,
capturing global attention. The Monitoring Group has
described piracy as a multi-million dollar industry
involving up to 2,000 people, using over 60 small boats
and several mother ships. The pirates are said to have
earned enormous amounts of money, estimated to be
more than $100 million in recent years.

This has made Somali piracy very compelling
indeed. Yet Somali piracy is only one of the symptoms
of the root causes of the Somali conflict. The
Monitoring Group has noted that pirates invoke
legitimate Somali grievances regarding illegal fishing
in Somali waters by foreign ships, together with the
illegal dumping of toxic waste off the Somali coast.
These grievances have earned the pirates general
support for their activities among Somali society.

In its latest report, the Monitoring Group has
recommended the creation of a maritime administration
caretaker authority for Somalia that could mitigate the
scourge of piracy, as well as begin to address the
problems of toxic waste dumping and illegal fishing on
the Somali coast. But, even if this recommendation
could be accepted, that would still be addressing only
one part of the Somali problem, albeit a Visible one.
This also explains why the arms embargo imposed by
the Council in 1992 has had such a minimal effect.
What Somalia urgently needs is for its tragic situation
to be addressed in a comprehensive and holistic
manner. In other words, the solution for Somalia lies in
addressing piracy and the arms embargo together with
a political solution that will lead to the establishment
of reliable Government authority in Somalia.
Otherwise, systematic violations will continue to occur
in an environment that has been one of impunity, where
there are few or no consequences for any violations.

A promising start has already been made with the
Djibouti Agreement, which brought the Transitional
Federal Government together with some of the Islamic
groups interested in rebuilding Somalia. Besides the
fact that the Djibouti Agreement is desperately in need
of international political support, there is a lack of the
security stabilization inside Somalia that would allow
for the political process to grow some roots. The
African Union has contributed the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to help stabilize the
situation and support the Transitional Federal
Government. And AMISOM, which is in dire need of
strengthening, can never be enough on its own.

The Security Council and the international
community must address Somalia in a holistic manner,
because we cannot watch Somalia become an even
worst disaster than it is right now. Thousands of people
are dying of hunger and disease in Somalia - that is if
the murderous militias that run freely throughout
Somalia do not kill them first.

So, the Council can pass the toughest resolutions
on piracy; the Council can strengthen the arms
embargo and can even aim the most stringent measures
at individuals and entities that may be seen as
obstructing the process in Somalia; but such
fragmented efforts are unlikely to succeed without a
comprehensive solution. Meanwhile, Somalia will
continue to sink further and further into despair. Surely
the people of Somalia deserve a better life than the one
they have right now.

I would like to offer my warmest wishes to my
successor as Chair of this Committee - I am not sure
whether to say condolences. I would also like to
express appreciation to the Monitoring Group for its
commendable work. We could not have done our work
without the tireless Secretariat, which has provided
support and advice to me and my delegation, as well as
to the Committee, over the past two years.

South Africa assumed the Chair of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa because we felt that this would strengthen the

African agenda on peace, security and development.
Our overall contribution to this Council was in line
with the aims of the Working Group. During our
presidency of the Council, we highlighted the need to
strengthen the working relationship between the
African Union and the United Nations, in particular the
Security Council. We hosted thematic debates that
brought several heads of State and Government from
Africa to the Security Council. Right now, we look
forward to a report of the African Union-United
Nations panel headed by former Prime Minister
Romano Prodi of Italy, which will make concrete
proposals on how the United Nations can support the
work of the African Union with predictable and
sustainable resources.

Regarding the programme of the Working Group,
we held four meetings, including a session at which the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, briefed the Working Group on the reform of
the Department of Political Affairs. The briefing
provided the Working Group with an opportunity to
understand how the Department of Political Affairs
sees its role in conflict prevention and resolution
efforts.

Another important meeting took place on
1 December 2008 and addressed the concept of
responsibility to protect. There were two main
purposes for holding the meeting. The first was that the
Secretary-General is expected to present his report on
the responsibility to protect to the General Assembly
early next year, which will then hold a debate on that
report. Our deliberations in the Working Group on the
concept of responsibility to protect could contribute to
that debate, whose objective is, among others, to arrive
at a common understanding on issues that are set forth
in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document (A/60/L.1).

Second, it was our understanding that the concept
of responsibility to protect falls within the mandate of
the Working Group. Therefore, it was critical that the
meeting be understood within the context of the
mandate of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which set forth

"To propose recommendations to the Security
Council to enhance cooperation in conflict
prevention and resolution, between the United
Nations and regional (OAU) and subregional
organizations" (S/2002/207, section 11] (iv)).

Finally, I would like to express my deep
appreciation for the cooperation of the members of the
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa in our endeavour to contribute to the
successful implementation of the Working Group's
mandate. I also wish to thank the Secretariat for its
support throughout the activities of the Working Group.

