Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Mr. President, we
congratulate you and the delegation of France for the
excellent work of the Security Council under your
leadership this month. We also felicitate the Permanent
Representative of Colombia to the United Nations and
his team for their successful presidency of the Council
during the month of April.

We support the efforts of the Council's three
subsidiary Committees in promoting greater
transparency and dialogue with Member States with
regard to their respective areas of activities.

Pakistan strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, committed by whomever,
wherever and for whatever purposes. Terrorism and
extremism should not be associated with any religion,
race, ethnicity, faith, value system, culture or society.
No religious tradition or doctrine should be depicted as
encouraging or inspiring acts of terrorism.

Roughly 72 hours ago, two terrorist suicide
bombers attacked a paramilitary training centre in
northwest Pakistan, killing more than 80 soldiers of the
Frontier Corps and injuring more than 70 other
persons. The incident has once again highlighted the
enormous sacrifices that Pakistan continues to make in
order to rid the world of terrorism.

Pakistan needs the solid and unwavering support
of the international community in its fight against
terrorism. Pakistan has deployed 160,000 troops on its
border with Afghanistan and has set up 822 border
posts to interdict members of Al-Qaida and Taliban. As
a result of terrorist acts and our efforts to root out
terrorism. Pakistan has lost 30,000 men, women and
children and more than 5,000 armed forces personnel.

The international community needs to promote
economic and social development as part of a holistic

11-3390]
approach to curb and eliminate extremism and
terrorism. The promotion of socio-economic
development in places afflicted by extremism should
be a high priority.

Pakistan has made considerable progress in
countering the financing of terrorism. Pakistan has
become a party to the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and has
enacted a landmark anti-money-laundering bill. A
Financial Monitoring Unit has been established in the
State Bank of Pakistan to monitor suspicious financial
transactions. Hundreds of bank accounts, to the tune of
750.8 million rupees, have been frozen. We are
implementing the comprehensive international
standards embodied in the 40 recommendations and
9 special recommendations of the Financial Action
Task Force. We are active members of the Asia/Pacific
Group on Money Laundering.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) organized a workshop for
Pakistani parliamentarians in Islamabad in November
2009 and a study visit of Pakistan's parliamentarians to
Turkey in February this year. Today, the Executive
Director of CTED, Mr. Mike Smith, is in Islamabad to
organize a workshop for strengthening anti-money-
laundering laws and countering financing for terrorism.

We have noted the work programme of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) for 2011 annexed
to document S/2011/223, and we appreciate the
Committee's efforts to enhance transparency by
holding informal briefings for Member States.

The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee
and its Monitoring Team have a difficult task to
perform. We appreciate the efforts of the 1267
Sanctions Committee to bring clarity to its working
methods, and we note that the Committee has made an
effort to improve its guidelines. There are many
interesting ideas in the eleventh report of the
Monitoring Team (see S/2011/245) to improve the
Committee's performance and enhance transparency in
its work. Some of those ideas are hard to implement,
and others can be incorporated easily in the current
regime. Different ideas to enhance the efficacy of the
1267 sanctions regime need to be studied in detail.

We are of the view that the institution of the
Ombudsperson must be strengthened and her views on
listing and de-listing issues given due weight. In case
of disagreement between observations of the

11-3390]
Ombudsperson and a decision of the Committee, the
rationale for the Committee's decision should be made
public in the interest of greater transparency.

We are not surprised that decisions of domestic
and international courts and tribunals on the 1267
sanctions regime have garnered worldwide attention.
The litigation relating to individuals and entities on the
Consolidated List in Canada, the European Union, the
European Court of Human Rights, the United
Kingdom, Pakistan and the United States has
highlighted legal challenges faced by the sanctions
regime in various parts of the world.

The preventive nature of the sanctions makes the
listings very simple and enforcement-friendly.
However, the legal community is more inclined to
verifiable evidence that could be acceptable in a court
of law. The questions of due process and effective
remedy are at the heart of court deliberations. We will
have to consider exclusive sharing of the verifiable
evidence with the courts and fixing a time limit for the
effectiveness of a listing.

Pakistan was a member of the Security Council
when resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted. We agreed
that it was a timely measure to address the threat of
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery to non-State actors. We have
consistently identified the need to make the 1540
follow-up mechanism more inclusive, transparent and
balanced in terms of responsibilities of States and the
international cooperation available to them to achieve
its objectives.

We believe that the recently adopted resolution
1977 (2011), which extended the mandate of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), should have been negotiated
after an open debate by the Council. In such a debate,
all Members of the United Nations would have had the
opportunity to express their views on, inter alia, the
scope, limitations, future direction, tenure of mandate
and experiences in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). That open debate would have then
provided the basis for the negotiations and extension of
the resolution. Such an open and inclusive process for
discussing an important resolution would have helped
to increase the level of confidence of all United
Nations Member States in this process, as it is they that
are ultimately required to implement the resolution,
which has its roots in State-driven efforts.
