The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which she requests to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representative of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to participate in the consideration without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Booto
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
to document S/2004/935, containing a letter dated
30 November 2004 from the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and documents
S/2004/933 and S/2004/951, containing letters dated
30 November 2004 and 6 December 2004, respectively,
from the representative of Rwanda.

After informal consultations among members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council expresses its very
deep concern at multiple reports of military
operations by the Rwandan army in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
at threats by the Government of Rwanda in that
regard. It recalls its adherence to the respect for
the sovereignty of all States, and underlines that
the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity of any State is contrary to the purposes

and principles stated in the Charter of the United
Nations.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
any and all such military action, recalling that
they are contrary to its resolutions, and in
particular to resolution 1565 (2004), by which it
urged each of the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda and
Uganda, to ensure that the territory of its country
was not used to infringe the sovereignty of the
others.

"The Security Council demands that the
Government of Rwanda withdraw without delay
any forces it may have in the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and calls on
all States in the region to refrain from any action
or statement that contravenes international law or
undermines the already fragile stability in the
region or the transitional process supported by
the international community.

"The Security Council notes that those
reported events and threats are contrary to all
peace agreements, declarations and protocols
signed by regional States since the 1998
commencement of hostilities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It underlines that those
events and threats, arising after the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region of Africa,
are contrary to the commitments taken by the
regional heads of State, in the Declaration
adopted in Dar es Salaam on 20 November 2004,
to settle their disputes in a peaceful manner, and
are all the more unacceptable.

"The Security Council calls on all
Governments in the region to commit themselves
to and make full use of multilateral mechanisms
they have agreed to establish, including the Joint
Verification Mechanism and the Tripartite
Commission, for the peaceful resolution of
bilateral disputes. It further calls on the
Government of Rwanda, as well as all
Governments in the region, to devote their
resources to the promotion of peace, stability,
democracy and development.

"The Security Council urges all Member
States fully to comply with their obligations
under resolution 1493 (2003), which imposed an

arms embargo in the district of Ituri and the
provinces of North and South Kivu.

"The Security Council recognizes that
continued tension in the eastern part of the
the

Democratic Republic of the Congo undermines
peace and security in the region, and in particular
that the presence of ex-FAR and Interahamwe is a
source of instability, a threat to civilian
populations and an impediment to good-
neighbourly relations between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. It considers
the armed presence and activities of ex-FAR and
Interahamwe elements in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to be
unacceptable and demands that they disarm and
disband without delay, with a view to their
repatriation or resettlement.

"In that regard, the Security Council
welcomes steps taken to set up the plan
established by the Congolese authorities, with the
support of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, aimed at accelerating the disarmament
and demobilization of foreign armed groups. It
calls on the Governments of Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to explore
ways to facilitate the voluntary repatriation of
those combatants, based on the existing
mechanisms. It urges the Congolese authorities to
do all possible to effectively disarm those armed
groups as a matter of urgency in the interest of
stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the security of Rwanda and Burundi, and
the establishment of peace and stability in the
region.

"The Security Council further calls in this
regard on the Congolese authorities to accelerate
the integration of the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
encourages the donor community to provide
coordinated financial and technical assistance to
that important task.

"The Security Council condemns any
attempt aimed at undermining the unity and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to consider further actions, including
measures that may be taken against those
individuals who, by their actions or statements,
compromise the peace and transition process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2004/45.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

