Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador Van
Oosterom and Ambassador Vale de Almeida for their
briefings today.

As has been noted, on 8 May, President Trump
announced that the United States would end its
participation in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) on Iran's nuclear programme and instead
pursue a comprehensive policy to both deny Iran all
paths to a nuclear weapon and to counter the totality of
the regime's malign activities.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/602)
shows that Iran continues to destabilize the region
through its support for terrorist groups and proxy
forces. The findings and information presented in the
Secretary-General's report paint a deeply troubling
picture of the scope of this behaviour. We are
particularly concerned by the detailed reporting that
confirms numerous Iranian arms embargo violations
across the Middle East and that certain nuclear
dual-use items have been shipped to Iran outside of
the agreed channels and without the required Security
Council approval.

Itis clearfromthereportthatIranbearsresponsibility
for providing the Houthis with five ballistic missiles
that they launched at civilian targets in Saudi Arabia.
The United Nations also finds that seized weapons it
inspected in Bahrain were manufactured in Iran, and
confirms that an unmanned explosive boat recovered by
the United Arab Emirates had systems with coordinates
showing that it had been in Iranian territorial waters and
that at least some of its components were manufactured
in Iran. The report describes Iranian drones recovered
in Yemen and Syria, and cites a televised interview
with Hamas political leader Yahya Sinwar, in which he
states that the Islamic Republic of Iran provided armed
groups in Gaza with "money, [military] equipment, and
expertise" (S/2018/602, para. 13) before and after the
2014 Israel-Gaza conflict.

Those unacceptable violations provide us with
concrete evidence of how Iran is destabilizing the
region and, in particular prolonging the violence in
Yemen. Adding up all of these data points leads to one
unmistakable conclusion - that Iran continues to send
weapons across the Middle East, in blatant violation of
the Council's resolutions. If there was ever any doubt
regarding Iran's clear threat to international peace and
stability, the findings of the report should lay it to rest.

The only question remains, when confronted with
all of the information presented by the Secretary-
General in this and other reports: How will the States
members of the Council respond? At a minimum, Iran
has violated the provisions of resolutions 2231 (2015),
2216 (2015), 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004). In those
resolutions, we, the members of the Council, prohibited
Iran from exporting weapons, and we prohibited the
supply of weapons to the Houthis and to Hizbullah.
Iran has defied and violated those resolutions, in many
cases openly. When confronted with a country that
continually violates the Council's resolutions, it is
imperative that we pursue meaningful consequences.
That is why we urge members of the Council to join us
in the imposition of sanctions that target Iran's malign
behaviour in the region. The United States stands ready
to work with the members of the Council to take real
action against the threat that Iran poses.

The United States will continue to work with
Member States and the Secretariat to shine a spotlight
on Iran's behaviour. Reports like the one we are
considering today are critical, and we encourage
everyone to read it. With the reimposition of our
sanctions, the United States is taking a stand. We have
declared that Iran's actions will not go unchallenged,
and we have shown that we will follow through. The
United States is taking decisive action to ensure that
Iran faces consequences as long as it remains bent on
sowing instability. We urge the members of the Council
to join us.

Standing up to Iran's destabilizing behaviour is
a mission that all of us should have and share. When
we look out at the region, we see Iran supporting the
Houthis, Iran supporting Hizbullah, Iran supporting
Hamas and Iran supporting the Al-Assad regime. Iran
repeatedly comes up when we gather to discuss mass
atrocities, humanitarian catastrophes or the launching
of ballistic missiles. As long as Iran is the common
denominator in so many conflicts across the region,
we must respond. Any Member State concerned about
promoting peace in the Middle East should do the same.

