The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.

I, too, would like to welcome the presence of
Prime Minister Dileita at this meeting. We also
welcome the participation of Ambassador Desta, the
Permanent Representative of Eritrea, and the
representatives of the African Union and the League of
Arab States.

The United States remains extremely concerned
with the situation along the Djibouti-Eritrea border.
Today, I would like to make the following two points.

First, on 12 June, the Council adopted a
presidential statement that condemned Eritrean military
action against Djibouti, called upon the parties to
commit to a ceasefire and show maximum restraint,
and urged both sides to cooperate and engage in
diplomatic efforts to resolve the matter peacefully.
While no new violence has occurred, Eritrea remains in
an aggressive military posture towards Djibouti and
refuses to engage with Djibouti directly or through a
third party to negotiate a peaceful resolution to the
cr1s1s.

We reiterate our call on both sides, and
particularly on Eritrea, to withdraw their military
forces from the common border area and to engage in a
diplomatic process to resolve the matter peacefully, in
accordance with international law, as the representative
of Italy and others have urged. If Eritrea fails to engage
in a peaceful solution and pull its forces back from its
border with Djibouti, the Security Council should
consider appropriate actions or measures.
Secondly, the Security Council cannot condone
Eritrea's regional destabilization, especially when it
comes at such a great cost to its neighbours. The
conflict with Djibouti occurs against a backdrop of
destabilizing behaviour elsewhere by Eritrea. In

Somalia, the Eritrean Government has supported
extremist groups, including the Al-Qaida-affiliated
Al-Shabab, which refuses to negotiate on a peaceful
political solution in Somalia. Eritrea has worked to
discredit and disrupt the recent discussion between
Somali parties in Djibouti. The Government of Eritrea
restricted the activities of the United Nations Mission
in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) - a force it freely
and voluntarily invited to its country - preventing it
from executing its mandate. Finally, the Eritrea
Government stopped all fuel delivery to UNMEE, and
consequently the United Nations was forced to
withdraw UNMEE from Eritrea, which further
destabilized an already dangerous situation.

For Eritrea, even now it is not too late to resume
its place as a responsible Member of this Organization
and to resume its status as a good neighbour. We will
be watching Eritrea's actions closely and we will insist
that Eritrea be held accountable for its actions.

Finally, my delegation can support the elements
for use in the press statement proposed by the French
delegation.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to Ms. Alice Aghenebit
Mungwa, Adviser to the Permanent Observer Mission
of the African Union.

