Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin this morning by firmly condemning, as
was done this morning by the President of the French
Republic, Francois Hollande, the appalling attack
against a school in Peshawar. We express our solidarity
and convey our condolences to the Pakistani authorities
and to the families of the victims. Indeed, what could
be more cowardly than to attack children?

I wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
and Mr. Pierre Buyoya, High Representative of
the African Union for Mali and the Sahel, for their
briefings, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad,
Mr. Moussa Faki, for his initiative and for presiding
over our open debate today.

I wish also to associate myself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union.

I wish to begin by paying tribute to African
Union peacekeepers, in particular today Chadian
peacekeepers, who have died in the line of duty, as well
as to their United Nations comrades.

The role of regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of peace is fully recognized by the
Charter and makes a decisive contribution to collective
security. Because of their geographic proximity, their
knowledge of local situations and their partnerships with
the countries affected by crises, the countries ofa region,
structured into regional and subregional organizations,
are in a position to provide a useful value-added
to the understanding, prevention, management and
consolidation of situations. This partnership is foreseen
by the Charter in its Chapter VIII, without prejudice
to the Security Council's primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Since the early 2000s, the African Union,
subregional organizations and their member States
have been mobilizing to develop their own structured
capabilities in terms of peacekeeping. France fully
recognizes this effort and encourages it. The growth of
the African Peace and Security Architecture is part of
an expansion of peacekeeping operations, in particular
on the African continent. As a result, it quickly led to
the establishment of a partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, namely, in terms of
operational coordination: annual consultations between
the United Nations Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council; the establishment of
liaison offices in New York and Addis Ababa; and the
creation of a Joint Task Force on Peace and Security, to
name but a few. I will note, however, that the partnership
is now operating at several levels, from the exchange
of information to operational cooperation, and is also
working in the context of the various dimensions of
situations, from prevention to peacebuilding, including
the arduous phase of peacekeeping.

Recent events provide an illustration of the
effectiveness and efficiency of this partnership. I am
thinking, of course, of the cases of Mali and the Central
African Republic, where a United Nations intervention
was preceded by that of an African Union one. We
will know more at the conclusion of the lessons-
learned exercise requested by the Secretary-General in
resolution 2167 (2014), but we can already at this stage
welcome that experience and also acknowledge once
again that undeniable progress has already been made
in Mali and the Central African Republic.

I would add that France, in keeping with its
responsibility as a Security Council penholder for
several African crises, will ensure coordination with
the African members of the Council and the African
Union representation in New York.

In the context of its efforts to develop its own
peacekeeping capabilities, the African Union receives
significant support from several partners, primarily
the European Union. The European Union early
on made this a key focus of its partnership with the
African Union. The observer of the European Union
will elaborate further on this point, but I would recall
that that intention has been put into practice through
education and training programmes supported by a
financial commitment of €750 million for the period
from 2014 to 2016 and very substantial financial support
to the African Union's peace support operations.

France fully supports that European Union policy
and provides, in a national capacity, support for
building and strengthening African peace capabilities.
That priority was highlighted by the President of
France, Francois Hollande, at the Elysee summit held
in December 2013. France thus contributes to training
25,000 African soldiers. France also welcomes efforts
by other African Union partners, including in particular
the United States and China, that have undertaken or
recently announced their intention to undertake African
peace capacity-building programmes.

We must ensure, however, that those contributions
are coordinated and serve a shared vision of
peacekeeping. The European Union is committed to
that purpose as part of its tripartite cooperation with
the United Nations and the African Union, which is
undoubtedly a factor in the good cooperation that has
been observed between missions in which the African
Union, European Union and United Nations cooperate,
for example, in Mali and the Central African Republic.
That effort should be pursued in several areas, as the
presidential statement adopted today (S/PRST/2014/27)
clearly notes.

First of all, in terms of funding, the financial
sustainability of the system has become a major issue.
The African Union has a lot of support from external
partners who support the strengthening African
peacekeeping capabilities. As recognized by the
presidential statement we adopted today, the challenge
is to also secure financial resources that come from the
African continent to support the political willingness
displayed by its leaders.

Rapid deployment capability is an essential
condition for the success of international interventions
in situations in which time is limited. As we have
seen in Mali and the Central African Republic, the
deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali and the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic were
essential to ensuring initial stabilization, paving the
way for a United Nations peacekeeping operation.

The transition between missions in particular is
a question of increasing importance as the modalities
of intervention diversify and succeed each other and/
or overlap. In that regard, the exercise on lessons
learned will be instructive. An additional dimension
to transitions, when interventions are being completed
within the same theatre, is that of coordination in
interventions, so that everyone provides the best of
their capacities to settle the crisis. How do missions
cooperate? What synergies are there to develop? That is
also a field to explore in the light of recent experience.

The questions before us today are crucial and
contribute to the broader discussion on the evolution
of peacekeeping. We will soon receive several reports
laying out the problems and, no doubt, formulating
recommendations, including the two reports requested
by the Council in paragraphs 13 and 28 of resolution
2167 (2014) and the report ofthe High-level Independent
Panel to Review Peace Operations led by Mr. Ramos-
Horta. However, none of them will be specifically
devoted to the question of the African Union's capacity
and its partnership with the United Nations. The
request has now been made in the statement that we
just adopted, which gives rise to an annual report. We
welcome that, and France is grateful to Chad for putting
that partnership at the top of the agenda of the United
Nations and the Security Council.

