Mr. Kouchner (France) (spoke in French): The
tragedy of child soldiers forces us to be determined and
uncompromising. In spite of the countless and
inevitable difficulties, of which we are all aware, our
sole objective should be the eradication of this
barbarous phenomenon. That is why I am pleased that I
could come from Paris to be here today with
participants in a project that poses a challenge to us all.
This issue constitutes an affront to all that we are. The
United Nations must play a central role in combating
this hateful form of slavery that turns victims into
assassins.

The establishment in 2005 of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict has already made it possible for us to act. That
innovative and profoundly original mechanism - in
which France had a major role in establishing and over
which we have had the honour to preside since its

08-2361]
inception - has resulted in tangible progress.
Thousands of children have been freed and returned to
civilian life - especially in Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and numerous other
countries, which I shall forego naming.
Recommendations have been made with regard to 10 of
the 12 situations on the agenda. The Working Group
will soon take up the last two pending cases, namely,
those of the Philippines and Colombia. Lastly, for the
first time, we are going to remove a country from that
sad list - Cote d'Ivoire.

Those considerable gains could not have been
achieved without the determination of the members of
the Security Council, which I commend. But we know
that they also owe a great deal to Ms. Coomaraswamy,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict. I pay tribute to her
efforts, as well as those of UNICEF. I also wish to
acknowledge the cooperation, in some cases on a
voluntary basis, of all the countries affected by this
terrible scourge. I thank them warmly.

In spite of those significant successes, I do not
wish to give the impression that all the problems are
being resolved. We still have much to do. There is the
reappearance of children in the battlefields of Sri
Lanka, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burma. I recently visited those countries, and I could
tell of the horror still fresh in my mind. Just today, the
Central African Republic and Afghanistan were placed
on the list of situations of concern. There are many
things to remind us daily of the forever unfinished
nature of this struggle. As always, the international
community must remain mobilized and redouble its
efforts.

France would in particular like to see a
strengthening of the deterrent character of the Working
Group. Its members must not shy away from adopting
strong targeted sanctions. Otherwise, what are we here
for? This is an issue that pertains to its credibility.
There is no credible deterrence without real sanctions.

International criminal justice - the International
Criminal Court or other special tribunals - has made
essential progress this year through remarkable actions,
especially against Germain Katanga, Charles Taylor
and Colonel Mathieu Ngudjolo, among others,
charging them with the use and recruitment of children
under the age of 15. The Working Group must follow

08-2361]
up those actions by calling for the imposition of
sanctions against uncooperative parties.

The Working Group's mandate is not limited to
the issue of child soldiers alone. Although that is
certainly its main priority, it also considers and
formulates recommendations concerning five other
grave violations of children's rights, including sexual
violence. During a visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo last month, I was able to see on the ground
the seriousness and extent of the widespread,
systematic and premeditated use of sexual crime as an
instrument of war. That barbarity concerns us all.
There, too, our failure to act would be reprehensible. I
welcome the fact that the Constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo recognizes this as
the most serious crime.

The Council's Working Group must absolutely
strengthen its action on this question. In its
recommendations it must demand that the belligerents
draw up action plans to combat sexual violence and
follow through on their implementation. Some might
find it paradoxical that we ask the belligerents
themselves to combat these crimes, but it is essential.
At the same time, the military leadership must bear this
in mind. It may be a paradox, it may even seem
immoral, but it is effective. The Working Group should
strengthen its efforts to combat impunity by
relentlessly demanding the arrest of those responsible
for rape and call on Governments to act in this regard.

In addition, I believe the time has come to reflect
together on the possibility of permitting the Working
Group to deal with the tragedy of sexual violence,
independently of whether or not there are child soldiers
in the country concerned. That would indisputably be a
major step forward. Just as we came to grips with the
problem of child soldiers, I am sure that we will reach
a consensus on the need to remedy sexual violence.

As I said a moment ago, action by the Security
Council is indispensable to moving forward on this
question. Such action does not prevent other initiatives.

The European Union therefore adopted guidelines
and an action plan on this question in 2003, in addition
to a list of priority situations in which it will intervene
in the future. The Slovene presidency of the European
Union has decided to make children in armed conflict
its priority in the area of human rights, a decision about
which I am delighted.
France, for its part, organized together with
UNICEF, in February 2007, a ministerial conference
entitled "Free Children from War," at which 59
countries signed on to the Paris Commitments to
protect children unlawfully recruited or used by armed
forces or armed groups, a collection of principles and
good practices that will, we hope, significantly
strengthen our efforts. Following that success, we
organized, again together with UNICEF, a ministerial
follow-up conference in October 2007, at which seven
more countries joined the Paris Commitments. On
16 January 2008, a few days ago, we held a working
meeting with the principal relevant actors that led to
the establishment of a follow-up forum for the Paris
Commitments, which Minister Rama Yade deals with.
Its first meeting is scheduled to be held in September
2008 on the sidelines of the General Assembly session.
I would like to thank members in advance for their
active and resolute participation in that meeting.

Once again, this is a cause that must mobilize us
all, completely and tirelessly. It is the least we can do
for the tens of thousands of children who are innocent
victims of a barbarity that through them, is an attack on
the very future of our common humanity.

