Mr. Abu Odeh (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
It is my pleasure, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, which is now coming to an end. Your
diplomacy and experience have undoubtedly contributed to
the success of the Council's work. It is also my pleasure to
congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Emilio
Cardenas, on his successful handling of the work of the
Council last month.

Our delegation, fully aware of the tremendous
importance of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, and fully aware that this matter is closely linked
to the achievement of a just and lasting peace and is a very
sensitive matter, with an effect on the peace process as a
whole, would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Council for your prompt response to
our request for this meeting. It was indeed a very timely
response, made in full awareness of the situation, fully in
keeping with the Council's knowledge, and the knowledge
of the international community, of the need to maintain the
momentum of the peace process and to ensure its success.

The Jordanian delegation is participating in this debate
because of our firm belief in this concept, and because we
deem it essential to achieve a comprehensive peace in the
region. We wish to participate in any effort to eliminate all
obstacles to peace. Israel's reactivation and resumption of
its settlement policy, as well as its insistence upon it at this
stage, when the States of the region and the partisans of
peace have been attempting to maintain the momentum of
peace and to accelerate the peace process and ensure its
success, undoubtedly constitute a very curious development,

 

one that is very dangerous for the peace process and its
credibility vis-a-vis the peoples and States of the region.

We know that the topic of settlements was included
in the Oslo Declaration as one to be discussed in the final
stage of the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations and left to the
people concerned. But we are sure that it was put back to
the final stages because of its tremendous importance, and
because it is fundamental and central to the peace process
in the region, just as the questions of Jerusalem, refugees
and sovereignty are. Hence, we assume that postponing
discussion upon it was intended to preserve the peace
process and keep it going smoothly in its early stages in
order to build more confidence among the negotiating
parties so that the peace process could be strengthened in
the face of the tremendous challenges presented by the
questions of Jerusalem, the settlements and sovereignty.

We did not expect Israel to disregard this concept
and resume the establishment of settlements or resort to
new concepts that must destroy the very foundations of
the peace process on the Palestinian-Israeli track after the
process had become a palpable reality and its two main
protagonists had shared the Nobel Peace Prize. The
resolution adopted by the Israeli cabinet on
24 January 1995 to resume the establishment of
settlements can be explained only as a deviation from the
declared Israeli commitment to ensure the success of the
faltering peace process.

The Security Council has discussed the question of
settlements before. It is not a new question, but emerged
in 1967. Many resolutions have been adopted declaring
these settlements null and void and an obstacle to peace
efforts and mediation aimed at achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace. The Council's
resolutions have called upon Israel to implement in detail
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, article 49
of which, in its sixth paragraph, prohibits the occupying
Power from deporting or transferring parts of its own
civilian population into the territory it occupies. The
importance the Council has attached to the matter is very
clear in the light of the fact that resolution 446 (1979)
established a Commission of members of the Council to
examine the situation relating to settlements in the Arab
territories occupied since 1967. That Commission, despite
the difficulties it faced, was able to submit its report to
the Council. In the light of that report, the Council
adopted the well-known resolution 465 (1980), which not
only strongly deplored the settlement policies, but also
expressed its deep concern over the consequences for the

 

local population and the need to protect their interests. The
Council considered such policies to have grave
consequences for peace efforts and called for an end to
such activities and even for the dismantlement of the
settlements. Paragraph 7 of the resolution also called on all
States not to provide Israel with any assistance in
connection with the settlements.
If I recall these matters, it is because I am certain of
the Council's position concerning the Israeli settlements, a
position based on international consensus at the level of
experts, politicians, legal scholars and even Governments,
and of the entire United Nations system. It has also been
agreed that the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War is the
instrument that governs the situation and the Israeli
presence in the occupied Palestinian territories. I also recall
these matters because I believe that the Council bears a
historic responsibility to save the peace process on the
Palestinian-Israeli track, and consequently on all tracks,
from complete collapse as a result of Israel's resumption of
its activity in establishing settlements. Such a collapse
could also result from the failure of all efforts and
mediation to persuade Israel to give up this formal
establishment of settlements, a practice that has indeed
surprised us. It constitutes a tremendous stumbling block to
the progress of the ongoing bilateral negotiations and could
even threaten the peace process at a time when it has
inspired hope throughout the world.

The greatest threat to the peace process is the illusion
on the part of the stronger party that genuine peace can be
established on the basis of imbalance between the
negotiators, and that the Middle East peace process
demands clever, cunning negotiators able to wrest the best
possible deal from their interlocutors. All efforts based on
such assumptions are futile and are doomed to failure, for
they can never lead to a just peace or, hence, a lasting one.

What peace in the Middle East needs is statesmen and
leaders with vision, not mere technocrats with clever
linguistic traps and an ability to take advantage of the
weaker party.

Because of its desire and hope for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace, my delegation calls on Israel to put
an end to all settlement activities in the occupied Arab
territories, first and foremost in Arab Jerusalem. This would
restore credibility to the Israeli Government's utterances.
We hope that the Security Council will take a clear position
in response to this blatant Violation of the Geneva
Conventions and of Security Council resolutions, and will

 

adopt measures that will put the peace process back on
track.

