Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): May I
take this opportunity to welcome Ambassador
Dabbashi to the Security Council this afternoon.

The Libyan people have shown remarkable
courage and perseverance over the past six months in
standing up for their rights and creating the conditions
under which they can decide their own future, a future
that the National Transitional Council (NTC) has made
clear will belong to all Libyans, not only the privileged
few, and in which the fundamental rights and freedoms
of all will be promoted and protected.

The NTC has set out a vision for the political
transition in Libya and has already taken positive steps
towards achieving it. We welcome the Libyans'
resuming their seat in the United Nations and look
forward to the establishment of an interim
Government.

There exists now an opportunity for Libya and its
people to achieve their full potential. It will not be
easy. Huge challenges remain on security, stabilization
and economic recovery. It is for the Libyans
themselves to tackle those challenges and shape their
future, but they can be assured that the international
community stands ready to support them as they set
about the considerable tasks ahead.

The unanimous adoption today of resolution 2009
(2011) will provide the National Transitional Council
with the support it needs as it implements its priorities.
It establishes a United Nations Mission that will,
among other things, provide support to Libyans in
preparing for elections so that they can choose their
own leaders; assist in institution-building so that they
can provide services to their people; help to promote
and protect human rights; and support steps towards
economic recovery so as to ensure a prosperous and
stable future for Libya. By providing a mechanism for
progressively de-listing sanctioned entities and
unfreezing their assets, the resolution will help to kick-
start Libya's economy and encourage economic self-
sufficiency.

The bravery and determination of the Libyan
people have sent a strong message to repressive
regimes everywhere that the legitimate demands and
rights of people cannot be ignored. People have basic
rights to which they are entitled. People know these
rights. They will struggle for them and, eventually,
they will win them.
11-50068

