Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I have
spoken many times about my strong belief that this
monthly debate should be used to shed light on the
many different sources of conflict and instability in
the Middle East. There are, unfortunately, many to
choose from, some of which prompt disagreement in
the Security Council. But today, I want to address an
issue about which there should be no disagreement.
That issue is the use of innocent children, women and
men as human shields.

Tragically, this outrageous practice is reaching
epic proportions in the region. A week ago today, the
European Parliament passed a resolution condemning
Hamas for its use of human shields. We were pleased to
see this action. It is difficult to think ofa more cowardly
act, even for a terrorist, than hiding behind innocent
civilians. The use of human shields deliberately gives
an advantage to those with no regard for human life
and is a disadvantage for those who seek to minimize
civilian casualties. The use of human shields is not
confined to any one conflict; it is present across the
Middle East in virtually every conflict. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) routinely used human
shields in Iraq. ISIS fighters took advantage of the
presence of civilians in their homes, hospitals, schools
and mosques.

When they were forced out of their positions, ISIS
went from door to door rounding up families and forcing
them to accompany their fighters as they evacuated their
locations. Hizbullah has also endangered civilians by
positioning its fighters and its weapons among them. Its
terrorists use schools, hospitals and apartment buildings
to shield its war arsenal in Lebanon. In the course of its
massive arms build-up, Hizbullah has turned Lebanese
villages into military compounds, stationing weapons
depots, rocket launchers and command posts in, around
and under the civilian population, in blatant defiance of
resolution 1701 (2006). Hundreds of Lebanese villages
are home to Hizbullah rockets and fighters. There are
press reports that every third or fourth house in South
Lebanon is in some way being used by Hizbullah to
shield its activities.

Another example is Yemen. The United Nations
has reported that Houthi militants have used Yemeni
civilians as human shields.

Lastly, Hamas has exploited and endangered the
very Palestinian people it claims to represent by locating
rocket launchers near schools, apartment buildings,
hotels, churches and United Nations facilities. It has
been less than a year since a Hamas terror tunnel was
discovered underneath two schools belonging to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in Gaza. That means that
United Nations facilities were being used a cover for
Hamas' military infrastructure.

I note the threads of commonality that run through
those examples.

The first is Iran. As usual, Iran is the patron and
protector of many of the groups that fight from behind
the bodies of innocent civilians. Groups that Iran have
sponsored or supported have perfected the tactic of
using human shields and have inspired others to do
the same. That is part of Iran's overarching efforts to
destabilize the region - efforts that include illegal
weapons shipments to Yemen and invading Israeli air
space with armed drones from Syrian territory.

The second common thread is the dramatic risk to
civilians. For those willing to sacrifice the innocent,
there is no way to lose. Innocent civilians either provide
cover for military infrastructure or they become victims
that rally the international media to their cause. Either
way, innocent civilians are caught in the crossfire
and exploited for illegitimate military and political
purposes. All decent nations and responsible militaries
seek to minimize civilian casualties in warfare. Those
who want to reduce civilian casualties in the Middle
East must focus their attention on the actors, including
non-State actors, who intentionally keep their military
infrastructure in close proximity to civilians.

The use ofcivilians to intentionally shield otherwise
lawful military targets from attack is a war crime. As
is so often the case, it is the most vulnerable who pay
the price for the use of human shields. Commandeering
homes puts families who are already in wae zones
at additional risk. Locating rocket launchers next to
schools eliminates safe places for children. Putting
command posts in the hospital shows complete
disregard for the sick, injured and the elderly. Each time
ISIS, Hizbullah or Hamas succeeds in using a village, a
family or a child to protect its terrorist operations, the
use of that grotesque tactic grows. It is a win for the
groups that are willing to endanger civilian populations
in order to accomplish their political objectives. It is a
loss for the people who play by the rules and seek to
minimize, rather than maximize civilian casualties.

Anyone who cares about the safety of Lebanese
families should condemn that practice. Anyone who
cares about the lives of Yemenis or Palestinians should
demand accountability for the militants who exploit
them. Anyone who truly cares about children in Gaza
should insist that Hamas immediately stop using
children as cannon fodder in its conflict with Israel.
That is an issue that transcends the usual debates in
the Chamber. It is quite simply an issue of decency.
Humankind itself loses when the barbaric practice
of human shields is tolerated and unanswered. For
humankind's sake the Security Council must rise up to
address that threat.

