Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate you, Madame President, on your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, as well as to express our confidence
that, under your able guidance, the Council will
successfully undertake its many duties and
responsibilities and conclude another challenging year.

At the same time, let me extend my appreciation
to Presidents Robinson and Byron, as well as to
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow, for their detailed
reports on the work of the Tribunals and on the
progress and challenges in the implementation of the
completion strategy.

The Tribunals' determined performance aimed at
the steadfast prosecution of perpetrators of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide has not only
served as a basis for an emerging culture of
accountability but also as a staunch reminder that grave
crimes, committed by whomever, will not go
unpunished. Croatia recognizes the efforts of the
Tribunals to comply with the strategy elaborated for
the finalization of their groundbreaking work and for
their transformation into residual mechanisms.

However, we are aware of the unprecedented
challenges faced by the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), as stated in Judge
Robinson's report (see S/2010/588). We firmly believe
that this widely desired and legitimate objective should
not be pursued at the expense of the mandate with
which the ICTY was established, nor compromise full
respect for due process standards. In that context, let
me particularly stress that the ICTY mandate could not
be considered accomplished without bringing to justice
the two remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladie and Goran
Hadzic, indicted for the gravest atrocities in Europe
since the Second World War, namely, the massacres in
Srebrenica and Vukovar.

Croatia remains strongly committed to its
unequivocal cooperation with the Tribunal. This
commitment has been largely demonstrated by the
prompt execution of all orders and other binding
decisions of the Tribunal, as well as by full compliance
with the assistance requests received from the Office of
the Prosecutor. To date, Croatia has received and
completely fulfilled 883 such requests.

In regard to one request in the Gotovina et al.
case, which the Office of the Prosecutor considered to
have been only partially fulfilled, Prime Minister
Kosor established last fall a special task force in order
to further intensify and broaden an ongoing
administrative investigation, as well as to improve its
quality and efficiency in line with the suggestions
received from the Office of the Prosecutor.

My delegation welcomes the comments of
Prosecutor Brammertz on the professionalism of the
task force, as well as his recognition that the task force
has begun to explore important new avenues in the
investigation. My delegation equally appreciates the
assessment of Prosecutor Brammertz, in which he
stated that Croatia is generally responsive to requests
by Office of the Prosecutor for assistance. These
requests are answered adequately and access is
provided to witnesses and evidence.

Regarding the Prosecutor's remark on possible
inconsistencies revealed in the last three reports of the
task force, my delegation would like to confirm the
strong commitment of the competent Croatian
authorities to continuing their work and further
clarifying those issues, including by opening new
avenues as suggested by the Office of the Prosecutor.
At the same time, my delegation appreciates all the
support for the activities of the task force extended
today by the members of this body, which we take as
an important additional acknowledgment of our efforts.

Over the reporting period, Croatian officials at the
highest level remained engaged in direct dialogue with
the Tribunal and the Prosecutor, while the Ministry of
Justice and the Office of the State Prosecutor continued
to nurture close and intense working relationships with
the Office of the Prosecutor.

Prosecutor Brammertz Visited Zagreb on 20 and
21 October 2010 and met with the President, the Prime
Minister, members of the Council for Cooperation with
International Criminal Courts - which includes the
Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of
Interior, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Minister of Defence - the State Prosecutor and
members of the task force.

This reporting period was marked by the final
decision of Trial Chamber 1 on this very last open
issue. On 26 July, after extensive litigation lasting
more than two years, during which time Croatia
produced 16 reports, introduced a significant number
of documents, performed a great number of
investigative activities and brought criminal charges
against 19 individuals - four of whom have already
been convicted - Trial Chamber I decided to deny the
prosecution motion.

By this decision, Trial Chamber I explicitly
recognized the proactive cooperation of Croatia with
the Tribunal and indicated that new information was
received on an ongoing basis. By applying common
sense in this delicate matter, Trial Chamber I not only
"declined to order Croatia to produce documents due to
uncertainties surrounding the whereabouts of the
documents" (S/2010/588, annex 1], para. 71), but also
concluded that uncertainties regarding the creation of
the documents, as well as uncertainties regarding their
continued existence or accessibility to Croatia, had
prevented Croatia from locating and delivering the
documents requested.

The documented position of Croatia, as well as its
proactive approach, obviously led Trial Chamber I to
the opinion that it would be of no avail to issue further
orders to Croatia when, after careful consideration of
each and every document requested, serious doubts
about the ability of Croatia to produce the
aforementioned documents still prevailed.

In full respect of the decision of Trial Chamber I,
Croatia is strongly determined to proceed with its
investigation and continue to undertake all reasonable
and feasible measures at its disposal in order to clarify
this matter. Croatia is absolutely aware that the
cooperation of States in the region remains crucial to
the successful accomplishment of the ICTY mandate
and the achievement of its completion strategy goals,
and will do its share in this regard.

As the Tribunal is beginning to downsize,
strengthening relationships between the Office of the
Prosecutor and national prosecutorial authorities is
becoming increasingly important. A considerable part
of the Tribunal's legacy is aimed at strengthening the
capacities of national jurisdictions to continue the fight
against impunity through the appropriate adjudication
of grave violations of international humanitarian law.

Croatia is determined to continue with domestic
efforts to prosecute all war crimes committed on its
territory since 1991, and in that context we deem it
particularly important to further enhance our working
relationship with the ICTY and to continuously
strengthen cooperation between prosecutorial and
judicial authorities in the region.

In conclusion, let me express our sincere
gratitude to Ambassador Mayr-Harting of Austria and
his team, who, while presiding over the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, have made
tireless efforts in setting up a residual mechanism to
replace the Tribunals. It is our understanding that this
work is now at its end, and we hope that the agreed
solutions, in particular regarding the management of
archives, the protection of witnesses and the serving of
sentences, will help safeguard the Tribunal's legacy
and ensure the successful fulfilment of its residual
functions.

