The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
take the floor in my capacity as representative of
Mexico.

My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Sharma,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, and the Secretary-General himself for the
information provided to the Security Council and for
the report before us (S/2003/449). The report relates
the positive development of the situation in Timor-
Leste but also reminds the international community and
the Council that we must remain attentive to
developments in the situation on the ground.

On 4 April, Mexico supported the adoption of
resolution 1473 (2003), which calls for an adjustment
of the downsizing of the military and police
components of UNMISET and reaffirms the Security
Council's commitment to continue supporting security
and stability efforts in Timor-Leste.

United Nations reconstruction efforts in Timor-
Leste provide us with valuable lessons and make it
possible to draw conclusions and experiences that
could be used in other situations requiring the building
of a new State or support for rebuilding institutions.

As we have seen in the case of Timor-Leste, the
international community's determination to support the
building of a State is not sufficient if it is not
accompanied by the necessary internal commitment on
the part of all political forces and sectors of society.
For this reason, the Government of Mexico welcomes
the initiative undertaken on 25 January by President
Gusmao to carry out a national dialogue with the
various political forces in the country. We believe that
it is only through dialogue and understanding that we
can lay solid foundations for a true democratic and
inclusive society in Timor-Leste. Likewise, friendly
and good-neighbourly relations are paramount.

Globalization and interdependence mean that a
country's development is closely linked to that of its
neighbours. Thus, Mexico welcomes and supports the
efforts made by Indonesia and by Australia to achieve
border demarcation and regulation agreements,
including commercial operations.

The Government of Mexico would like to express
its gratitude to Mr. Sharma and to his team for the
progress made thus far in discharging the mandate
entrusted to them. This has led to the development of
the ability of the Government and people of
Timor-Leste to manage their own destiny. It is
necessary to continue to work to remove shortcomings
and to strengthen national capabilities. United Nations
participation in this process is essential. The strategic
plan that is being developed by the Government of
Timor-Leste and by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) is a step in that direction.

Additional efforts will be required to strengthen
the justice system. A greater number of trained judges
and greater access to courts for the entire population
are steps that could be taken to improve the situation in
the immediate future. Reconciliation and peace depend
to a large degree on a transparent and effective justice
system.

Timor-Leste also requires continual strengthening
of its institutional processes. Thus, Mexico joins in the
Secretary-General's appeal to the international donor
community to continue supporting programmes for
strengthening the National Police and the judicial
system.

As for internal security, the report reflects, as did
resolution 1473 (2003), the importance of developing
national capabilities and proper preparation for the
defence forces and for the National Police. Mexico
stresses the importance of training police in the area of
human rights. In building a State, the population's
confidence in law enforcement institutions is vital. The
promulgation of a code of conduct for the police has
thus been an important measure in that direction.
As for external security and border control,
proper coordination between the United Nations forces
and the Governments of Timor-Leste and Indonesia is
crucial. We urge both countries to continue
strengthening their cooperation in those areas.

On previous occasions, Mexico has referred to
the importance of assisting with the economic and
social development of Timor-Leste, as a fundamental
element of peace-building. My country therefore views
as highly positive the report's information on the work
of United Nations agencies and programmes for
infrastructure rehabilitation and national development.

With a View to reaffirming its commitment to
Timor-Leste, Mexico supports the proposal of the
Secretary-General to extend the UNMISET mandate
for another year, until 20 May 2004.

On behalf of the Government and people of
Mexico, I would like to join the others in expressing
our gratitude to the civilian, military and police
components of UNMISET, who have done excellent
work in Timor-Leste. I would ask Ambassador Sharma
to convey Mexico's greetings and its appreciation for
the work that his team has carried out.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Timor-
Leste. I welcome him and give him the floor.

