Miss Hassan (Djibouti): My delegation is honoured
and pleased to take the floor on behalf of the member
States of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC).

This important meeting is being held at a time
when the question of Palestine is yet again at a very
critical juncture. Our hopes for reaching a just and
comprehensive solution to the question of Palestine
were raised following the recent resumption of peace
talks, which definitely requires the strong support of
us all to ensure the advancement and attainment of
their goals, in conformity with the parametres defined
by relevant United Nations resolutions, the terms of
reference of the Madrid Conference, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map.

However, it is unfortunate that, in spite of those
positive developments, conditions in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, are
still deteriorating as Israel continues its colonization
of Palestinian land, including through Israeli settler
terrorism, the arrest and detention of Palestinian
civilians, and the collective punishment of the
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip with an illegal
blockade.

Israeli colonial settlement activities, which have
manifestly escalated recently, remain the core challenge
to making genuine progress in the peace negotiations.
The matter needs to be seriously addressed by the
international community if we are to salvage that
solution and work towards peace. In that regard,
we reaffirm that the continuation of building and
expanding Israeli colonial settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including in and around East
Jerusalem, undermine the territorial integrity, viability
and contiguity of the Palestinian State on the basis
of the pre-1967 borders and are clearly illegal acts
that constitute a flagrant violation of international
laws, resolutions and covenants, especially the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949.

In contradiction with United Nations resolutions
and the peace process, Israel continues to defy the will
of the international community by creating de facto
realities on the ground, aimed at altering the Arab
character, status and demographic composition of
occupied East Jerusalem, with a view to isolating the
city from its natural Palestinian environs. All of Israel's
unlawful activities - inter alia, settlement activities,
forcibly displacing Palestinian civilians, restricting
Palestinians' access to places of worship, building
the apartheid wall, confiscating Palestinian lands,
desecrating Islamic and Christian holy sites, and closing
Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem - must be
brought to an immediate halt.

We must also draw the Council's attention to
the constant incitement by extremist Israelis at holy
sites, particularly at Al-Haram Al-Sharif in occupied
East Jerusalem. Such provocative, illegal actions
are aggravating religious tensions and risk fuelling
religious conflict. In that regard, we forewarn that the
continuation of all such Israeli violations will lead to
eliminating any chance to realize peace and eventually
threaten to further destabilize the already fragile
situation in the Middle East.

At the same time, the OIC reiterates its firm
commitment to the rights of the Palestinian people in
East Jerusalem, which forms an integral part of the
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, and remains
in support of a final solution that guarantees the return
of the city to Palestinian sovereignty as the capital of
the State of Palestine.

Given that the Palestine question remains at the
heart of unrest in the region and has constituted a long-
standing challenge to this body, the OIC group reaffirms
that the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East requires firm and prompt action by the
Security Council to enforce international law and to
ensure compliance by Israel, the occupying Power, with
all of its legal obligations and commitments to ending
its daily crimes and aggressions for the achievement of
peace and justice.

Likewise, the OIC reaffirms the permanent
responsibility of the United Nations for the Palestinian
question until all of its aspects are justly and fully
resolved. In this International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, the OIC further appeals for
the international community's sustained engagement
and full support at this critical period in order to seize
the current diplomatic opportunity to bring about the
enforcement of United Nations resolutions and an
end to the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian land
occupied since 1967.

In closing, I wish to reaffirm the full support and
solidarity of the OIC with the Palestinian people in their
endeavour to regain their legitimate and inalienable
national rights, including their right to return, self-
determination, sovereignty and independence in the
State of Palestine on the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

