Mr. Gopinathan (India): Mr. President, we once
again welcome you to the Council and would like to
convey our deep appreciation to you for calling this
meeting on an issue which is of particular importance
to the international community as well as to my
delegation.

My delegation had made a detailed statement
during the open meeting of the Council on this subject
on 26 March 2002. We shall therefore focus only on
developments since then.

We welcome the return to Afghanistan of former
King Mohammad Zahir Shah. We believe that his
presence will contribute to ongoing efforts to resolve
political differences and promote unity in Afghanistan.

The presence of the Taliban and Al Qaeda in
Afghanistan continues to be a cause of serious concern
to the international community. Time and again, those
two entities have shown that they are lying low and
biding their time, in order to regroup and strike again
in Afghanistan and elsewhere. To counter these forces
of malevolence and darkness is a task beyond the
present capacity of the Interim Administration. Those
twin tormentors of Afghanistan need to be decisively
neutralized by the international community without
delay. There are many reports of Taliban and Al Qaeda
fighters hiding and regrouping along the eastern and
southern borders of Afghanistan. This is the time for a
reality check for those who created, nurtured, promoted
and supported the Taliban but who now claim to have
changed. They should be asked to match their rhetoric
with action on the ground or be held accountable for
aiding, abetting and supporting international terrorism.
The international community has paid a very heavy
price for tolerating such uncivilized and illegal
behaviour, which should no longer be countenanced.

It will not be possible to eliminate terrorism
conclusively from Afghanistan unless the question of
the external support extended to the Al Qaeda and
Taliban cadres is firmly addressed and dealt with. The
declaration of intent to participate in the international
struggle against terrorism should not be permitted to be
accompanied by subversion in parallel, in the form of
protecting, sheltering and supporting elements of the
terror machine.

We cannot overemphasize the need for the
establishment of security structures in Afghanistan that
not only result from intra-Afghan processes, but also
lay the foundations for the establishment of a multi-
ethnic Afghan national army and police force. India is
contributing to the efforts in that regard.

The process of selecting representatives for the
emergency loya jirga has begun and appears to be on
course. We applaud and commend the Special
Independent Commission, which has accomplished so
much in so little time with such meagre resources.
However, there are twin but interlinked concerns. The
first relates to ensuring that the process is free of
intimidation and coercion. And the second is to keep
the Taliban and its backers firmly out of the process.
Otherwise, there will be questions about the outcome's
credibility and acceptance. Security for the loya jirga
process is therefore important, and all available
resources on the ground should be marshalled to that
end.

In another three weeks' time, the emergency loya
jirga will have completed its work, giving to
Afghanistan a Transitional Administration reflecting
the wishes of the Afghan people. This will be a
significant milestone in the implementation of the
Bonn Agreement and a major step towards the ultimate
objective of a democratic Government in Afghanistan
installed through free and fair elections.

More than two decades of conflict and three years
of drought have led to widespread human suffering and
massive displacement of the people of Afghanistan.
International and bilateral efforts for the reconstruction
of Afghanistan must be sustained and widened. Several
developing countries have explicitly expressed keen
interest in participating in the rebuilding of
Afghanistan within the South-South cooperation
modality. They have offered development
cooperation - both software and hardware - as well
as highly skilled human resources to assist in the
rebuilding of Afghanistan.

To facilitate a process through which relevant
capacities from developing countries can be easily and
cost-effectively made available for Afghanistan's
rebuilding efforts, the Government of India and the
United Nations Development Programme have
organized a two-day conference on South-South
cooperation for rebuilding Afghanistan, which began in
New Delhi today with the participation of a large
number of developing countries, United Nations funds
and agencies, and international financial institutions. In
an effort to ensure greater transparency and better
overall coordination of the ongoing international effort,
developed countries have been invited as observers.

The main objectives of this conference are: to
fully appreciate the magnitude of the challenges facing
Afghanistan and the development assistance required
for its economic and social recovery and reconstruction
over the medium to long term; to identify specific
capacity needs in both software and hardware areas
that can be met or supplied by other developing
countries; and to recommend mechanisms by which
such capacities and supplies from developing countries
can be easily and cost-effectively channelled to
Afghanistan. We are confident that the conference will
give the required impetus to South-South cooperation
for the development of Afghanistan and serve as a
model for similar cooperation elsewhere.

Chairman Karzai and other members of the
Interim Administration have demonstrated enormous
resolve and determination to put Afghanistan on the
road to peace and prosperity. But this long, arduous but
rewarding journey will become a bit easier, a bit faster,
if the international community extends all the
assistance that Afghanistan requires in keeping with
the priorities and preferences expressed by the Afghan
people. We would like to reiterate India's commitment
to contribute to Afghanistan's reconstruction and
rehabilitation, both in terms of financial commitments
and project-based assistance, as prioritized by the
Afghan Interim Administration. In that context, India
has already announced a commitment of $100 million
and has pledged assistance, both humanitarian
assistance - the requirements of which are more
immediate in nature, such as a million tons of wheat
and much-needed medical aid - and long-term
assistance to meet the economic reconstruction needs
that encompass several sectors, including police
training, education, housing, human resource
development, industrial development, public transport
and information technology. We have decided, in
addition, to make available a sum of $10 million as a
budget subsidy to the Afghan Government. Discussions
are at an advanced stage for a gift of three aircraft by
India to Ariana Airlines to enable it to build up its
fleet.

The next few weeks will provide the Afghan
leaders and the international community with another
opportunity to demonstrate the commitment of all
parties to the faithful implementation of the Bonn
Agreement through the holding of the loya jirga. We
hope that everyone will assume his or her
responsibility and that this will lead to the peaceful
selection of the Transitional Administration.

