I thank you, Sir, for convening today's open debate on pandemics and the challenges for sustaining peace. I would also like to thank Secretary General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for their insightful briefings. Six weeks ago, the Security Council held an open debate on pandemics and security (see S/2020/663), chaired by the German Foreign Minister. Recently, we also had an informal exchange of Council members, with representatives of the Peacebuilding Commission, on the impact of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on peacebuilding. In both meetings, we called on the Council to adopt a comprehensive understanding of peace and security. I am therefore grateful to Indonesia for providing us with an opportunity to build on these discussions today. A comprehensive approach to peace and security means also addressing root causes and mid- and long-term challenges, as opposed to only acute crises. It means needing to find integrated solutions for interconnected challenges and strengthening prevention, peacebuilding and sustaining peace - no matter if we are facing the multidimensional challenges related to human rights violations, pandemics or climate change. COVID-19 continues to rage across the world. It is a multidimensional challenge that adversely affects humanitarian, health, political, social, economic and environmental aspects. It also affects peace and security and undermines peacebuilding efforts in conflict-affected countries and countries in transition. What needs to be done? Allow me to focus on four brief points. First, the Security Council needs to be active and engaged. It must follow up on resolution 2532 (2020), in which it explicitly recognized that COVID-19 might reverse peacebuilding gains. We should encourage the Secretary-General to fully integrate in his reporting the impact of the pandemic on security. Such reporting would support prevention and early warning. The Council should further empower the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which has a unique mandate within the United Nations system, to enable integrated and cross-pillar approaches. We commend the PBC for its rapid response and excellent track record since the outbreak of the pandemic. We need to ensure that the United Nations and its presence on the ground, especially its peacekeeping operations and special political missions, are sufficiently equipped and mandated to address the direct and indirect challenges of the pandemic. This is particularly important in the context of transitions, such as those currently taking place in Darfur and Guinea-Bissau. This is the Security Council's core business. Secondly, we underline the need for coordination and coherence. We need integrated peacebuilding efforts to respond to challenges such as COVID-19. The Secretary-General's briefing today (see annex 1) and his recent report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2020/773) have demonstrated how the United Nations system as a whole has adapted to the pandemic. However, we need to ensure further progress in achieving better coordination and coherence within the United Nations system, its agencies, funds and programmes. There are lessons to be learned from the impact and response to the pandemic. We believe there is value in incorporating those lessons in the ongoing process of reviewing the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. Thirdly, peacebuilding and sustaining peace urgently need funding. The COVID-19 pandemic has had massive, immediate socioeconomic repercussions. Peacebuilding needs are underfunded even now, despite the fact that a prevented crisis is much less costly than an acute crisis. Germany continues to contribute to peacebuilding and prevention. For instance, we continue to support the Secretary-General's Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), to which we have just made an initial contribution of €15 million for 2020. With its flexibility and catalytic function, the PBF plays a crucial role in meeting such critical peacebuilding needs as those relating to gender and inclusivity, cross- border collaboration and, in particular, in contexts of transition. On a bilateral level, Germany has contributed to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire by supporting additional efforts of its mediation partners on the ground. Gender equality gains are at a risk of being lost as many Governments are diverting funds that were originally earmarked for the support of women and girls and their participation in peace processes. As a member of the Funding Board of the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund, Germany supported the establishment of an emergency response window within the Fund and made $2.5 million available to this emergency window. Through this window, local women's organizations in countries in Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, the Middle East and Europe can apply for funding that enables them to sustain themselves through the crisis and for programmes responding to the pandemic and its gendered dimensions. But these efforts are not enough. To create sustainable and predictable financing for peacebuilding, we need strengthened partnerships with international financial institutions, regional banks and the private sector. Further, as donors, we should not forget: to make a difference: donors should coordinate better, use pooled funding if possible, and engage in good peacebuilding donorship. Fourthly, inclusive approaches are needed to build resilience. All efforts will be in vain if they are not based on national ownership. We will be able to build resilient societies that can better withstand the impact of pandemics only by working in lockstep with affected countries. Respect for human rights and political processes that are inclusive and allow all parts of society, especially women, youth and marginalized groups, to participate in a meaningful way, are crucial in building up such resilience. Let me conclude on a hopeful note. This pandemic, just like other multidimensional challenges, is providing us as an international community with an opportunity - an opportunity to strengthen cooperation, reinforce multilateralism and show international solidarity. If we manage to overcome traditional thinking and siloes and find integrated and coherent solutions, we will be able to defeat a deadly virus, eventually halt climate change and hopefully realize a world where everybody can live in peace and security.
