Mr. Chua (Singapore): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the very important
topic of the role of States, regional arrangements and
the United Nations in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts.

As a small country, Singapore's security and
prosperity are highly dependent on a stable regional
and international order. We therefore firmly believe in
conflict prevention and preventive diplomacy. Timely
political action must be taken to prevent disputes
that could threaten regional peace and stability from
escalating into all-out confrontation. Singapore
also believes that regional security and stability are
best served by a robust, open and inclusive security
architecture that encourages all relevant parties to
have a voice at the table and engage constructively in
dialogue with one another.

AsafoundingmemberoftheAssociationofSoutheast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), which was established 51
years ago, Singapore has seen the strides that ASEAN
has taken over the decades in its contributions to peace
and stability in the region. ASEAN was formed at a
time of great geopolitical instability. South-East Asia
was divided and conflicts were rife. The fact that the
founding members of ASEAN - Indonesia, Malaysia,
the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand - could get
together to establish ASEAN, despite their fundamental
differences, was a major achievement. Since then, the
ASEAN family has grown to 10 members. There has
been no outright conflict or war between ASEAN
member States. There are and will be disagreements,
but what is important is that each ASEAN member
State remains committed to consensus and resolving
differences through words rather than weapons. In this
day and age, that is an achievement worth celebrating
and must also be preserved at all costs.

ASEAN also recognizes that an effective regional
security framework for peace and stability has to be
based on strong support for a rules-based multilateral
system and international law. We also need to have
greater communication, mutual trust and confidence
among all relevant stakeholders in the region so that
miscalculations and mishaps are minimized. The
ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting-Plus (ADMM- Plus), which involves eight of ASEAN's dialogue
partners - namely, Australia, China, India, Japan,
New Zealand, South Korea, Russia and the United
States - aims to achieve that at the highest level among
the respective Defence Ministers. The ASEAN Regional
Forum (ARF) comprises 27 members, including the
European Union, and seeks to do the same. Both the
ADMM-Plus and the ARF are ASEAN-led mechanisms
that provide avenues for greater interaction and
dialogue among countries. They play an important role
in conflict prevention and in the development of a more
robust, rules-based regional security order.

The United Nations cannot prevent conflict or deal
with these transboundary and contemporary threats
alone. States and regional organizations must be
meaningfully engaged to complement the work of the
United Nations in addressing these issues. The Plan of
Action (2016-2020) to Implement the Joint Declaration
on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN
and the United Nations is an example. It outlines the
strategic priorities that will be undertaken by both sides
to further enhance political, security, economic and
sociocultural cooperation. Of note, it promotes closer
cooperation for sustaining peace, preventive diplomacy
and confidence-building measures though capacity-
building activities. The importance of enhancing
cooperation in preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention was further emphasized in the recent
meeting between ASEAN members and the United
Nations Secretary-General in September.

The recognition of the contributions of regional
organizations to peace and security is not new, and
has been outlined in Security Council resolution
1631 (2005) and General Assembly resolution 69/277,
entitled "Political declaration on strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations". Just last week, the
General Assembly adopted seven resolutions that
highlighted the further collaboration and deepening
engagement between regional organizations and the
United Nations. Given their specialized knowledge,
functional expertise and holistic understanding of
regional contexts, such organizations can contribute to
enhancing the work of the United Nations in a manner
that takes into account the specific circumstances and
needs of each Member State. This is an important
element in gaining the trust and confidence of the
parties involved. Trust and confidence are integral to
any dialogue and negotiation process.

