Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I am glad to welcome
you, Sir, to this Chamber, where the Norwegian peace
philosophy - depicted in the famous mural before our
eyes - has for decades inspired the Security Council's
members. I would also like to join other speakers in
congratulating your delegation upon its successful
beginning of the Security Council presidency.

It is my special privilege to thank Secretary-
General Kofi Arman, Secretary General/High
Representative Javier Solana, High Representative
Wolfgang Petritsch and Special Representative and
Coordinator Jacques Paul Klein for their important
statements today.

My delegation is also pleased to greet here the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country
that had to go through the ordeal of war to become, I
believe, a symbol of peace, inter-ethnic reconciliation
and religious tolerance.

Ukraine welcomes the decision of the European
Union (EU) to take on the United Nations-led
international mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
starting its first crisis-management operation under the
new Security And Defence Policy. The intention of the
European Union to make a leading contribution to the
streamlining of the overall civilian and police presence
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a fundamental step,
which should accelerate further positive changes in that
country. The EU activities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are not only a test case for the European ability to
preserve what has been achieved in that country and to
promote Europe-oriented development; it is also a clear
political and economic challenge to the European
Union's new crisis management strategies and
methods.

In this context, Ukraine welcomes the agreement
of the European Union to invite non-EU member States
to participate in the future Police Mission. Having
already expressed our interest in being involved in the
EU-led military crisis-management operations and in
the European Security and Defence Policy-related
processes, including military and civilian aspects, my
Government reiterates its readiness to contribute to the
EU Police Mission. Having participated in all the
international peacekeeping efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina - from the United Nations Protection
Force, the Implementation Force and the Stabilization
Force to the International Police Task Force - Ukraine
remains committed to achieving the goals of peace and
stability in that country.

I would like to inform the Council that, early next
week, the special representative of the Ukraine in the
Balkans, Deputy Secretary of State Ihor Kharchenko,
will pay an official Visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina to
discuss practical forms of bilateral cooperation as well
as other issues related to Ukraine's participation in
international efforts in the region.

It is with regret that we learned of the decision of
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch to step down from his post at
the end of May 2002. As was stated in his lucid
briefing, visible results have been achieved in
implementing priority tasks endorsed by the Peace
Implementation Conference in May 2000.

My delegation notes with particular satisfaction
positive changes in economic reform. Tangible
progress has been made in the consolidation of state
institutions. The implementation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's Constitutional Court's "Constituent
Peoples' Decision" is in a crucial phase.
Comprehensive reform of the judicial system has been
instituted. In the past two years alone, there have been
more than 130,000 returns of citizens to areas where
their ethnic group was a minority. Finally, Bosnia and
Herzegovina seems to be ready to hold general
elections in October that will be the first since the end
of the war to be organized by the local authorities.
In all these achievements, Ukraine recognizes the
valuable contribution made by Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch.
Appreciating his useful efforts during the past two and
a half years, we wish Mr. Petritsch every success in his
further endeavours. We also welcome the decision of
the Peace Implementation Council to designate Lord
Ashdown as the new High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina and pledge our full cooperation with
him.

On behalf of the Government of Ukraine, I would
like to pay tribute to the men and women of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), led by Mr. Jacques Paul Klein.

My delegation is encouraged by the important
good news from the field highlighted today by Mr.
Klein and welcomes the valuable results obtained in
the spheres of police reform, police restructuring,
institution-building and inter-police force cooperation.
We hope that all these positive developments will be
preserved in the future and we strongly believe that the
practical goals determined by UNMIBH will be
successfully implemented by the EU follow-on
mission.

Let me conclude by reiterating my country's
utmost support for the intense efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to build a democratic and prosperous
society with respect for the rights of each and every
citizen. We look forward to further steps aimed at
strengthening the principles of the rule of law and at
fostering processes of institution-building and
economic transformation.

My delegation also pays special attention to the
protection of the rights of persons that belong to
national minorities, in particular the Ukrainian
community. This issue is still a matter of concern to us
and we count on the further assistance of the High
Representative/EU Special Representative in further
improving the situation in this sphere. We also believe
that Bosnia and Herzegovina's political leaders will
demonstrate the necessary resolve to guide that country
into a European community led by the European
Union, the North Atlantic Alliance and the Council of
Europe.

