Mr. Nambiar (India): We thank you for
scheduling this open meeting of the Security Council
on an issue that the Security Council has not
specifically addressed on any previous occasion, but
that is, nonetheless, of considerable import and great
concern today. We note in particular, Madam President,
the intensity of your personal involvement in the
subject of today's debate. We also seek your
indulgence for the length of our statement.

For many Member States of the United Nations,
the experience of nationhood is still relatively new.
Indeed, the transition, after the Second World War,
from empire to nationhood in many regions of Asia and
Africa and parts of the Caribbean was itself the result
of a process of political conflict, post-conflict
reconciliation and deliberate crafting of nationhood.
This process was unique for each region, if not for
every nation. The role of the United Nations was also
significant, though of a somewhat different nature from
what seems relevant to the present debate.

What is the basis for the Security Council's
current consideration of this subject? Ever since the
crisis in the Congo in 1960, the United Nations has
considered aspects of internal conflicts because of their
potential implications for international peace and
security, taking into account Article 36, paragraph 1, of
the Charter. This Article allows the Council to consider
or make a recommendation regarding a dispute or a
situation of a similar nature at any stage, with perhaps
the minimal requirement of an investigation under
Article 34 of the Charter. Since the nineties, the United
Nations has been involved in a variety of robust
peacekeeping operations, and therefore such a search
for a Charter basis is, today, only academic. For the
Council to proceed from peacekeeping to peacemaking
and post-conflict reconciliation is seemingly but a short
step.

The present debate seems to be focused on the
effects of intra-State conflicts that have bedevilled the
international landscape in the post-cold war period and
have bred ethnic conflicts or factional struggles for
military control, political power, economic resources or
external patronage within States. Though it can be
argued that most intra-State conflicts invariably have
external components, the concept of peace-building
that arose in the early 1990s and provided the impetus
for robust international action by the United Nations in
many areas of the world was directed mainly to
prevent, mitigate, resolve or manage such conflicts
with a view to both avoiding their exacerbation,
thereby positively affecting international peace and
security, and to enabling broader political transitions to
take place within these societies for long-term regional
stability. How far these processes represented an
imposition on the part of outside agencies, including
the United Nations, and how far they had the effect of
encouraging the development of genuinely indigenous
authority structures or institutions are assessments on
which the judgements of the outside world vary.

It is axiomatic that reconciliation within any
nation must be not only home-grown but also home-
nurtured. This is more than a routine expression of pro
patria sentiment. There are many examples where
solutions imposed from the outside have failed when
those external influences disappeared. Similarly, any
process that does not fully involve the participation of
the local population, in all its diversity, is also unlikely
to yield lasting peace.

It is said that peace looks to the future and justice
to the past. If true reconciliation is to be achieved,
there must clearly be a blend of both values. Without a
willingness to look beyond the bitterness, rancour and
misgivings of the past, any future reconciliation is
unlikely to be realized. But, by the same token, unless
there is a credible sense of justice and accountability
for past actions, especially in cases where there have
been grave and systematic violations, it would be
equally unrealistic to expect genuine reconciliation
between opposing parties. However wrenching the
process may be, the various contending parties must
deal with each other in order to arrive at mutual
accommodation and to deal with issues of the past,
including those relating to peace, justice, reparation
and amnesty.

Post-conflict societies also require new rigour in
their judicial system. The establishment of criminal
courts, truth commissions and a system of reparation
for losses sustained by victims of crimes may become
necessary in certain circumstances. However, it is
important that the establishment of the rule of law and
the dispensation of justice in post-conflict societies be
fashioned in accordance with the needs and aspirations
of the people in those societies. Promotion of post-
conflict healing is a dynamic process. The local actors
must lead the process. Externally imposed prescriptions
will not necessarily work. International assistance for
the establishment of a rule of law regime and
dispensation of justice in post-conflict societies,
therefore, should help set up credible local institutions
and build up their public image and acceptance.

What should the role of the United Nations and
the international community be in such a scenario? Our
View is that the United Nations should play a
supportive and facilitating role, without seeking to
impose outside viewpoints or values on the delicate
process of reconciliation under way in any war-torn
society. This is not to belittle or underplay the role of
the United Nations or the considerable expertise
available within its system, including that available
through the various funds and programmes, to deal
with crises and complex situations. Nor is it an
argument against the basic benchmarks of human rights
values that need to be adhered to in all civilized
societies. What is of paramount importance is
recognizing the complexity of an exercise in national
reconciliation in post-conflict situations and dealing
with it from a perspective informed by sympathy and
understanding rather than prescription.

Although the post-conflict reconciliation
theologian is likely to make a sharp distinction between
in-conflict and post-conflict situations, the reality, in
most cases, is far more complex. Reconciliation efforts
often commence even while the conflict is taking place
and persist after peace agreements are signed. On the
other hand, even after the formal ending of hostilities
and the signing of peace accords, conflicts continue, at
times sporadically and, at other times, assuming even
more virulent forms. Any involvement by the United
Nations will need to take into account this reality.

Before involving itself in a particular situation,
the United Nations will thus need to recognize that
there is no uniform approach that can be adopted in all
situations. Every post-conflict situation will have its
distinctive characteristics, which need to be given full
consideration in any reconciliation model. Where
societies have traditionally enjoyed a high degree of
provincial or local autonomy, it would be futile to set
up highly centralized structures. In the case of large
communities with mixed compositions, the distribution
of power between the federal and provincial
Governments would need to be worked out with great
care.

Any process of national reconciliation will
require time and painstaking efforts. Short-sighted
approaches with unrealistic timetables based on
considerations of purely financial implications are not
always likely to succeed.

An important contribution the United Nations can
make, in our View, is to ensure the centrality of the
local actors in the political process. Models forced
upon societies from the outside often fail. Full
ownership by the political elements of society in an
inclusive, rather than exclusive, process would ensure
that the solutions devised do not contain the seeds of
resurgence of conflict.

We are convinced that, for a system of
governance to work in post-conflict societies, it must
respect the dynamic of the community in its plurality. It
also follows that only a political form that is inclusive,
tolerant of dissent and democratic can provide the
required space for national reconciliation, as well as a
stake for all in its future well-being. Democratic
governance implies governance through the will of the
citizen, exercised through independent constitutional
mechanisms. It is the will of the people that defines the
political institutions, the economic and social
manifestos, the targets and the instruments. However,
reaching targets democratically set needs resources.
Resources are the crucial factor that can determine the
difference between effective governance that delivers
and governance, however well-meaning, that fails to
meet the needs of its people. Extra-territorial and other
threats to the sovereignty of States are further factors
that seriously impinge on national capacity and self-
image and divert attention from the priorities of social
and economic development. We feel, therefore, that too
narrow a focus on governance, without adequate
attention to the challenges of social order and security,
is likely to affect the consolidation of post-conflict
societies.

Democracy is a major area where the United
Nations can assist in national reconciliation efforts.
Different parts of the United Nations system have
acquired experience and expertise in providing
assistance in census operations, the preparation and
revision of electoral rolls, the delimitation of
constituencies, verification and other areas considered
essential for the successful conduct of elections.

There are other areas where the United Nations
could prove invaluable. These relate to the provision of
humanitarian assistance, the protection and promotion
of human rights, judicial assistance and, of late, dealing
with political processes. The instrumentalities available
in the United Nations system to deal with each of these
areas, however, have different characteristics. Many of
them have time-honoured traditions of neutrality and
impartiality. We urge that caution be the watchword in
dealing with the intersections of the political process,
humanitarian assistance, peacekeeping operations and
the promotion and protection of human rights. A push
in one direction to satisfy any donor country or interest
group, without taking into account its impact on the
other three, could lead to consequences or situations
that hinder rather than assist reconciliation.

A leading non-governmental organization has
identified truth, justice and reparations as the three
indispensable pillars of post-conflict national
reconciliation. The three are also intrinsically linked.
The instances of South Africa's truth and national
reconciliation process, as well as Peru's Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, have been held out as
examples of the success of such efforts. They have
enabled an outpouring of admissions and grievances,
thereby providing the basis for an effective
reconciliation. In the case of Afghanistan, the
imperatives of truth and justice have to be balanced by
the demands of stability and order. In Cambodia, on the
other hand, the urgency displayed by the international
community in seeking justice from the Khmer Rouge
more than two decades after their fall from power does
not absolve it of the failure to seek this truth when the
Khmer Rouge was in power. Here, too, we are faced
with the complex and often controversial balance of the
moral imperatives of a post-modern civilized society
and the perceived political interests of powerful States.

Amnesty is also linked to justice. Blanket
amnesty, in the interest of peace, can prevent truth and
justice from emerging. At the same time, the complete
denial of amnesty in the interests of justice can
sometimes hinder peace efforts. Here, too, balance is
essential. Reparations are important in securing
reconciliation, but need to be carefully quantified to
ensure that they are not unduly at the expense of other
parties to the conflict. History is replete with instances
of the perceived injustice of reparations leading to
further conflict. This issue continues to be relevant in
our times.

Unfortunately, national reconciliation can
sometimes be pursued with misplaced vigour. For a
community emerging out of the shadow of death and
destruction, starvation and deprivation, the goal of
political reconciliation comes with a psychological
cost. The scars of the past do not heal as quickly as
demanded by the international community as the price
of its activist humanitarian interventions. When the
United Nations or the international humanitarian
community decides to intervene in a manner that seems
to privilege or favour one group over another, even
with the soundest of motives, these actions run the risk
of foisting an outside construct on the situation. While
it is difficult to make value judgements on such
situations in any generalized manner, we must agree
with what was stated by a scholar recently to the effect
that the attempt to do good, if poorly planned and
lacking in strategy, can do more harm than good.

India firmly believes that national reconciliation
must be a soft process of co-optation and cooperation.
It cannot be thrust on an unwilling or unprepared
society. Political engineering in the form of
empowering one group at the expense of another may
appear to be essential for the restoration of ethnic
balance, but can come at the expense of minority
interests and heighten tensions in the future. It may
also affect the neutrality of the United Nations in the
perception of the people of the affected country and
result in long-term disharmony.

The role of the United Nations in supporting
national reconciliation must involve assistance through
a system-wide, coherent, needs-based approach, which
can result in the consolidation of security and peace,
democracy, economic freedom, social order and justice.
In all these areas, the United Nations should play a
basically supportive role.

