Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the Presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I have full
confidence in your ability to lead the Council
successfully thanks to your experience and wisdom.
We would also like to congratulate your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of France, for so ably
presiding over the Council last month. We would also
like to thank the Council for convening this open
meeting to express the concerns of Member States at
the United Nations.

We are meeting today to discuss the situation of
Iraq amidst difficult circumstances. We welcome the
reports of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, which we heard
on Friday. The reports included many positive points
with regard to the disarmament of Iraq's weapons of
mass destruction and stressed the importance of
continuing the inspections, which will reduce the
possibility of war and its ravages. We would like to
thank Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei for their great efforts
to bring to a close this complex case.

The Arab Summit in Beirut last March stressed
the importance and necessity of safeguarding peace and
stability in the Gulf region. It also stressed the
importance of creating positive conditions conducive to
the development of normal relations among the
countries of the region. In this context, we stress the
importance of Iraq's implementation of Security
Council resolutions relevant to the situation between
Iraq and Kuwait, particularly the question of Kuwaiti
prisoners and missing persons from third countries, as
well as its cooperation with the United Nations to
alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people.

The United Nations expressed its grave concern
over war and its negative impact and repercussions on
Iraq, which would lead to untold suffering. We cannot,
therefore, ignore the humanitarian aspect of the
situation in Iraq. When all is said and done, those who
will suffer are the Iraqis, who have been suffering,
actually, for more than 10 years. We should work to
alleviate their suffering and assist them in resolving
this predicament. The Iraqi people have suffered the
scourge of many wars during the last decade.
International sanctions have exacerbated their
suffering.

We should stress here that it is Israel, the party
that owns a destructive and lethal nuclear arsenal, that
should be held accountable by the international
community. The international community has ignored
the crimes perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinian
people, thereby fuelling and increasing the cycle of
violence in the region, all as a result of the policies
pursued by the current Israeli Government, which
continues to occupy Arab territories and to commit war
crimes.

We therefore call for the enforcement of
paragraph 14 of resolution 687 (1991), which calls for
the declaration of the Middle East a region free from
weapons of mass destruction. The international
community must play the role entrusted to it by the
Charter, without any selectivity or double standards.

We have been following the inspections
operations in Iraq. It has become clear to us that the
tasks undertaken by the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
have yielded positive results. What is required now is
to allow the inspections more time to complete such
tasks.

The Iraqi Government should cooperate more
actively to bring this enduring case to a close. We
believe that Security Council resolution 1441 (2002),
unanimously adopted, provides for a framework that
has not been fully used yet. As Members of this
international Organization, which was established to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
we should commit ourselves to the implementation of
international law and the enhancement of human rights.
We should also spare no effort to peacefully settle any
crisis that we face, so that we can maintain the
foundations of international peace and security.

Continued inspections in Iraq, with more time for
the inspectors to implement their mandate, will assist
in disarming Iraq, which is the objective that,
collectively, we are seeking. The disarmament of Iraq
by peaceful means is our objective. There is an
alternative to war; military force should be a last resort.
The Security Council, which is entrusted with
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, should spare no effort to use every
means at its disposal peacefully to disarm Iraq of its
weapons of mass destruction. Iraq should cooperate
more actively with the international community and
should implement all relevant Security Council
resolutions.
In conclusion, we would welcome any initiatives
or ideas calling for the peaceful resolution of this
question and stressing the need to preserve the unity,
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq. We
hope that the efforts of the Council and other
international efforts will be successful in finding a
solution to the current crisis.

