The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Canada, Chile, Cuba,
Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Japan, Jordan, Malaysia, Morocco, Pakistan, South
Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Tunisia, Turkey and the
United Arab Emirates, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Listre (Argentina), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada),
Mr. Valdes (Chile), Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla
(Cuba), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Hidayat
(Indonesia), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan),
Mr. Al-Hadidi (Jordan), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia),
Mr. Bennouna (Morocco), Mr. Khalid (Pakistan),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Arias (Spain),
Mr. Manis (Sudan), Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia),
Mr. Bilman (Turkey), and Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 3 May 2002
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document S/2002/506,
and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Friday, 3 May 2002, regarding the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the
Council's provisional rules of procedure and with
previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in response to the request
contained in the letter dated 2 May 2002 from the
Charge d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of Sudan
to the United Nations in his capacity as Chairman of
the Arab Group, which is contained in document
8/2002/510.

Before we begin the proceedings, I would like to
make two procedural announcements. I would like to
inform members and non-members that we plan to
suspend the meeting at around 4.30 pm. to hear a
briefing by the Secretary-General. We will then resume
our deliberations at around 6 pm. Since we may be
going on late into the night, I hope that my colleagues
around this room will not mind if I make a request: can
they - except, of course, for the principal parties -
shorten their speeches to five or ten minutes? I hope
that that is not an unreasonable request.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, on whom I now call.


