Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish to express my
delegation's appreciation to the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Michael Williams,
for his useful briefing, and I commend his efforts,
including his visit to the Middle East last week aimed
at reinvigorating the peace process.

My delegation welcomes the meeting between
Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas in
Jerusalem on Tuesday, 28 August, which we hope will
contribute to the restoration of trust and the
establishment of an atmosphere conducive to moving
the peace process towards the ultimate goal of a two-
State solution.

Ghana also welcomes the renewed engagement
and the recent activities of the Middle East Quartet,
including arrangements by the Secretary-General to
open an office in Jerusalem for Quartet Representative
Tony Blair, who is mandated to help galvanize
international support and resources for rebuilding
Palestinian institutions of governance, promote the rule
of law and help rehabilitate the economy in the
occupied territories.

It is our expectation that the Quartet
Representative can count on the goodwill and full
support of all factions in Palestine and the parties in
the region, whose cooperation will be instrumental in
ensuring the success of his endeavours in the coming
months.

The recently relaunched Arab Peace Initiative,

including the resumption of consultations between

Israel and its Arab neighbours, are steps in the right

direction. We call on all the regional States to continue

to play positive and constructive roles to facilitate the
search for peace in the Middle East.

My delegation is concerned about the
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories,
especially the worsening socio-economic conditions in
Gaza, and calls for the speedy implementation of the
Agreement on Movement and Access in order to
alleviate the plight of innocent civilians, including
women and children.

In Lebanon, Ghana commends the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for its sacrifices
and welcomes the adoption of resolution 1773 (2007)
extending the mandate of UNIFIL, which, together
with the Lebanese Armed Forces, has helped to create
what has been aptly described as a new strategic
environment in Southern Lebanon. We urge the parties
to remain committed to the tripartite mechanisms in
order to address outstanding issues. As a troop-
contributing country, Ghana also welcomes the
mitigation measures being taken by the Secretary-
General to ensure the safety of UNIFIL personnel.

The troubling situation in Northern Lebanon,
where the siege at the Palestinian refugee camp of
Nahr el-Bared has lasted for more than three months
with no end in sight, gives cause for serious concern.
We call on the Fatah al-Islam militias to recognize the
sovereignty of the Lebanese Government and give up
their arms in the interest of peace.

We are equally concerned about the lack of
progress in the inter-Lebanese national dialogue and
reconciliation, and call on the various political parties
to endeavour to reconvene parliament in order to make
the necessary preparations for the holding of
presidential elections, as President Emile Lahoud's
term approaches its end.

We are pleased with reports of progress that has
been made by the cartographer with regard to the
geographical definition of the Shab'a farms and appeal
to all parties to continue to cooperate with the
cartographer, who is due to visit the region again in the
coming days.

To ensure a durable peace in Lebanon, we call on
all the relevant parties in the region to comply fully

with the terms of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1701 (2006)
and other relevant resolutions, including the need to
respect the sovereignty of Lebanon and the legitimacy
of its democratically elected Government and
institutions.

The political, security and humanitarian situation
in the Middle East remains volatile and still constitutes
a clear danger to international peace and security.
Nothing short of concerted action underpinned by the
necessary political will on the part of the relevant
actors in the region and the international community
will suffice if we are to contain, stabilize and resolve
this situation. It is our hope that the forthcoming
regional conferences to be convened by the Quartet and
the United States-sponsored international conferences
on the Middle East expected to take place in the next
few months will contribute to the quest for a just,
durable and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

