Mr. Navarrete (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I wish at the outset to say how very
gratified my delegation is at the objective, impartial
and transparent manner in which you are conducting
the Council debate. I warmly congratulate you.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made this morning by the Ambassador of Costa Rica
on behalf of the countries members of the Rio Group.
We also find many of his views reflected in the
statement made this afternoon on behalf of the
countries of the Caribbean Community by Ambassador
Durrant of Jamaica.
We are also grateful for the statement made by
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee this
morning, which made it possible to focus today's
debate on the present and future work of the
Committee 4 a fundamental task of this Organization.

Mexico has already, on other occasions,
expressed its firm commitment to the fight against
international terrorism and has referred to the specific
actions it has taken. Resolution 1373 (2001) provides
an additional tool to enhance the effectiveness of our
efforts to eradicate terrorism. The heinous attacks of 11
September made clear the extreme seriousness of
current manifestations of terrorism and the need to
work in unison to prevent criminal groups from sowing
terror and destruction among the population.

My country reaffirms once again its readiness to
continue to work to implement resolution 1373 (2001)
and the agreements adopted in other United Nations
forums, inter alia the General Assembly. It is clear that
the broad legal framework established by the
international community over the years provides the
foundations for lasting cooperation. Applied in good
faith and without double standards, it should allow us
effectively to combat terrorism.

Mexico has submitted to the Council the report
referred to in paragraph 6 of resolution 1373 (2001)
and will continue to take the necessary measures for its
implementation, including in the framework of North
America, with joint or coordinated actions by its three
countries in areas such as border control, exchange of
information, monitoring of financial transfers and arms
trafficking, among many other areas.

I should like to limit my statement to a
presentation of Mexico's view of the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its future
orientation.

The Committee's objective is to enable States to
enhance their level of response in combating terrorism.
In order to reach that goal, it is essential to ensure
transparency and objectivity in the conduct of its work;
the broadest possible dialogue among its members and
the other States Members of the Organization; and
close coordination with other forums that are applying
measures similar to those contemplated in resolution
1373 (2001).

These very elements - transparency, objectivity,
dialogue and coordination - have characterized the
actions taken thus far by the Committee. I should like
to express my delegation's appreciation to its
Chairman, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, for the manner in
which he has conducted its work, and I express once
again Mexico's resolute support for his work. I am
likewise grateful for the outstanding contributions of
the three Vice-Chairmen of the Committee.

It has been said here by the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee himself that the
Committee is not a tribunal, but, rather, finds in
international cooperation its natural scope of action,
since that is the only way to combat and eradicate
terrorism.

Technical assistance, when it is required by
concerned States, is a key element in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The
Committee must assist States in overcoming any
difficulties they may have encountered in the
implementation of the resolution, especially that one
third of the total number of Members of our
Organization that have not yet been able to submit their
initial report to the Committee and the Council.
Accordingly, I would like to know what orientations
Ambassador Greenstock might be able to suggest in
order to lend more effective assistance to those that
truly need it, in addition to the measures already
taken- for example, the expansion and further
development of the directory of assistance that has
been compiled by the Committee.

Operative paragraph 4 of resolution 1373 (2001)
alludes to the close link between international terrorism
and other forms of criminal conduct. Many of the
representatives who have spoken in today's debate
have also underscored this point. Various international
institutions competent in this regard have shown a
willingness closely to cooperate with the United
Nations and to assist States in the implementation of
that resolution.

A satisfactory dialogue has been launched with
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and
the Financial Action Task Force in the area of
combating money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism. That dialogue should encourage the efficient
use of resources and avert any duplication of efforts,
and it should effectively contribute to enhancing the
technical capacity of States in combating terrorism.
Also important, in my delegation's view, is the work
done by the International Atomic Energy Agency in
combating nuclear terrorism. Dialogue and
coordination should be extended to other forums in
which measures to eradicate terrorism are currently
under discussion.

The implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
should be consistent with the multilateral legal
framework. In particular, it should be ensured that joint
or separate measures taken by members in cooperation
with the Organization are carried out in conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, including standards of human rights
and international humanitarian law, as well as the
protection of genuine cases of asylum and refuge.

As has been said here, in order to be effective, the
fight against terrorism must be fully compatible with
the exercise of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Otherwise, our efforts will be
counterproductive.

Mexico hopes that the renewed spirit of
cooperation that prevails in the United Nations will
lead to the successful conclusion of the work of the
special Committee established pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 51/210. We are encouraged by the
statements we heard throughout the day with respect to
the prospects for its work. It is to be hoped, therefore,
that, during its sixth session, pending issues can be
resolved and progress made in the adoption of new
international instruments, thus strengthening the
framework for fighting international terrorism.

Accordingly, Mexico deems it indispensable that
there be a prompt conclusion of the draft
comprehensive convention on terrorism, an instrument
that will endow the international community with a
more uniform framework in combating this scourge
and will make it possible to cover all of those forms of
terrorism that are not specifically contemplated in other
agreements.

Allow me in conclusion to exercise my right not
to reply but to express thanks. I have heard very kind
words spoken throughout this meeting. I am most
grateful for them. It has been a privilege for me to
represent Mexico in this Organization in the year that
has brought my country to the Council.

I would ask my colleagues in the Council and,
more generally, the representatives to the Organization,
to extend to my successor, Ambassador Adolfo Aguilar
Zinser, the same frank cooperation and generous
friendship with which you have honoured me.

