Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to join other
speakers in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko and expressing our gratitude for his briefing
and the report (S/2014/777, annex). I would also like to
express our appreciation for the personal efforts he has
been making in carrying out his difficult and important
mandate.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement just delivered
by the Head of the Delegation of the European Union,
and I would like to add several remarks in my national
capacity.

I would like to start by quoting Croatian
President Ivo Josipovic', who, as the first President of
Croatia ever invited to speak before the Parliamentary
Assembly ofBosnia and Herzegovina, told the Assembly
on 14 April 2010: "Croatia is not merely a neighbour of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but it is also its sincere friend,
partner and ally". Those words are as relevant today as
they were more than four years ago.

Croatia, sharing a 1,000-kilometre-long land border
with our neighbour, considers the territorial integrity,
stability, functionality and prosperity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be of paramount importance for that
country, and in Croatia's national interest as well. It is
also a principal matter of regional and European peace
and prosperity.

We fully support the European and Euro-Atlantic
orientation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and offer our
partnership in achieving that goal. Who else but its
neighbours would know best the importance of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's integration into the European Union,
in particular its neighbour that not long ago went
through the same long and highly demanding accession
process?

Croatia firmly believes that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has a future as a member ofEuro-Atlantic community as
a modern European State with a developed democracy
and viable competitive economy. We shall spare no
effort to help and assist Bosnia and Herzegovina
throughout that process.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a State with a
particular political system, rooted in the Dayton Peace
Agreement. Its system is primarily based on ethnic
representation, which rests in turn on genuine equality
among the three constitutive peoples. That equality is a
prerequisite for the stability and functionality of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and a key to achieving a successful
ethnicity-citizen balance.

Croatia is mindful of the legitimate needs and
rights of Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina, who
are the smallest but nevertheless equally important
constitutive people in the country. We shall certainly
keep extending our support to them.

The protests that took place earlier this year in
Bosnia and Herzegovina were a telling expression of
citizens' frustration with the dysfunction of the system
and the deteriorating socioeconomic situation in the
country. Those events were a direct consequence of the
lack of much-needed reforms that could ensure stability
and prosperity. Otherwise, the country might face
further socioeconomic tensions and destabilization
along ethnic lines. We therefore share the High
Representative's concern and condemnation of divisive
and secessionist rhetoric coming from Republika
Srpska. The calls for a referendum on secession and
other statements challenging the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country are completely
unacceptable.

As highlighted in the report, the two most
significant developments in the reporting period were
the floods that hit Bosnia and Herzegovina hard in May
and the general elections in October.

In our View, the general elections held on 12 October
were fair and inclusive. It is now of crucial importance
that all levels of Government be formed without delay
and that the challenges, in particular the economic and
social issues, be swiftly addressed.

In May, Bosnia and Herzegovina was hit by
catastrophic floods. We commend the immediate acts
of solidarity extended to the flooded areas and the huge
contributions that have been made from the region,
Europe and beyond. Croatia was among the first to
respond, providing assistance in goods, personnel and
money. The work to alleviate the dire consequences
of the floods is not finished yet, and Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs the international support to remain
ongoing.

We believe that in order to achieve our common
goal - a stable, functioning and prosperous Bosnia
and Herzegovina - a realistic strategy is neede that
takes into account the country's specific issues and
conditions. The clear prospect of membership in
the European Union (EU) is by far the best stability
and security framework within which Bosnia and
Herzegovina can achieve steady progress. The EU
accession process serves as the best blueprint for
State-building reforms, strengthened administrative
capacities and good governance.

We should all continue to keep our focus on Bosnia
and Herzegovina and further strengthen our assistance
and good advice after the new Government is formed.
However, the lack of collective political will on the part
of the political leaders to address the reforms necessary
for progress on the EU path has caused a standstill in
the European integration process. It is imperative that
we find a way to overcome the gridlock in Bosnia and
Herzegovina's European integration process so that the
Stabilization and Association Agreement can enter into
force and open the way for the country's EU candidate
status.

With that in mind, Croatia has put forward a proposal
for a tailor-made approach to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
EU integration process. That does not mean minimizing
the criteria, but rather helping the country to meet all
of them through keeping its EU integration process
tangible and feasible. In that respect, the preconditions
for starting an EU-oriented process become an integral
part of the integration process, which carries with it
a transformative power that gradually increases the
stability and functionality of the State.

To that effect, we are in line with the recent
initiative put forward by the Foreign Ministers of
Germany and United Kingdom. We fully support their
approach for giving the necessary impulse to restarting
the reform process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
deem it especially important that the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina make long-term, irrevocable
written commitments to implementing the necessary
reforms with the objective of making Bosnia and
Herzegovina ready for the EU accession process.
Those commitments should become part of the new
Government's programme and approved by Bosnia and
Herzegovina's Parliament.

Croatia also believes that the intensification of the
NATO integration process is of great importance for the
stability and security of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
are hopeful that new Government will invest additional
efforts in order to fulfil the necessary conditions for the
activation of the NATO membership action plan.

Croatia continues to support the executive mandate
of Operation Althea of the Eureopean Union-led
peacekeeping force. Operation Althea is a vital
mechanism for the prevention of potential instability
in the situation, which may, as we have already
witnessed, easily and rapidly slide into violence. It is
also an important tool in security capacity-building and
training.

We regret that the additional protocol to the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina, legally required after Croatia's
accession to the EU, has not yet been concluded. We
particularly regret the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina
does not accept the negotiating principle on the basis of
traditional trade. We therefore urge the newly elected
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to come to
a viable and sustainable agreement on this matter.

Finally, allow me to say that Bosnia and Herzegovina
calls for our attention and unquestionably deserves it. It
is worth reminding ourselves how important the country
is for Europe. I would therefore like to conclude by
reiterating Croatia's readiness to continue to cooperate
closely with our neighbour on all issues and to provide
Bosnia and Herzegovina with strong and continuous
political, technical and other support required in the
process of building a better future.

