Mr. Williams: It is late in the afternoon, and I
will not keep my colleagues for long. But I am grateful
to the Council for giving me the opportunity to say a
few more words.

First, let me say how grateful I am for the
comments that have been made about me personally,
particularly with regard to my work on Council
resolution 1701 (2006) and, more recently, as United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process. I deeply appreciated those remarks, which
came from very many delegations.

With regard to the first Security Council
resolution, resolution 1701 (2006), I would like to take
this opportunity to commend the commitment of both
Governments - the Government of Israel and the
Government of Lebanon - to that resolution. I think
both have worked extremely hard to avoid any renewal
of hostilities along their common border. And it is only
because of that commitment that the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon has been able to operate in
southern Lebanon and to provide security on Israel's
northern border - security that has been elusive for
very many years, if not decades.

Last Friday, before I left Israel at the end of
another regional tour, my last conversation was with
Karnit Goldwasser, the wife of one of the two abducted
Israeli soldiers. Members will recall that the cause of
the war last summer was the abduction of those
soldiers, Ehud Goldwasser and Eldad Regev. I have to
say with deep personal regret - because I have made
very considerable efforts in this regard - that, more
than 13 months after their abduction, we still cannot
establish proof of life. I do not even say the release and
repatriation of the prisoners; I say proof of life. And I
urge those Member States that have relations with
Hizbollah to urge that group to meet the basic
humanitarian standard that proof of life of prisoners
should always be presented.
17

I am sad to be leaving the United Nations. That
sadness is diminished by the fact that, throughout this
long debate, signs of hope were alluded to by
delegations from all corners of the globe: the
appointment of Tony Blair as Quartet Special Envoy;
the meeting called by the United States for November
this year; the Arab Peace Initiative, which stemmed
from the summit held in Riyadh in March; and, perhaps
above all, the dialogue that has been taking place
between Prime Minister and President Abbas, with the
most recent meeting having taken place yesterday. I
think all of these give us hope that, with good will and
18

political courage - and it will require real political
courage - we may be able to move forward on the
Israeli-Palestinian peace track and towards a just and
comprehensive peace throughout the region.

