Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Pending the long-awaited
Quartet parameters for peace negotiations in the
Middle East, Arab leaders, including the Palestinians,
have welcomed as constructive elements the lines
drawn by President Obama last May. While they
continue to support holding an international conference
on the Middle East in Moscow, they also welcome the
recent French initiative to host another international
conference in Paris. But this Arab attitude has once
more met with Mr. Netanyahu's reiteration of his
resounding four "no's": no freeze on settlements; no
return to the 1967 borders; no negotiations over the
future status of Jerusalem; and no right of return for
Palestinian refugees.

The Palestinians have been accused of seeking
recognition of statehood and membership of the United
Nations as an alternative to negotiations. But the
reality is that those negotiations have been non-existent
since September 2010, when the Israeli Government
failed to renew the settlement freeze, partial though it
was.

Moreover, in view of Mr. Netanyahu's four
"no's" obstinately undermining any possible significant
outcome, at best such negotiations could lead only to
yet another round of frustrating negotiations.

However, hoping against hope, President
Mahmoud Abbas is indeed worthy of praise for having
steadfastly reiterated, just three days ago, that the
Palestinians would continue to opt for negotiations
over any other path, including at the United Nations.
President Abbas is right, as there can be no
comprehensive solution without genuine negotiations
on final status issues, including border-related issues,
security arrangements, the future of settlements, the
status of Jerusalem, the return of refugees and water-
sharing. However, it should be noted that statehood
was never among those issues, and the reason for that
is very simple. Statehood is but an expression of the
right of self-determination, and self-determination is
part of the inalienable rights of people. An inalienable
right is by definition a right that can be neither
surrendered nor negotiated. In the United Nations
system, the Palestinians' inalienable right to self-
determination was first recognized by the General
Assembly in its resolution 3236 (XXIX), of 1974, and,
since then, has been reaffirmed every year by an
overwhelming majority of the members of the
Assembly.

The question has sometimes been asked as to
whether Palestine fulfils the requirements of statehood.
Under international law, the test of whether an entity
claiming to be a State is, in fact, a State remains
whether such an entity meets the requirements of
statehood as defined in the 1933 Montevideo
Convention on the Rights and Duties of States.

The first criterion is that of a permanent
population. It is our guess that no one here still
questions the existence of a Palestinian people. Both its
existence and its inalienable rights as a people have
long been recognized by our Organization.

The second criterion is that of a defined territory.
For the Palestinian leadership, the territory of the State
of Palestine comprises the well-known Gaza Strip and
West Bank, which was occupied by Israel in 1967, and
whose final borders could be subject to mutually
agreed-upon adjustments by both the Palestinians and
the Israelis. The fact that the territory's final borders
are not confirmed is no impediment to statehood, as
many States' borders have undergone changes or have
been challenged without their statehood being affected,
as noted by the International Court of Justice in other
cases.

The third criterion is that of government. The
position of the international community is that the
condition of proper institutions for self-governance has
now been fulfilled. On this condition of statehood, the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Serry, who is here with us
today, concluded in his report to the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians meeting in Brussels on
13 April that Palestinian "governmental functions are
now sufficient for a functioning government of a
State"; we heard him repeat this earlier today in this
Chamber. That conclusion was underscored by
concurring World Bank and International Monetary
Fund (IMF) reports.

The fourth and final criterion is the capacity to
enter into relations with other States. Such a capacity
is, obviously, evidenced by the fact that Palestinian
embassies and missions operate in more than 100
countries.

Palestine therefore meets all four criteria of
statehood. However, it is an occupied State, and it is
our duty to help it put an end to occupation and achieve
independence.

It has also been asked whether the Palestinian
quest for recognition of statehood and United Nations
membership violates previous Palestinian-Israeli
agreements. First, the basis of Palestinian statehood
precedes any Palestinian-Israeli agreement and cannot
therefore be logically or practically in violation of
them. As a matter of fact, Palestinian statehood is
rooted in General Assembly resolution 181 (II), of
1947, which divided Palestine into two States and has
often been labelled "the birth certificate of Israel".
Based on that resolution, the Palestinian leadership
proclaimed, during an extraordinary meeting of the
Palestinian National Council held in Algiers, the birth
of the State of Palestine in 1988, that is, five years
prior to the Oslo accords, the first Palestinian-Israeli
agreement.

Secondly, rather than considering the fulfilment
of Palestinian statehood as contradictory to or
incompatible with the peace process that started with
the Oslo accords, the international community
endorsed the two-State solution in the road map and in
Security Council resolution 1850 (2008) and continued
to encourage the Palestinians to consolidate and
strengthen their Government and national institutions.

Seeking recognition of statehood has sometimes
been referred to as a unilateral move. Could seeking
such recognition and applying for membership in the
United Nations, as announced by the Palestinian
leadership and supported by the Group of Arab States,
qualify as a unilateral move?
Obviously, giving full legal effect in the United
Nations system to the recognition by the majority of its
Members of the State of Palestine can by no means
qualify as a unilateral act. That would simply reflect
the expression of the collective will of the vast
majority of the Members of the United Nations, which,
in turn, is the most multilateral of forums in the
international system.

Unilateral actions continue, however, to be taken
on the ground and to jeopardize not only the
resumption of the much-hoped-for negotiations but
also the viability of the two-State solution. The
continuous building of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, the demolition of Palestinian
houses, the eviction of Palestinians from their ancestral
homes and the confiscation of their lands, as well as
the building of the infamous Wall by the Israeli
occupying forces are not, to the best of our knowledge,
carried out with the consent of their victims, but are,
par excellence, unilateral acts. These are the unilateral
and illegitimate acts that must be stopped.

Seeking recognition for the State of Palestine and
granting it full membership in the United Nations is not
about delegitimizing Israel. It is about upholding a
legitimate right of the Palestinians and, yes,
delegitimizing Israel's decades-long occupation.

To those who are still reluctant to join us in such
an endeavour, allow me to say: do not blame the
victims, but support their quest for dignity. To reap
peace, invest in justice. Recognize the State of
Palestine. Help it achieve independence.

