Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation learned
with dismay of the disturbing developments in Lebanon
over the weekend. We consider the recent attacks on
Lebanon by Israel as a clear violation of the principles of
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Lebanon. It is in this light that my
delegation fully endorsed the request by the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon and by the Arab League for the
convening of this urgent meeting of the Security Council,
in response to the rapidly worsening situation. My
delegation is hopeful that our consideration of the situation
in Lebanon today will lead to the elimination of the
obstacles faced in the peace process.

The land incursion, sea blockade and air attack by
Israel demonstrate once again its utter contempt for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence
of Lebanon. By its action, Israel has violated not only the
most basic principles governing relations between States, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, which we
all espouse, but also international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 425
(1978). We find intolerable this Israeli military action,
which has inflicted casualties among the civilian population,
particularly women and children, and has caused destruction
of the infrastructure and archaeological sites which are
under the protection of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). The
international community, too, must unreservedly condemn
this action.

Clearly, more than principles is involved. Civilians are
being killed and maimed. An exodus of hundreds of
thousands of Lebanese, including women and children, has
been reported. We have condemned such policies when
they have occurred elsewhere, most recently in the Balkans
and in Africa. Lebanon should therefore be no exception.
The concerns expressed during the Council's earlier
deliberation on the fate of innocent civilians languishing
under the Israeli siege and strangulation of Palestinian
territory similarly applies with regard to the situation in
Lebanon. The ordinary Lebanese, whose concern is
merely to escape the decades of conflict and violence
which have ravaged their land, must not be punished
collectively for the actions of those over whom they have
little or no control.

In spite of repeated Israeli declarations that the
civilian population is not the intended target, the facts
show that it is precisely they who are the greatest victims.
The massive dislocation of the population threatens the
stability not only of Lebanon - which is in the process
of rebuilding and reconstructing the country after decades
of civil war and devastation - but also of the Middle
East region. It is therefore imperative that emergency
relief operations be put in place in order to alleviate the
sufferings of the civilian population.

Over the past few years the international community
has witnessed significant progress in the Middle East
peace process, particularly in the Palestinian-Israeli track
of negotiations. Indonesia has on many occasions
expressed its principled position on the need for similar
progress in the Syrian-Israeli and Lebanese-Israeli tracks,
leading to a comprehensive and just settlement in the
Middle East, based on Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978). This most recent
Israeli military action against Lebanon, like those before
it, cannot but be in total contradiction of the aims and
objectives of the peace process. Moreover, we seriously
doubt whether such action will in fact have its intended
effect and bring about a solution to the problem. It is
imperative, therefore, that the military action to be put to
an immediate end.

At this most critical juncture in the peace process, all
the parties concerned must place the interest of peace in
the region above any other more transient and narrow
interests. Without such a vision, the vicious cycle of
violence and conflict in the Middle East, would be
renewed. An abrupt escalation of aggressive actions and
the prospect of more strife and turmoil in an already
volatile region cannot but lead to a crisis of far greater
proportions, posing dangerous consequences to the Middle
East peace process as a whole. My delegation therefore
calls upon Israel to cease immediately its military action
against Lebanon and to withdraw all reinforcements, as its
acts constitute a clear violation of the principles of the
United Nations Charter, international law and relevant
Security Council resolutions.

 

Finally, bearing in mind the potential for the escalation
of recent events into a crisis, my delegation shares the view
that the Council should remain seized of this matter so long
as the Israeli military action has not been halted. It is our
earnest hope that our meeting today will provide the
necessary impetus towards this end.

