Mr. ngowe (Botswana): The United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) has played a
pivotal role in preventing the spread of the war into the
southern region of the Balkans. UNPREDEP has thus been
a major success as the first United Nations experiment in
preventive diplomacy and it has contributed in no small
measure to the stabilization of the international political
situation in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

The recent positive political developments in the
Balkans have minimized threats to the security of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Under normal
circumstances, UNPREDEP would be winding up its
mandate in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
We are, however, addressing the future of the mandate of
a peace-keeping operation in a very volatile region. The
peace that has been engendered through the Dayton
arrangements has not yet reached the stage of
irreversibility. In other words, the security of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is intertwined with
stability in the rest of the former Yugoslavia. As the
Secretary-General rightly points out in his report, peace
and stability within the borders of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia are still very much dependent on
developments in the rest of the former Yugoslavia. Thus,
the people of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
still have legitimate concerns about threats to the security
of their country and would really feel abandoned by the
international community if the mandate of UNPREDEP
were to be altered at this stage.

The mandate of UNPREDEP should be extended so
that it coincides, to the extent possible, with the end of
the mandate of the Implementation Force (IFOR), to
which it is closely linked. At that stage, it would be much
clearer whether or not the peace process in the former
Yugoslavia would continue to hold. If the situation were
to be stable enough and the peace process appeared
irreversible, the people of the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia would be more confident about the future,
and the mandate of UNPREDEP could then be adjusted
and ultimately terminated.

We are the last to advocate the permanent stationing
of United Nations forces in any country. Our preference
is that a United Nations peace-keeping mission should do
its job and depart at the earliest opportunity, but we are
not convinced that now is the time to leave in the case of
UNPREDEP. We believe UNPREDEP still has a role to
play in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and
it should therefore remain in that country with the current
force strength and composition so that it can continue the
good work it has been doing in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.

We are not oblivious of the financial crisis with
which the United Nations is faced. It is therefore
important that every effort should be made to use the
scarce resources in the most rational manner. We are
confident that the Secretary-General will review the
strength and composition of the Force at reasonable
intervals and advise the Council, as appropriate, if and
when the situation in the region would warrant the
adjustment of the mandate of the mission.

