Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; Ambassador
Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Ambassador Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Ambassador of Belgium and
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), for the comprehensive and detailed briefings
they just delivered. We also welcome the presence of
the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea thanks the
Secretary-General for his eighth comprehensive and
balanced report (S/2019/934) on recent developments
in the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). These
updates are important and certainly clarify key aspects
related to the Iranian nuclear programme.

We agree that the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA), unanimously endorsed by the
Security Council on 20 July 2015, is the faithful result
of the firmness of the international community on
proliferation issues and requires the full and effective
compliance of the signatory parties to achieve its
maximum potential.

We continue to commend the rigour, professionalism
and integrity of the work of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), as the mandated body for
verifying and monitoring the full implementation of
the JCPOA. Its support for the full implementation of
the plan, providing the international community with
its assessments and monitoring in the Islamic Republic
of Iran, in line with resolution 2231 (2015), is an
unequivocal confirmation of its work.

Equatorial Guinea has always considered the
JCPOA as the best option for resolving Iran's nuclear
problem and therefore a sustainable way to reduce some
of the tensions in the Middle East. It is obviously in our
interest to express our concerns about the deterioration
that began 8 May 2018 in relation to this issue. We call
on all the parties concerned to review their positions
and to find some readjustment that will restore the
achievements of dialogue and multilateral diplomacy in
the proliferation regime that was established in 2015.

We are concerned by the IAEA's assertion in
this latest report on the activities announced and
undertaken by the Islamic Republic of Iran to reduce
its commitments under the plan. It is important that
it conclude and confirm the ongoing verifications of
the non-diversion of declared nuclear materials and
assessments with respect to the absence of undeclared
nuclear materials and activities. It is relevant and
necessary that Iran pursue its implementation of the
Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement and
the implementation of the transparency measures
undertaken in the plan.

We agree with the stressed importance of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action and resolution 2231
(2015), which we see as effective and essential tools
for nuclear non-proliferation and for stability in the
Middle East and the world at large. It is therefore the
responsibility of all parties to ensure strict compliance
with the commitments undertaken with respect to
these legal instruments and the restrictive measures
contained in annex B of the resolution.
Before concluding, we reiterate our confidence
in diplomatic efforts to find a sustainable solution to
this long-standing conflict, the consequences of which
threaten Iran's economic stability and adversely affect
the well-being of its nation.

