Mr. Effendi (Indonesia): At the outset, the
Indonesian delegation would like to express its
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and the members of
the Council for convening this meeting at a critical
juncture for the African continent. Our deliberations today
reflect the utmost importance that the international
community accords to issues concerning Africa,
particularly those relating to security and economic and
social development. It provides a unique opportunity to
take stock of the significant achievements and progress
made by the African people over the last few years and
concurrently to focus attention on the need for enhanced
international cooperation to establish on the continent a
partnership with the rest of the world based on mutual
benefit and prosperity.

Before proceeding further, I should like to express
our sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report, entitled "The causes of conflict and
the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa", which in paragraph 107 contains
recommendations and proposals

 

"to reduce conflict and in time help to build a strong
and durable peace".

It is expected to generate action from the international
community to establish peace and prosperity in Africa.
Equally important is that it envisions intensified cooperation
and closer coordination between the United Nations and
regional organizations in Africa, thus providing greater
momentum for the realization of stability and sustainable
development for Africa and its people.

During the past years the African continent has
undergone profound change and transition. Colonization and
apartheid have successfully been relegated to the dark
chapter of history. We rejoiced when Namibia succeeded in
its long struggle for independence and apartheid was
forever eradicated in South Africa, thereby bolstering hopes
and optimism that a new era was unfolding on the
continent. Today, at the threshold of the next millennium,
Africa stands closer to attaining its goal of stable peace and
economic prosperity. It is therefore gratifying to note in the
introduction to the report of the Secretary-General that

"Africa as a whole has begun to make significant
economic and political progress" and "efforts to break
with the patterns of the past are at last beginning to
succeed."

As a vast continent with abundant natural resources and
industrious people, Africa holds great untapped potential for
development and is a vital force to be reckoned with in the
global markets.

For such prosperity to flourish and grow there must be
an environment of peace and security. In this context, my
delegation views with concern the conflicts taking place in
some parts of Africa that have torn the very fabric of its
society, resulting in immense suffering for its people. It is
our fervent hope that the long and relentless efforts of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the United
Nations will bring the concerned parties together to settle
their disputes in a peaceful and amicable manner through
dialogue and negotiations. We therefore commend the
efforts of the OAU, which has long been at the helm of all
concerted endeavours to resolve conflicts through peaceful
means. Over the past three decades, the OAU has continued
to be the leading and most indispensable organization
through which the African nations and their peoples have
been able to address crisis situations. There is much that the
OAU and the United Nations can achieve when both
Organizations work in concert to remove obstacles
endangering the peace and thereby facilitate the peace
process. We believe that such a partnership of cooperation
can be built within the framework of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

In this regard we fully concur with the Secretary-
General's observation that the international community
has a crucial role to play in nurturing the ongoing peace
process by extending assistance to provide short-term
stability and providing various inducements while the
parties to the conflict work towards long-term
reconciliation and the reconstruction of their societies. At
the same time, my delegation underscores the importance
of the African countries, like all other countries, being
masters of their own destiny in choosing the road map to
development that is fully in accord with the sacrosanct
principles of respect for the sovereignty of nations and
strict adherence to the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of other States.

It is clearly evident that to succeed in building
frameworks for enduring peace and stability on the
African continent, the international community must work
together with the African countries to strengthen the
continent's social and economic foundations. Abject
poverty, illiteracy and hunger only breed despair and
resentment. Only through increased economic
development and generalized improvement in standards of
living will people gain a vested interest in working
towards peaceful resolutions of their differences. It is no
longer sufficient for the international community to
convene and merely express empathy and support for the
African countries without providing concrete
contributions. If indeed there is a genuine desire to avoid
the need for emergency humanitarian assistance or to
avoid costly peacekeeping and peacemaking operations -
as well as to give meaning to the expressions of concern
so often voiced - then comprehensive, concerted and
concrete action on economic development cooperation
must be taken. Anything less will result in a loss of
credibility.

In that connection, the initiative announced by the
Secretary-General, in collaboration with the Secretary-
General of the OAU, to promote large-scale long-term
investment in growth-promoting sectors in Africa is a
positive and constructive step forward. Clearly, new
efforts need to be made to attract foreign direct
investment in Africa, which accounted for less than 5 per
cent of the overall direct investment in the developing
countries in 1996. Those African countries that have, in
the framework of their economic reform programmes,
worked vigorously to establish a favourable climate for

 

attracting private, domestic and foreign direct investment
should receive a positive response and serve as models for
replication.

At the same time, steps must be taken by the
developed countries to increase market access for African
exports through a reduction of trade barriers. As the
sustained economic growth of the continent will depend
largely on export-led growth, we believe it appropriate for
the World Trade Organization to closely monitor the critical
situation and to work with all concerned to alleviate all
obstacles. In the near term, the continuing importance of
official development assistance, particularly in meeting the
resource requirements of the low-income countries, needs
to be strongly underscored. The global decline in official
development assistance, as market forces are increasingly
left as the determining factor, must be reversed. A
constructive global partnership to support the development
efforts of the developing countries, particularly the least
developed, needs to be re-established. This is in the
interests of all members of the international community, not
only aid-recipient countries. It is no longer acceptable for
developing countries to continually call for official
development assistance commitments to be fulfilled, only
to be ignored. We must get off that treadmill and all take
a serious look at the benefits of development aid and begin
to restore the flow of international development assistance.

Concurrently, vigorous efforts must be taken to finally
resolve the unsustainable debt burdens of the African
countries. It is a travesty for the African countries to
continue to pay more than 17 per cent of their total export
earnings to donors and commercial lenders while many
struggle to meet the most basic needs of their people.
Maintaining the status quo is unacceptable. Indonesia
therefore supports the OAU's call for an international
agreement to clear the debt stock of the poorest countries
in Africa. This would represent an important step in the
effort to revitalize the economic performance of these
countries and put them back on the path of growth.
Likewise, we see merit in the proposal for creditor
countries to convert into grants the remaining official
bilateral debt of the poorest countries, and for financial
institutions to significantly ease and speed access to
facilities, as well as to provide sufficient resources for
economic growth and social development for the heavily
indebted poor nations.

South-South cooperation also holds promise for
supporting the development objectives in Africa, as many
developing countries are clearly in a position to provide
assistance and capacity-building. Such assistance could be
developed in the areas of trade promotion and
strengthening food production and distribution, to name
but a few. This also provides a good opportunity to draw
on the experiences of the African countries and to
determine priorities. The countries of the South can ill
afford to miss this opportunity to act in solidarity and to
contribute to lasting solutions to their common problems.

In the long and arduous struggle for political
freedom, Africa has shown great resilience and courage.
So, too, at the present time, the spirit of Africa can break
the chains of underdevelopment, and Africa can gain its
rightful place as a peaceful, harmonious and prosperous
continent. But in this era of interdependence and
globalization it cannot go it alone. Africa deserves the
attention of the international community. There is
therefore an urgent need for action on the part of the
United Nations and the international community. In this
respect, we commend the report of the Secretary-General,
which is a step in the right direction. Let us therefore
reaffirm our commitment to the African nations to secure
lasting peace and security and promote in earnest
international cooperation in which strong economies can
be built anew to sustain the peoples of Africa in a self-
reliant and sustainable manner. It is only through our
collective efforts that the true destiny of this great
continent can be successfully fulfilled.

As for Indonesia, although it, too, is a developing
country with economic problems of its own, it is firmly
committed to assisting its partners in Africa in achieving
their vision of a peaceful and prosperous Africa.
Indonesia and African countries have long enjoyed close
and fraternal relations, having their roots in the distant
past, the seeds of which were first sown in Bandung in
1955. That historic forum was the precursor to the
establishment of the Non-Aligned Movement, which
charted the way not only for Asia and Africa but also for
the future of mankind as a whole. The non-aligned
countries have since then adopted policies through which
they have assiduously sought to promote and consolidate
their hard-won independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity and the social and economic uplift of their
peoples. These remain as valid today as they were more
than four decades ago.

Indonesia's commitment to its brothers and sisters in
Africa over the past few years is reflected in, among
other things, Indonesia's support of African development
during its chairmanship of the Non-Aligned Movement,
the convening in Indonesia of the Asia-Africa Forum, our
participation in such forums as the United Nations New

 

Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s
(UN-NADAF) and support for the United Nations System-
wide Special Initiative on Africa, as well the strong
bilateral cooperation that Indonesia maintains in various
parts of the continent. Next year Indonesia will convene a
summit-level meeting on South-South cooperation, to be
held in Jakarta. It is our hope that such a summit-level
meeting will result in a clear and determined path for the
South into the twenty-first century, from which it can meet
the challenges of globalization and emerge from the socio-
economic exclusion of the past.

