Mr. Yardley (Australia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. I also thank
all today's briefers.

Afghanistan continues to experience unacceptable
levels of violence. With 3,804 reported civilian deaths
in 2018, that is more than any other year on record. Since
then scores more lives have been lost to the conflict,
including civilians and Afghan security forces trying
to protect their country against terror and insurgency.

Australia remains firm in its support of all efforts
to achieve peace in Afghanistan. We appreciate the
efforts made by United States Special Representative
Khalilzad to engage in meaningful negotiations
with the Taliban. The past year has seen significant
diplomatic investment to end the long-running conflict
in Afghanistan. In recent days, many hoped such
efforts would result in a historic deal to de-escalate the
conflict and lay the foundations for direct intra-Afghan
peace talks.

We call on the Taliban to immediately halt
the violence against civilians and to agree to a
comprehensive ceasefire as the basis for intra-Afghan
negotiations. We must continue to prioritize diplomacy
and other peaceful means to end the conflict.

Afghan and international human rights advocates
have called for the full protection of the rights of
Afghan women. That must include access to health
care, education, employment and freedom of movement
and addressing gender-based violence. Many Afghan
women are calling for transitionaljustice, basic services
and room to continue the long journey to equality.

We applaud all those who stand up for these rights.
Australia will continue to advocate strongly for the full
protection of Afghan women and girls.

We know that the most durable peace agreements
are inclusive and are able to address the root causes of
conflict by engaging all citizens in a process of change.
That is a long-term endeavour and will require the
support of the international community.

The inclusion of women in the intra-Afghan
peace dialogue is an important moment, including for
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security.
Women must have the right to speak for themselves at
home and in international forums, including in peace
discussions. Ensuring the representation of Afghan
women in negotiations would be the beginning of a
truly inclusive peace process.

Despite the ongoing challenges, Australia welcomes
the significant gains that Afghanistan has made over
the past 18 years, such as the tenfold increase in school
enrolment, the 20-year increase in life expectancy
and the fivefold increase in gross domestic product
per capita.

We must work together to protect those gains. It
is not for the sake of a diplomatic agreement but for
the gains made by ordinary Afghans that we must
collectively pursue peace in Afghanistan.

