Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank Prosecutor Luis Moreno-
Ocampo for his presence at this meeting and for his
valuable, precise and detailed briefing to the Security
Council on the activities carried out by his Office
pursuant to the relevant section of resolution 1970
(2011).

The drafters of the Statue of the Court, among
whom Colombia is pleased to count itself, were aware
that the new judicial body being created could not
operate in a vacuum and that, in certain circumstances,
the task of maintaining international peace and security
could overlap with the implementation of the principle
of international criminal responsibility and the need to
bring to justice those responsible for serious crimes of
an international nature. That is why the Statute grants
the Security Council the right to refer a situation to the
Court in which one or more crimes under its
jurisdiction are alleged to have been committed.

In resolution 1970 (2011), the Council reaffirmed
several important concepts that are relevant to today's
debate, including a determination that the widespread
and systematic attacks carried out against the civilian
population in Libya may constitute crimes against

humanity. The investigation has uncovered evidence of
systematic armed repression resulting in hundreds of
victims, illegal arrests, torture and sexual violence. The
Council also stressed that all those responsible for, or
complicit in, attacks against the civilian population,
including aerial and naval attacks, must face the
consequences of their actions.

My Government believes that much of the added
value of the Security Council as the body bearing the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security lies in its credibility,
which is necessarily dependent on the effective
implementation of its decisions. In this context, we
believe that the work being carried out by the
International Criminal Court with regard to the
situation in Libya is of the utmost importance for
ensuring the full and effective implementation of
resolution 1970 (2011), and thus deserves our full
support. We are here owing to a decision adopted by
the Council under Article 40 of the Charter, which
clearly is binding in nature vis-a-vis all States
Members of the Organization.

I wish to emphasize that the report provided to
the Council last week and the additional information
provided today by Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo show
that the Court and the Prosecutor's Office have been
particularly diligent with regard to the practical
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011).

Respect for international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights provide the basic
channels for consolidating democratic societies
governed by the rule of law - societies acting within a
system guided by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the standards of
international law.

