Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I welcome the participation of Foreign
Minister Aminu Bashir Wali of Nigeria as President of
the Security Council at this meeting, which reaffirms
the importance of security sector reform to African
countries.

We are considering security sector reform in the
context of post-conflict peacebuilding efforts aimed
at achieving lasting peace and at effectively reducing
crisis-related tensions in order to prevent the recurrence
of armed conflict. It is the sovereign right of national
Governments to undertake reforms in that sector.
International assistance, including through the United
Nations, must be provided with the concurrence of the
host country.

Security sector reform is a complex and
multifaceted process. Even minimal success in early
stages of reform can strengthen the trust of citizens
in their authorities, create conditions conducive to the
return of the population to normal life, and establish
the preconditions for lasting peace. Moreover, broad
popular support for comprehensive reforms undertaken
by the authorities and their security forces can play a
decisive role in national reconciliation.

Countries emerging from conflict or that have
recently overcome the critical phase of a crisis often
have limited resources to ensure security. That is
why the assistance of the international community
is so necessary. We believe that, given the great
importance of and frequent lack of alternatives to
such assistance to national authorities in security
sector reform, we must recall the essential nature of
such fundamental principles as the agreement of the
recipient States and respect for national sovereignty
and political independence. Governments themselves
must define the priorities for carrying out such reforms,
coordinate their implementation and bear the primary
responsibility for the outcome. We also must avoid
excessive external pressure and the imposition on the
recipient State of the essential vision for the reform
process. Strong mentoring, bording on intervention in
the internal affairs of a State, can only do harm.

As we have seen from experience, it is critically
important to take into account the specific country
situation in providing assistance to States. Ignoring
such specifities while seeking to apply a universal
approach to reform in such an important area can
only lead to the failure of such ready-made formulas,
including in the form of recurring conflict situations,
as we are seeing, for example in the Central African
Republic and South Sudan.

Without a doubt, the United Nations and, first and
foremost, its peacebuilding missions have a central
role to play in the provision of assistance to post-
conflict countries by the international community.
As an objective factor, the Security Council has been
assigning multidimensional mandates, including
peacebuilding tasks, to peacekeeping operations on a
more frequent basis. Peacekeepers play an important
role in supporting security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the rehabilitation of
law enforcement agencies, and the restoration of the
rule of law as a whole.

Another body that plays an important role in post-
conflict reconstruction, and security sector reform
in particular, is the Peacebuilding Commission. The
development of a balanced and comprehensive approach
to the coordination of mutually complementary advisory
and financial support in post-conflict countries
significantly increases the stability, accountability
and professionalism of national security structures.
Moreover, we must not underestimate the potential of
the Peacebuilding Fund as a flexible instrument for
financing security sector reform projects.

The format of cooperation among the States of a
given region, as well as with regional and subregional
organizations, also demonstrates strong potential
for security sector reform. Broad exchanges of best
practices among them, as well as the provision of
timely financial support, will enable the more effective
resolution of existing and emerging issues in the reform
process. A clear example of such regional cooperation
is that of Africa and the activities of the African Union.

We thank the delegation of Nigeria for its
coordination of work on the draft resolution on this
issue, and we support its adoption.

