Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun,
and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
Burundi configuration, our colleague Ambassador Jiirg
Lauber, for their respective briefings.

Uruguay reiterates its concern at the current state
of affairs in Burundi, which is still picking up the
pieces from the 2015 electoral crisis and continues to
face a host of further challenges, in particular serious
and persistent violations and abuses of human rights,
an economic slowdown and the mass displacement of
its population.

Uruguay notes with interest the convening of
the East African Community summit on 20 May, at
which the countries of the region reach reiterated their
commitment to finding a peaceful solution to the crisis
in Burundi. Moreover, during the summit, the facilitator
of the inter-Burundian dialogue, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa,
presented a road map containing a series of steps aimed
at ending the current stalemate in the political process
and promoting the necessary conditions for transparent,
inclusive and peaceful elections in 2020.

Uruguay therefore urges the countries in the region
to support Burundi in a united and coordinated manner.
Similarly, we urge the Burundian parties to resume
dialogue in good faith so as to ensure the implementation
of the road map proposed by facilitator Mkapa on the
basis of respect for the Arusha Agreement.

Given the deteriorating human rights and security

situation in the country, Uruguay is concerned
that currently, for various reasons, the cooperation
between Burundi on the United Nations is at a low
ebb. We are particularly concerned by the suspension
of cooperation with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and
the further problems encountered in the relationship
between the authorities and the Office of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General in the country.

We believe that it is essential to restore mutual trust
between the Government of Burundi and the United
Nations system, which would make it possible to pool
our efforts to ensure the stability and development of
the country and the well-being of its people. Here we
advocate for fresh engagement between the United
Nations and Burundi, which can take the guise of
specific actions such as the concluding of an agreement
for the renewal of the activities of OHCHR in Burundi.

By the same token, almost one year after the
adoption of resolution 2303 (2016), we call upon the
Government of Burundi to acquiesce to the deployment
of human rights observers and military experts by
the African Union as well as to the deployment of the
United Nations police component, as provided for in
the resolution.

To conclude, we would like to express Uruguay's
support to the recently appointed Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando,
and we wish him every success in his role. We eagerly
await the outcome of his visit to Burundi at the end of
this month. We also pay tribute to the work of the Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, for his
unstinting efforts to build peace in Burundi.

We also look forward to the outcome of the
socioeconomic retreat that is set to take place next
month, which we understand will be a crucial forum
for the Government of Burundi and its international
partners to discuss various modalities for cooperation.

