Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by thanking the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Jamaica and of the Bahamas for their statements. They
shed sobering light on the tragic situation in Haiti,
which is growing in scope and gravity with every
passing hour. Indeed, in recent days the situation in
Haiti has sharply worsened, with half of the country
under the control of rebel forces. There is now a
genuine risk that those forces could soon launch an
assault on the capital and that a blood bath could occur.

Anarchy and violence now prevail in northern
Haiti, down to Port-au-Prince, with looting and a lack
of security. The situation is of particular concern
because it is accompanied by a real humanitarian
disaster: there is a sore lack of all necessities.

If the international community does not take
decisive action, the whole country could well be
plunged into chaos, with all that that implies in terms
of the collapse of State institutions, instability, lack of
security, human tragedy, flows of refugees and the risk
of destabilization in other countries of the region.

The crisis that has engulfed Haiti for several
weeks is clearly political in nature. It could have
been - and still could be - resolved through
negotiation and responsible dialogue among the parties
concerned. At a time when the confrontation between
the President of the Republic and the opposition has
turned into violent conflict, diplomatic efforts towards
a political, constitutional settlement must continue and
be intensified, because there is no alternative to a
negotiated resolution of the crisis.

For that reason, Algeria - which has been
following developments in Haiti with great concern
and which firmly condemns the violence in that
country - has joined the rest of the international
community in supporting the efforts of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) and the Organization of
American States (OAS) aimed at restoring confidence
and promoting dialogue among the parties in
accordance with the three critical principles just
outlined by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jamaica.

Only yesterday, a determined, unanimous
Security Council called on the Government of
President Aristide and the political opposition in Haiti
to accept the CARICOM-OAS plan of action in order
to bring about a peaceful, constitutional resolution of
the crisis. But, while President Aristide has accepted
the Plan of Action, the opposition continues to reject it,
and armed groups strengthen their hold over northern
Haiti and prepare to take the capital by force.

In the face of this deteriorating situation, the
Security Council - while continuing to support the
efforts of CARICOM. and the OAS and urging the
parties to favour dialogue over confrontation - must
urgently consider a variety of options for an
international commitment in Haiti, including an
international force in accordance with the United
Nations Charter. The Council cannot permit Haiti to be
engulfed in chaos or its civilian population to be caught
up in a spiral of violence. It cannot allow the repetition
of a tragedy like those the international community has
powerlessly viewed in the past both in Haiti and
elsewhere.

Given the humanitarian disaster looming in Haiti,
the Organization must also mobilize the assistance that
the Haitian people desperately need in these dire
circumstances, and it must strengthen its presence in
Haiti. Here, we welcome the Secretary-General's
appointment of a Special Adviser for Haiti.

Let me in conclusion pay tribute to CARICOM
and the OAS for their tireless efforts to find a peaceful
resolution of the crisis in Haiti.

