Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I would
also like to join those who have expressed to
Ambassador Shen best wishes for success in his next
mission, wherever that takes him, and we hope to see
him again soon in New York.

Today's debate has confirmed the auspicious
trend towards brevity, which leads me to confine
myself to a few essential points.

The most important thing is to thank you, Sir, for
your brilliant presidency. It was a tremendous success.
You have managed to be efficient while making newly
elected members like us feel at ease in the Council. My
delegation and I sincerely thank you for that.

The Council's work in the month of January was
largely focused on crisis situations in Africa, which is
to be welcomed. The public debate on the situation in
Africa was a success. The presence of the Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity,
Mr. Amara Essy, among us was an important feature.
The presence of ministers of both members and non-
members of the Council was a success. Bulgaria's
Minister for Foreign Affairs greatly regretted not being
able to attend because of an important bilateral
commitment. The Council's meeting enabled us to
exchange ideas on strategies for strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity.

The fight against terrorism rightly occupied a
central place in the Council's activities this month, and
substantial work was carried out by the Committee,
especially on the review of the country reports pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001). In this regard, we would like
to underline the transparent and effective approach of
the work done by the Committee's Bureau, particularly
by the British chairmanship of the Committee. I would
once again like to pay tribute to Sir Jeremy Greenstock
for his remarkable work. The public debate on
terrorism was a clear success, especially due to the
chosen format, which was a positive innovation worth
using on other occasions.

Bulgaria is gratified that the Council reacted
quickly and appropriately to the situation in
Afghanistan. The rapid adoption of resolution 1390
(2002) constitutes a success for the Council and the
international community.

My country welcomes consensus in the Council
on the resolution extending the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia.

In conclusion, I would like to thank you
particularly, Mr. President, for including the issue of
Kosovo on the Council's agenda this month. We are
pleased that the presidency held a public debate. My
country feels it is important that the Council continue
closely following the situation in Kosovo on a regular
basis at a time when the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo is at a critical point in
carrying out its mandate. The recent appointment of
Mr. Michael Steiner as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, given his skill and experience, gives
us hope for the consolidation of peace and stability in
Kosovo.

