Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank the Lebanese presidency for
having organized this debate and allowed us to
participate in it.

I wish to take this opportunity to welcome the
presence of the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Mariano Fernandez
Amunategui. I thank him for his detailed briefing and
wish him the greatest success. He can rest assured of
Spain's full support.

I would also like to fully associate myself with
the statement that will be delivered on behalf of the
European Union. I should now like to make some
remarks in my national capacity.

This is a extremely important moment in Haiti's
recent history. For the first time in its history, there has
been a peaceful transition of power from one
democratically elected President to another, formerly
of the opposition. President Martelly won significant
popular support. The country is hopeful for a change
for the better. It will not be easy. The challenges lying
ahead are enormous and leave no room for delay.

More than four months have passed since
President Martelly took office; yet a prime minister has
still not been appointed and no Government has been
formed. This is hard to understand. We share the hope
expressed by the Special Representative and other
speakers that this situation can be rapidly resolved as
soon as possible, for the country is in need of a
Government that can take decisions and the
international community needs an interlocutor to work
with in implementing those decisions. We urge there to
be constructive institutional dialogue between the
executive and legislative branches. We appeal to the
sense of responsibility of all of those in whom the
Haitian people have placed their trust. The public
interest must prevail.

While the security situation has, fortunately,
remained calm, we all know that this is only a relative
calm given that the signs are not entirely positive. On
the on hand, criminality has continued to grow. On the
other, there is a heightened risk of social unrest
resulting from the socio-economic and political
situation in the country.

As noted in the Secretary-General's most recent
report (S/2011/540), the Haitian National Police is still
not ready to take over full responsibility for internal
security. It is therefore crucial that the pace of the
process of reforming and strengthening the Haitian
National Police be stepped up, both in terms of
personnel and resources.

The humanitarian situation remains fragile. There
are still 634,000 internally displaced persons in the
camps. That is a lot - indeed, too many.
Unfortunately, the pace at which this number was
being reduced has slowed significantly, with only
47,000 returns since March.

Cholera continues to pose a serious threat. In
May and June, there was a spike in the epidemic. The
death rate has gone down, but the incidence could rise.
The total number of cases continues to be very high.

With regard to reconstruction and development, it
is clear what has to be done. Putting it into practice is,
obviously, more complicated. We have a strong basis
for doing so, following the international donors'
conference held in New York last March. First of all,
we must all honour our own pledges. According to the
report of the Secretary-General, as has been previously
mentioned, only 37.8 per cent of the funds promised
for the 2010-2011 biennium have been delivered.

We also have appropriate tools at our disposal,
including the Haiti Interim Reconstruction Commission
and the Haiti Reconstruction Fund. We recently
supported the extension of the Commission's mandate
for another year, until October 2012. We are acutely
aware that interim means temporary. We have
committed to improving its internal functioning and to
creating conditions to allow it to be fully transferred to
Haitian hands as soon as possible.
With regard to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), we share the
assessment of the Secretary-General and support his
recommendation that the Mission's mandate again be
extended for another year, up to 15 October 2012,
while its size is gradually reduced. The reduction
proposed by the Secretary-General seems to us
realistic, as does the proposal that it be partial and
gradual. We would therefore urge the members of the
Council and the Group of Friends to have a favourable
view of these recommendations by the Secretary-
General.

The continuation of the presence of MINUSTAH
in the medium term is necessary, we feel. We know that
some Haitians are asking for its withdrawal so as to
fully recover the sovereignty of their country, and it is
true that some mistakes have been made, both in action
and omission, but they have been isolated and
infrequent. What is important is to correct those
mistakes and to eliminate the factors that allowed them
to take place. We know that the majority of the Haitian
people appreciate the work of MINUSTAH and
value- as do we - the generosity of contributing
countries, the majority of which are Latin American, as
they are best-placed to know the country and its
particularities. I would like to pay them a well-
deserved tribute in the Council.

We applaud the excellent stabilization,
humanitarian, reconstruction and development work
carried out by MINUSTAH in difficult conditions. We
should intensify our efforts to strengthen the rule of
law. Without legal security or judicial and prison
systems that are effective, and without an adequate
revenue collection system, the development of Haiti
will not be sustainable. We have expressed and
reiterate our support for a rule of law compact, as
proposed by the Secretary-General.

Spain's commitment to the Haitian people is solid
and consistent with the values that we hold. We are the
third largest bilateral donor. At the conference held in
New York, Spain committed to contribute to the
reconstruction of the country with $346 million, and
we have already disbursed 68 per cent of this. We
participate in the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission
and we are part of the consultative group of the
Economic and Social Council. We will also be joining
the Advisory Council for Economic Development and
Investment recently created by President Martelly. We
also maintain a police contingent within MINUSTAH.
As I said, our commitment is firm, and we have
repeated this on many occasions, including in the
biannual debates held by this Council. This is what we
told President Martelly during his visit to Spain on
7 and 8 July 2011, his first visit to a foreign country
after his election. Monday will be another opportunity
to tell him this again, during the Haiti partners'
meeting.
