Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Ambassador
Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union, and Ambassador Cardi, Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for
their briefings.

My country fully supports and strictly implements
resolution 2231 (2015), as it is crucial for ensuring the
proper implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA). Kazakhstan attaches great
importance to that historic agreement, which is
reckoned as the most momentous achievement of
multilateral diplomacy in recent decades. We are
pleased that Kazakhstan had direct involvement in that
process and had an impact on its success.

As part of our initiative, we organized two rounds
oftalks in 2003 in Almaty, which paved the way for that
agreement. As part of it, in 2015, Kazakhstan supplied
Iran with natural uranium on commercial terms as
compensation for the removal of low-enriched uranium
from that country, as specified in the JCPOA. We are
ready, should there be any further need, to continue
our supply, in accordance with the requirements of
resolution 2231 (2015) and other documents related to
the uranium-related nuclear programme.

As noted in the third report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/515), the International
Atomic Energy Agency continues to verify and monitor
the Islamic Republic of Iran's implementation of its
nuclear-related obligations. In that regard, we commend
the commitment of Iran to comply with resolution 2231
(2015) and the JCPOA. We would also appreciate more
comprehensive reports dealing with all relevant parts of
resolution 2231 (2015).

As for the allegations in the report relating to the
violations of some of the provisions of annex B of the
resolution, we will expect more detailed information,
as promised in that text. We therefore call for the
transparent and impartial investigation of those
cases. That process requires more active interaction
among the Secretariat, Iran and all interested parties.
Implementing the JCPOA has had a significant impact
on normalizing the situation in the region and beyond.
The Plan of Action will also have a positive effect on
the revitalization of economic activities in the region.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that
Kazakhstan will continue to support and strictly
implement resolution 2231 (2015). Moreover, it affirms
its right to cooperate with Iran within the framework
of the implementation of the JCPOA. We believe that
the implementation of the JCPOA and strict observance
with its obligations by all parties are crucial for
strengthening non-proliferation and regional security.
We stand ready with others to contribute to its further
practical realization. Finally, we believe that the Security
Council, as a guarantor of international peace and
security, should always insist on full compliance, and
Kazakhstan will play its part in that collective action.

