Mr. Guehenno: It is almost five years ago to the
day that the Security Council adopted resolution 1308
(2000). To be frank, some of us initially wondered
whether it belonged on the agenda of the Security
Council. But that landmark resolution provided the jolt
that we desperately needed. I would like to
acknowledge the role of Ambassador Holbrooke in
putting this issue on the map. In retrospect, at that time
AIDS was not sufficiently on the radar of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. It deserved to
be. It most certainly is now.

Conflict and post-conflict environments are high-
risk areas for the spread of HIV. Since the adoption of
resolution 1308 (2000), we have developed a
comprehensive strategy to reduce the risk of
peacekeepers contracting or transmitting the virus
while on mission. That strategy has five key elements:
first, the creation of specific capacity within missions
to address AIDS; second, ensuring the availability of
condoms and observing universal medical precautions;
third, the development of voluntary counselling and
testing capacities in missions; fourth, establishing
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms; and fifth,
setting up projects for outreach to local communities
and mainstreaming the issue of AIDS into mission
mandates.

I welcome the opportunity to brief the Council
today on the concrete progress that has been achieved
in all five of those areas. Before doing so, however, I
must acknowledge with sincere gratitude the critical
technical and advisory support that Dr. Piot and his
team at the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) continue to provide the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), both
at Headquarters and in the field. Our programmes
would not be where they are today without their
assistance. In fact, DPKO has been and remains
dependent on many partners throughout the United
Nations system and on host communities to achieve
progress.

Perhaps the most essential partners, however, are
the 105 countries that currently contribute uniformed
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping operations
around the world. The support of Member States is a
determining factor in the success of our programmes.
That is true of donor countries as well. In that regard, I
wish to express my gratitude to Denmark and the
United Kingdom for their contributions to the
HIV/AIDS Trust Fund.

The assistance we have received could not have
been more timely, given that the number of United
Nations peacekeepers deployed worldwide continues to
surge. There are over 66,000 uniformed personnel and
more than 13,000 international and national civilians
serving in 17 peacekeeping and related field
operations. That is a significant number of people who,
at any given time, need to be advised and trained on
how to do their part in the fight against AIDS. It is a
serious challenge, but I think we have made major
progress.

(spoke in French)

When I reported to the Council two years ago on
resolution 1308 (2000), I made a commitment to
deploy AIDS advisers to all major peacekeeping
operations. At that time, there were just four AIDS
advisers. We now have 10, supported by United
Nations Volunteers and professionals of the host
countries, and smaller missions have designated focal
points. Together, those advisers and focal points form a
valuable network linking all peacekeeping operations.

DPKO and UNAIDS carried out joint missions to
Haiti and the Sudan to establish AIDS awareness
programmes in advance of major deployments of
troops and civilian personnel. That set a new
precedent, which we hope will become the norm in the
future.

Since 2003, UNAIDS has seconded an AIDS
policy adviser to DPKO to provide policy guidance and
coordinate the various mission initiatives. At the end of
this year the post will be financed through the DPKO
budget, and I would like to thank Member States for
supporting its creation.

Awareness-training is central to DPKO's strategy.
We work closely with troop-contributing countries and
UNAIDS to establish at least a basic level of awareness
of AIDS among all those who work in peacekeeping
operations. AIDS awareness-training activities are now
routinely included in all "train the trainer" courses, in
military observer programmes and in other sessions
organized and sponsored by DPKO to enhance national
peacekeeping capabilities. This year, for example, the
issue of AIDS was an important part of recent senior
management seminars held in Ghana, India and Russia
for high-ranking police officers from numerous
Member States.

AIDS awareness training is also central to pre-
deployment training for mission-specific personnel,
such as that provided to Guatemalan and Peruvian
peacekeepers currently being deployed to Haiti, to
Rwandan peacekeepers being deployed to Sudan and to
African Union soldiers who served under the AU in
Burundi before becoming United Nations peacekeepers
there. The question of AIDS is also part of induction
training for all civilian personnel.

We recently revised our AIDS training module to
ensure that the important issues of gender, codes of
conduct and sexual abuse are fully reflected.
Our strategy has also been to reinforce support
for this issue and mobilize all personnel within DPKO
to deal with it. AIDS is high on the agenda of the
conference of all our force commanders from around
the world scheduled for next week, and it will
henceforth be part of the senior leadership training for
those serving in peacekeeping operations. In addition,
we have created modules tailored for specific
occupational groups, such as public information
officers and stress counsellors who serve in the most
difficult missions.

Within missions, AIDS advisers coordinate with
training cells to provide training and ongoing
awareness training to troops, military observers,
civilian police and civilian staff. All this must keep up
with rotations; we must ensure that each new
contingent receives training.

Missions also ensure the availability of male and
female condoms. Post-exposure prevention kits are
available at our medical facilities in case of exposure
to HIV. Screened blood supplies have long been part of
our basic medical equipment.

(spoke in English)

But what impact do we actually make? How do
we measure the effectiveness of our training
programmes? To find some answers, DPKO piloted an
HIV/AIDS knowledge, attitude and practice survey in
Liberia during May and June this year, in collaboration
with the United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention and UNAIDS. More than 660 uniformed
peacekeepers were randomly selected and individually
interviewed. The sample included military observers,
civilian police and troops of all ranks, from privates to
colonels, from eight different contingents. The results
are currently being analysed, but I would like to share
a few preliminary findings.

Awareness was generally high. For instance, over
94 per cent correctly stated, unprompted, two of the
key ways that HIV is transmitted: through unprotected
sex and exposure to infected blood. The vast majority,
over 87 per cent, of those who had been in mission for
at least a month had received AIDS awareness training
since their arrival.

However, one disappointing finding was that only
a small number had received training from within their
battalions or detachments, and less than two per cent
had been briefed on AIDS by their commanding
officers while in the mission area. The support of the
command structure is crucial to any efforts to
mainstream AIDS training, and I take this opportunity
to urge troop-contributing countries to ensure that
AIDS awareness is considered a command
responsibility.

To create greater capacity among peacekeepers,
AIDS advisers run peer education programmes,
drawing on the UNAIDS peer education kit and
awareness cards. For example, the mission in Ethiopia-
Eritrea, which was the first mission to be established
after resolution 1308 (2000), has trained approximately
1,100 peer educators in a series of two-week intensive
programmes. UNAIDS and DPKO are examining ways
to create a network to maintain the capacity of such
peer educators when they return home. I hope we can
do this in partnership with Member States so that this
expertise is reinforced, rather than lost.

We are very aware, though, that knowledge in
itself does not protect people from HIV; it is what
people do with that knowledge and how they change
their behaviour that makes the difference.

Strengthening voluntary counselling and testing
facilities across our peacekeeping missions is a
priority. This allows peacekeepers to make an informed
decision to find out their HIV status and is critical to
influencing behaviour and preventing transmission.

Of the peacekeepers surveyed, over 92 per cent
had been tested for HIV as part of their preparation for
deployment, but only half stated that they had received
any counselling with the test. The mission in Liberia
has two voluntary counselling and testing centres,
which have been visited by over 420 uniformed and
civilian peacekeepers since they opened in April this
year. The mission plans to launch a roaming facility to
ensure access for all personnel in the sectors. There are
similar facilities in other peacekeeping operations.

Our efforts focus not only on how to reduce the
risk of HIV transmission, but also on how to capitalize
on the positive potential of peacekeepers as agents of
change. When we train peacekeepers in gender
awareness, human rights and child protection, we hope
to influence not only their own behaviour but also their
ability to recognize and respond to sexual violence and
exploitation.

Peacekeepers can also share their knowledge
about HIV with the local population. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for example, awareness-raising
projects by peacekeepers have ranged from theatre
performances and football matches to high-profile
events attended by local dignitaries. Across missions,
peacekeepers link up with local groups to mark World
AIDS Day.

Peacekeeping missions also develop AIDS
outreach projects that specifically target local
communities. For instance, the mission in Liberia has
held five-day programmes for local Christian and
Islamic leaders to encourage faith-based AIDS
prevention initiatives in the country and training
sessions for the local media and women's groups. In
Haiti, a number of quick-impact projects have
supported AIDS initiatives, and the public information
office has worked with a local non-governmental
organization to fight stigma and discrimination and to
promote awareness among local journalists.

All AIDS advisers are members of their
respective host countries' Theme Groups on
HIV/AIDS. Those Groups assist in the development
and the implementation of national strategies to
respond to the epidemic. Such partnerships are central
to our overall response. For example, in Cote d'lvoire
the mission has teamed up with the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) to conduct a series of
programmes over one year with peacekeepers and local
communities, in particular targeting women and girls.
In Sierra Leone we have worked closely with the
Society for Women and AIDS in Africa. Engaging with
local women's groups not only helps to reach the most
vulnerable but also strengthens training for
peacekeepers, as the testimonies of local women
provide a different perspective on AIDS and the
broader issue of sexual exploitation.

United Nations Volunteers (UNV) have often
played a pivotal role in the outreach projects of our
missions, such as by raising funds for school fees for
AIDS orphans in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or helping former commercial sex workers in
Ethiopia and Eritrea find alternative sources of income.
In Sierra Leone, there is a UNV-funded reintegration
and transition-to-peace programme. At the request of
communities, the project has provided AIDS awareness
training for youth leaders in 12 districts of the country.

DPKO is also collaborating with other United
Nations agencies to mainstream AIDS into mandated
mission functions. For example, AIDS is included in an
initiative involving 14 United Nations entities to create
integrated standards and guidelines for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in peacekeeping
settings. The AIDS adviser in the Sudan is designing a
strategy to train AIDS peer educators as part of the
demobilization programme in that country.
In Haiti, the mission is working with UNAIDS,
UNFPA and national bodies to build the long-term
capacity of the police force to address AIDS in the
ranks. At the time of our mission in Timor-Leste, a
special peer education programme for the police force
was part of a six-week schedule of living testimonies
conducted by an HIV-positive trainer.

Building on the survey in Liberia, we intend to
roll out similar monitoring and evaluation projects in
other missions. Immediately following this open
meeting, DPKO and UNAIDS are jointly hosting a
workshop for AIDS advisers and focal points from 16
missions. That will provide an opportunity for frank
discussion and the sharing of lessons learned so that we
can enhance our programmes.

I could provide more details on different
initiatives, but I hope that this brief overview gives the
Council a sense of the concrete measures that we have
been taking to tackle HIV/AIDS in peacekeeping
operations. Over the past five years, we have learned
many lessons from our partners, from our successes
and also from our mistakes. But we have to ask
ourselves, are we doing enough? Is our basic strategy
the right one? What additional investments need to be
made to sustain and strengthen our efforts?

My feeling is that we are on the right track. We
have overcome a lot of resistance. And as the value of
the programmes has become apparent, there is a
demand for more. But a number of areas still need to
be tackled. Testing, for example, remains a
controversial and divisive issue. And, as I mentioned
before, we need to ensure that AIDS awareness is
considered a command responsibility, moving beyond
rhetoric to engagement at the highest levels. We need
continued support for our HIV/AIDS Trust Fund, and
the capacity of missions to respond to growing
demands will need to be reviewed, especially if we
want to move beyond raising awareness to changing
risk behaviours.

We are constantly being challenged to find new
ideas and approaches, and we are ever mindful that any
success in tackling HIV/AIDS relies on working in
partnership. In 2000, we barely crossed paths with
agencies such as UNAIDS, UNFPA or the United
States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Today, we design and implement programmes together.
As I emphasized earlier, ultimately, addressing
HIV/AIDS initiatives in peacekeeping must be a joint
effort involving Member States, troop-contributing
countries, United Nations and other agencies and host
communities. I look forward to further strengthening
all those partnerships.

