Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the Islamic
world on the blessed month of Ramadan and to thank
Indonesia for choosing the topic for today's debate. I
also want to thank Secretary-General Antenio Guterres
for his informative and important statement, and the
Force Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Director of the
Challenges Forum International Secretariat for their
thorough briefings.

The State of Kuwait aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

I would like now to discuss today's topic, with
particular reference to three points - reform, the role
of peacekeepers and our responsibility.

The State of Kuwait would like to reiterate its
support for the reforms undertaken by the Secretary-
General in the area of peace and security, including the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We also reiterate
our support for the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which
we have endorsed, along with all the members of
the Security Council. The Declaration is a powerful
expression of our willingness to develop and build
peacekeepers' capacities. As the Secretary-Generaljust
said, training can save lives and is ajoint responsibility.
We commend the fact that many States, including
Indonesia, convened the first meeting of the tripartite
partnership, which is an important and necessary step
for strengthening coordination and consultation efforts.

We cannot but emphasize the priority given to
political solutions in peace operations. That requires
operations that are capable of supporting political
processes, depending on their mandates. Most
peacekeepers are operating in difficult environments,
and sometimes they contribute to the prevention of war
crimes, again depending on the mandate ofeach mission.
They are in the forefront with those who protect civilians
in certain conflict areas. They also facilitate and protect
humanitarian aid convoys. Consequently, it is important
that troop-contributing countries participate as much
as possible in the elaboration of the mandates that they
will be in charge of implementing and defending in
order to ensure greater coordination and unity of effort,
so as to guarantee the success of the mandate. As the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia mentioned a
while ago, the cost of peacekeeping operations is eight
times less as compared to the cost of bilateral actions.

As far as our responsibility is concerned, what
I just mentioned is only a part of the significant
role played by peacekeepers. What we need to do is
formulate mandates that take into account the needs of
host countries and their citizens, as well as the political
processes that we will need to support. To that, we
would add the training, language and logistical skills
that must be provided to peacekeepers. We stress the
inherent right of each country to train its troops and
choose its priority skills. We must also respect the rules
that govern the selection of peacekeepers and police
units in peacekeeping operations in a way that makes
it possible to implement the mandate of each operation.
As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia
mentioned, it is true, and we agree with her, that
there is no one size that fits all. We also welcome the
commitments made by States during the Peacekeeping
Ministerial held on 29 March.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation and pride for the role played by women in
peacekeeping. Experience and studies have shown that
the participation of women contributes to perpetuating
peace. We are proud of the peacekeepers in general.
Some of them have sacrificed their lives to maintain
and defend peace. We would like to reiterate the support
of the State of Kuwait for the efforts of all troop-
contributing countries, and for the active role played
by Indonesia in peacekeeping as well as in involving
all stakeholders.

