Ms. King: At the outset, Mr. President, I am honoured
by your invitation to answer the Council's questions today
on the situation of Afghan women and girls. I am most
grateful to you for the invitation, and to your Government,
and to all those who have consistently provided strong
support in incorporating a gender perspective in all aspects
of work of the Security Council, including peacemaking
and peace-building.

I would also like to say that perhaps today we would
not be having this discussion had it not been for the very
bold landmark decision of the Council, on 8 March of
this year, to incorporate women and girls in all the
deliberations of the Council, not just as victims of armed
conflict, but also as constructive actors in finding peace.
In this regard, I would like to pay a special tribute to
Ambassador Anwarul Chowdhury for his leadership in
this regard, as he was president of the Security Council
on 8 March.

Now I would like to turn to some of the questions
that were asked. On the issue of the participation of
women in civil society, I would strongly suggest that the
policy followed by many United Nations agencies - for
example the World Food Council, Habitat, United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and others - on the
principled approach to participation in all aspects of the
work of the United Nations and of the projects which we
are carrying out, not only to develop the country but for
humanitarian assistance, should be continued and fostered.

We find that at the community level, particularly in
some rural areas, there is less resistance to women's
participation. Although, as we have heard from many
speakers, that policy is applied in a somewhat erratic way,
it is very important to build on these entry points. For
example, some of the projects that have involved women
and men in decision-making at these levels have
encouraged women's decision-making on where to place
a well, because it is the girls in society who have the
chore of collecting water and bringing it back to the
villages. So, if you place a well far from a home-based
school, that means that during school hours the girls will
not be going to that home-based school.

Other decisions concern the type of vegetables and
seeds they need in order to grow food for their families.
There is a very successful project that has been run by the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
(UNCHS) that has drawn men and women together at the
local level for sewage disposal and other questions of
sanitation within the communities. There are also
community councils, and in the inter-agency mission we
found some mullahs in Herat and elsewhere who are very
open to the participation of women in terms of giving
their opinions and seeking their opinions and passing on
their advice, sometimes through the mulluhs, to the men
of the village.

 

For civil society and civil participation, electoral
education is needed, also education in tolerance and ideas
of democracy, including knowledge of the United Nations
Charter, the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). Some of the
mechanics of learning how to identify key issues - for
example, how to end war, how to get education for children
and how to lobby for their needs - are also very important
for women to learn at this level if they are to fully
participate in the civil action of society. Some of the local
non-governmental organizations are already doing this, as
are some of the agencies, but this needs far greater financial
assistance, and I think that this should be strongly
encouraged by the Council.

Above all, the Council and other forums such as the
Commission on Human Rights and the Commission on the
Status of Women have kept this issue alive, and they must
continue to press for the full enjoyment of the rights of
women and children, not only for education, health and
employment, but in all other areas. The special rapporteurs
of the Commission on Human Rights, and the transmission
and promulgation of the findings of their reports, are
particularly important.

With regard to how women can seek employment: it
is one thing to seek employment; it is another to have
employment available. I think that one of the strategies
could be for more ministries to be opened up to women.
For example, we have recently had reports that women are
now being employed - I think about 70 of them - in the
Ministry for Social Affairs. This could be opened up, if the
Taliban and other authorities are encouraged, to other
ministries such as Health, Education and so on.

I would also urge that in Kandahar and Kabul, which
are the main locales for decision-making, machinery for the
advancement of women should be established, either in
terms of a regional unit, a bureau of women's affairs or
even a ministry of women's affairs. This can be a focal
point within the existing authorities to spread the word and
to join the mainstream, and it can also be a focal point for
the United Nations agencies.

With regard to seeking better treatment, this is also
very difficult and depends very much on the political
climate. If there is no political solution, it will be very
unlikely that women and girls will really have their
situation improved. Very often those who do speak out, we
are told, are subject to intimidation, and to harsh and swift
retribution in some cases, not only for themselves but for
their families.

As one of those with the inter-agency team two
years ago, I visited two prisons, one exclusively for
women and one where there were women and men but in
separate establishments. I would urge that we think in
terms of a holistic view; seeking employment and seeking
rights has to be within the context of an overall enabling
environment where women can do this. With regard to
the prisons, one of them had 13 women and some
children, some of whom had been born while the women
were in prison. There were no sanitary facilities because
the current toilets were situated in a part of the building
that had been mined. This was in Kandahar.

Emphasis should also be placed by all United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations on
giving women in the home-based schools and girls,
through textbooks translated into local languages,
knowledge of the basic human rights instruments and of
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, which, incidentally, a
former Afghan Government signed, but which
Afghanistan has not ratified. They should also have
knowledge, as soon as these are developed, of the
procedures under the optional protocol to that Convention,
through which individual women or groups of women can
transmit their complaints directly to this CEDAW
committee for investigation and action.

I will strongly suggest that in this connection the
United Nations agencies also take a lead and set an
example in having more women in those agencies, and at
high levels, and in having women particularly from those
countries with similar traditional and cultural norms, with
a good knowledge of gender equality and of human
rights, who might be able to draw on aspects of Koranic
and Islamic law and its relation to other instruments of
human rights. In this regard, considerable work has been
done with non-governmental organizations, academic
groups, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) in drawing these distinctions between
shariah law, Islamic law and the Convention. We hope
that this will encourage the Taliban to see these issues in
their true perspective.

Other ways might include further urging United
Nations agencies to incorporate gender in all projects.
Some outstanding examples are the peace projects of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

 

A project was also planned by the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) in
Helmand to create alternative means of livelihood by
rebuilding a wool factory as an alternative means to drugs.
This was to be done jointly with the Taliban authorities,
giving work to 1,300 people. The United Nations Drug
Programme insisted, as part of the blueprint, that of those
1,300 at least 200 should be women. Regrettably, this
project has not yet got off the ground, but it represents the
kind of creative thinking that could go some way towards
meeting the challenge posed by this issue.
With regard to the question on the Gender Adviser, I
must say here that I greatly welcome the United Kingdom's
support for the United Nations Gender Adviser and also the
announcement that you, Mr. President, just made about its
generous contribution to this work in Afghanistan. Some of
what the Gender Adviser has done is to create a gender
plan of action. This has taken place at the policy level and
at the programming level. Contacts have been established
within the United Nations donor system and with women's
non-governmental organizations and Afghan women. There
has been direct training of United Nations staff, many of
whom, as noted in the original report, had no real concept
of what human rights and gender rights stood for in the
United Nations system.

The Gender Adviser, with the strong support of the
United Nations Coordinator and the Human Rights
Adviser - also part of that report's recommendations -
has also identified the United Nations system's need for
gender-related interventions - finding what the entry
points are, looking around to see what projects are working
and seeing if they can be replicated in other areas.

Initial contacts have also been established directly by
the United Nations Coordinator and the Gender Adviser
with Afghan authorities in Kabul and Kandahar. There has
also been an upgrading of the capacity of United Nations
programming staff to address gender-related issues in
Afghanistan.

These are some of the issues which the Gender
Adviser has been engaged with. She has also participated
in workshops with United Nations agencies such as the
World Bank and in other bilateral initiatives.

One of the important things in terms of this very, very
modest shift we have seen in the last 18 months relates to
the Mahram edict. The Gender Adviser, for example, is
from one of those countries where there is strict application
of the Mahram edict, which implies that any woman from
a Muslim country, whether international staff or not, has
to be accompanied in her daily job by a male family
member. This has not been applied in her case, and we
now have at least five or six other women - United
Nations international staff - who are also from those
countries and who are also working without any
restrictions.

The representative of Jamaica wanted to know the
likelihood of further progress. In my view, further
progress, if based on the very incrementally slow progress
that we have seen over the last two and a half years, is
going to be equally slow unless there is a strong,
negotiated peace. I believe that in the deliberations held
at the political level, whether by the United Nations or
other international agencies or on a bilateral scale,
sometimes the issue of gender is very low on the list of
priorities or is totally forgotten. I think that we cannot do
that; we cannot allow that to happen.

There is another factor affecting the rate of change:
the fact that in many United Nations agencies and
delegations there are very few women. So we are going
to instruct the Taliban to have 50 per cent women or to
include more women in their projects and in decision-
making, and the United Nations has a united male front.
I think that we have to take this rather seriously.

On the issue of steps in the area of human rights, I
think that I have addressed that. The existence of
programme awareness has also, I think, been covered to
some extent.

In terms of the status of project implementation,
training is taking place. Some advisers have been
appointed, but there is still quite a lot to be done in terms
of evaluation, in terms of looking very carefully at the
projects from a gender perspective and of seeing to what
extent they are affecting the country and whether they are
really bringing about any change.

I would like to close by saying that we should
perhaps take into account, in the progress that has been
made, the fact that on 8 March 2000, for the very first
time in the recent history of Afghanistan, a formal public
celebration of International Women's Day was held in
Kabul, the capital. Seven hundred women of all ages,
including former university professors, engineers,
teachers, doctors, nurses and school principals, attended
the celebration. Ten of them were honoured with gifts
from the organizers of the celebration - the United
Nations system, working in very close collaboration with

 

the Taliban authorities. The representative of Mullah Omar
made a statement at the celebration. Radio Shariah, the
official radio station, covered the event, and permission was
given to a wide cross-section of international media to
cover the event and conduct random interviews with the
women present. At the end of the celebration, it was
announced that six women prisoners would be released in
celebration of the Day. Two had children living with them
in prison. I might add that the daily ration for the women
and children is two loaves of bread a day, and I saw the
loaves.

To conclude, I would not say that this is cause for
euphoria, but I do think that there has been some progress
and that with continued pressure from the Council and its
members in other forums - the Afghan support group, the
United Nations Secretariat - progress can be made. But at
the heart of this is a political settlement that is firmly
grounded in human rights and gender.

