Mr. Ngwej (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): It is an honour for me to address
the Security Council on behalf of Mr. Joseph Kabila
Kabange, President of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, whom I am representing at this meeting,
and on behalf of the entire Congolese people and its
Government.

At the outset, I express my deep pleasure in seeing
you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council this
month. You represent India, a country with which the
Democratic Republic of the Congo maintains long-
standing relations characterized by reciprocal esteem
and respect. Since my country attained to international
sovereignty, India has always stood at our side in the
defence of our territorial integrity. I take this opportunity
to commend your predecessor, Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal, Permanent Representative of Guatemala,
and to thank him for his outstanding leadership of of
the Council last month.

I also thank you, Sir, for having agreed to convene
this important meeting of the Security Council
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, particularly in the light of the humanitarian
tragedy currently unfolding in and around Goma as a
consequence of the aggression by regular troops of the
Rwandan army.

Let me furthermore pay well-deserved tribute to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his good offices
and his commitment to the quest for peace and security
around the world in general, and in particular for his
personal involvement in restoring lasting peace to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The accelerating deterioration of the situation in
the province of North Kivu began on 15 November
following the attacks launched on positions of the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo (FARDC) by troops of the regular Rwandan
army. These included three battalions of the Rwandan
Defence Forces (RDF), commanded by General
Ruvusha, and two RDF special forces units, including
a heavy artillery unit commanded by Rwandan General
Gatama Kashumba.

In the view of many observers on the ground,
the so-called military success of the 23 March
Movement (M-23) in Goma was rather suprising. Unlike
the debacle suffered by the attackers since 15 November
in the areas of Kibumba and Kazizi along the border
with Rwanda, the operations that led to the fall of
Goma benefited from remarkable planning, abundant
resupply, and in particular night-vision equipment. This
is materiel that, unlike Rwanda, neither the FARDC nor
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
have in their arsenals. Even air defence equipment was
used against combat helicopters of the Forces armees de
la Republique democratique du Congo and MONUSCO.
Rwandan territory has been used systematically as a
theatre for manoeuvres to circumvent the Forces armees

de la Republique democratique du Congo in order to
conquer new territory on the road to Goma.

There is no need for us at this juncture to go into
detail about other evidence of Rwanda's involvement
in the war around Goma. There is a great deal of such
evidence, and it is well documented. In that respect,
how can we describe this humanitarian tragedy without
concluding that the situation has only exacerbated
human suffering, the loss of human life, massive
violations of human rights, the rape of women, the
forced recruitment of children, widespread population
displacements, extortion of property, the breakdown of
economic and trade activity, and the growing number
of Congolese refugees. In brief, the situation is one of
widespread insecurity and a major humanitarian crisis.

We hereby request the Security Council to reaffirm
and uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, of which it is the guarantor, and
particularly to most firmly condemn Rwanda and the
assaults on human rights and international humanitarian
law perpetrared by its troops on Congolese territory. The
Council must demand that Rwanda put an immediate
end to its aggression and withdraw all its troops from
the city of Goma and the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It must insist on a cessation of
all forms of violence and activity that could destabilize
and undermine the authority of the Congolese State. It
must support the efforts of the Government to restore
and strengthen State authority in the eastern part of
the country, and implement targeted sanctions against
all leaders of M-23 and Rwandan officers cited in the
mid-term report of the United Nations group of experts.

In order to dissipate the climate of instability
prevailing in the province of North Kivu, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo calls for open dialogue in good
faith with Rwanda in order to resolve their ongoing
security problems. We also call for the good offices of
the United Nations to facilitate that dialogue.

Furthermore, we would like to see greater
involvement on the part of MONUSCO in terms of
resources, force strength and logistics, so as to meet
more effectively the demands of peacekeeping in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Now that the responsibility of Rwanda has
been clearly established in the destabilization of the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, in mass human rights
violations and in the humanitarian tragedy afflicting
the people of North Kivu, it is up to the Council to
take the following action. First, in the light of the acts
committed by Rwanda, it should state that the recurring
attitude of this neighbouring country with regard to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo constitutes a serious
and persistent violation of the principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations in its Articles 1, 2,
6 and 39; a serious threat to international peace and
security in the subregion; and a series ofproven acts of
aggression under Article 39 of the Charter.

Secondly, it should state that once again Rwanda
has circumvented the sacrosanct principle enshrined
in paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter, which calls
on States Members of the Organization to refrain in
their international relations from resorting to the threat
or the use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State, or in any other
manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United
Nations.

Thirdly, the Council should state that Rwanda is
a Member of the United Nations and recall that, in
accordance with Article 6 of the Charter, a Member
that persistently violates the principles of the Charter
may be expelled from the Organization by the General
Assembly upon the recommendation of the Security
Council.

Lastly, the Council should ascertain all the
consquences of Rwanda's behaviour and take whatever
steps are necessary to restore peace and security in
North Kivu.

In conclusion, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo reiterates its openness to dialogue with the true
protagonist, Rwanda. Nevertheless, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will no longer settle for easy
arrangements of the sort that, for three years, have always
produced the same effects with the same consequences.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo now demands
an open, frank debate that could guarantee lasting
peace in the interests of all the peoples of the region.

