Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): My delegation
thanks you, Sir, for convening today's open debate. I
would also like to thank your delegation for preparing a
concept paper on the topic under discussion (S/2013/334, annex). I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his statement
earlier in the day.

The intrinsic link between the effective management
of natural resources and development is a time-tested
reality. Conflict holds back development. It is a fact
that, in several countries on the agenda of the Security
Council, including those in Africa, problems of control
over natural resources and their exploitation are serious
exacerbating factors fanning conflict, and also remain
a major impediment to post-conflict nation-building.

If one looks into the history of these conflicts, both
the control and exploitation of natural resources have
been driven largely by factors outside the control of the
affected countries. External interference with the aim
of controlling and exploiting natural resources, when
combined with political objectives and ethnic rivalries,
has been a particularly combustive mix for conflicts.
As a result, several countries in Africa have remained
mired in conflicts for decades. It is therefore necessary
to tackle the issue holistically.

It is imperative that we fully respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of all United
Nations Member States, including when the Council
considers situations on its agenda. The international
community, including the Council, must respect States'
right to control and manage their affairs, including
natural resources. No attempt should be made to be
prescriptive about the control, management and use of
natural resources by the States concerned.

Even while some countries in Africa are involved
in conflicts related to natural resources, we note that
the continent has been the second fastest growing
region in the world in the past decade. From 2000 to
2010, six of the 10 fastest growing economies were in
Africa. Africa's collective gross domestic product is
expected to grow to $2.6 trillion by 2025. Clearly, with
greater assistance from the international community,
conflict-affected countries in Africa can achieve faster
progress.

In that regard, it is important for the international
community, particularly the United Nations, to play
a seminal role in capacity-building of the Member
States concerned. Conflict-affected countries do need
assistance to fulfil their international commitments
and strengthen their internal institutions, including
those dealing with security and border control. The role
of the international community, including the relevant
United Nations agencies, should include enhancing
development partnerships with countries in conflict
situations. This should include higher allocations of
financial, technical and human resources by donors and
United Nations agencies, and coincide with the national
priorities of the countries concerned.

We commend the efforts and commitment of the
relevant United Nations agencies in developing the
capacities of countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We hope that their commitment to national
capacity-building, including in the control and
management of natural resources, will be matched by
adequate resources and that support will be provided
based on the requests of national Governments and on
mutual agreement.

Before I conclude, let me state that a concerted push
has been made to include several normative issues into
the Council's agenda under the pretext that they affect
international peace and security. Such a move should be
avoided to ensure the effective functioning of the United
Nations system. The Charter provides clear a division
of responsibilities between the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and
other specialized bodies created by the Member States.
All United Nations bodies, including this Council, must
respect this division of roles and responsibilities.

