Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by welcoming
His Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso. I thank him and all the briefers
for their comprehensive and informative presentations.

We remain deeply concerned about the security
situation in the Sahel. According to the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/868), attacks by
terrorist groups and intercommunal violence continue
to increase. The humanitarian situation across the
Sahel also continues to deteriorate. That requires closer
collaboration in combating the threat and addressing
the underlying causes of instability. In that regard,
allow me to reiterate three points.

First, Indonesia supports the initiative of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries in
addressing the security and development challenges
confronting them. The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is one
such initiative. We welcome the progress made in the
operationalization of the Joint Force, including the
conductofrecent operations. The operationalization of its
police and civilian components and the implementation
of the human rights and international humanitarian
law compliance framework are commendable. That
will serve to improve accountability and coherence
with national justice systems, so that the Joint Force
may enjoy greater levels of trust and support from the
population. We note with concern that the Joint Force
continues to face training, capability and equipment
shortfalls. The multiple relocations of the headquarters
ofthe G-5 Sahel Joint Force are also an impediment that
we hope to see resolved in due course, by identifying
and establishing a permanent location.

Secondly, we welcome the support of regional and
international partners of the Joint Force, including the
pledge made by the Heads of States of the Economic
Community of West African States to mobilize

$1 billion for counter-terrorism efforts. We note that
some ofthe pledges are yet to be disbursed and realized.
We concur with the Secretary-General that it is urgent
that partners ensure the realization of their pledges. We
are pleased to note that arrangements are being made
with regard to the extension of the support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali to all contingents of the Joint Force. It
is important to ensure that such assistance is delivered
in a safe and timely manner. We hope that that support,
along with that of others, will enhance the capability of
the Joint Force.

Thirdly, as terrorist groups continue to increase
their area of influence, greater coordination is needed
among national and international forces operating in
the Sahel. We welcome the joint operations conducted
by the Joint Force, as well as the intelligence exchange
protocol to enhance operations. We also believe that
information- sharing should be enhanced, including with
regard to the activities undertaken by the Joint Force.

Before I conclude, let me reiterate that all security
initiatives should be complemented by broader efforts,
including in the areas of socioeconomic development
and capacity-building. Enhancing States' capacity
and ability to deliver basic services, alleviate poverty,
create opportunities for young people and combat
climate change should be prioritized. We support the
joint efforts being made by regional and international
actors in the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. Indonesia stands
ready to contribute and work together with a view to
achieving lasting peace and stability in the Sahel.

