Mr. Sannoh (Liberia): It is an honour and a
privilege for me to address the Council as it considers
the thirtieth progress report of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) (S/2015/620).

On 3 September 2015, Liberia was declared
Ebola-free for the second time by the World Health
Organization. Although this would not have been
possible without the strong leadership of our President,
Her Excellency Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, and the
resilience of the people of Liberia, we owe a debt of
gratitude to the United Nations and our international
partners for walking along with us to cross this bridge. It
has been a difficult road for us as a people and a nation.
The steep decline in the economy due to the Ebola
crisis remains the greatest challenge to our nation, and
the reverberations of that decline will continue to have
an impact on all sectors of the Government, especially
the justice and security sectors.

Permit me therefore to express appreciation to
the Secretary-General, members of the Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the Liberia
configuration, as well as our bilateral and other
multilateral partners, for their invaluable support,
which enabled us to contain the Ebola scourge.

The Secretary-General has noted in his report
(S/2015/620) that the assumption of security
responsibilities for UNMIL will mark a historic
moment in post-conflict Liberia, whereby the fate of
the country and the protection of its citizens will, for
the first time in more than a decade, be completely in
the hands of the national authorities. I agree fully with
the Secretary-General that this will be an important
turning point in our nation's history. The Government
is doing everything possible to make this a reality.

As Council members may be aware, the plan for
Liberia to assume this responsibility has five strategic
objectives. The first objective is to fill immediate
security gaps created by the UNMIL drawdown
throughout the country. The second objective is to
strengthen response capacity in threat-prone regions
of the country. The third objective is to simultaneously
pursue all normal conventional security operations
throughout the country. The fourth objective is to
reform the legal frameworks of the sector agencies.
The fifth objective is to build the capacity of the
sector. Significant progress has been made towards the
achievement of these objectives.

In close collaboration with our partners, the
Government now has a clear road map, especially
with regard to the structural and implementation
arrangements of the plan. The Government has
disaggregated the plan. The priority activities for
implementation between now and June 2016 have been
identified and costed with timelines. They include
those responsibilities that the Government is to take
over from UNMIL and those challenges that pose
immediate threats to the consolidation of peace. The
total budget for these activities is $38.8 million. Against
this amount, the Government of Liberia has allocated
$20 million in its 2015-2016 budget, and 50 per cent
of this amount is to be deposited in a dedicated trust
account to enhance timely disbursement and rapid
implementation. With the support of the United Nations
Development Programme, a transition implementation
unit has been established within the Ministry of Justice
to coordinate the various activities of the plan.

With respect to the legal framework, in July 2015,
the Legislature opened public consultation on a draft
firearms act. A draft police act and a draft bureau
of immigration and naturalization act have been
drawn up, approved by the Cabinet and the National
Security Council, and forwarded to the Legislature for
enactment. On Monday, 8 September, these draft bills
had their first reading in the legislature. Work is also
currently in progress on a draft alien and nationality
law. These reforms will lead, inter alia, to a strong,
coherent and modern legal framework for the justice
sector, improving civilian and democratic oversight of
the sector's governance system, reducing inter-agency
overlapping of functions, professionalizing the sector's
management systems and ensuring accountability and
efficiency.

Progress is also being made in the area of training.
On Saturday, 12 September, the Bureau of Immigration
and the Liberian National Fire Service will be graduating
328 officers who have undergone three months of
intensive training. The Police, the Drug Enforcement
Agency, the Armed Forces of Liberia and the Bureau
of Corrections and Rehabilitation are also conducting
trainings. Procurement plans are now being finalized
for the bulk purchase of needed items prioritized under
the disaggregated plan.

I would like to note at this juncture the Government
of Liberia's appreciation for the work of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia and the support of the
partners in furtherance of the transition. However, the

Government is concerned about the slow pace offunding
commitment or support for implementation of the plan.
There is as yet no funding commitment to close the
$60 million gap for this fiscal year. It is imperative to
give new impetus to resource mobilization initiatives in
support of Liberia as foreseen in the statement of mutual
commitments with the Peacebuilding Commission.

The Secretary-General has expressed concern
about the about the recent surge in violent public
disturbances and has linked this surge to deficiencies
in the response capacity of the national police, public
discontent, alienation and slow pace of reconciliation.
However, the violence alluded to represents isolated
incidents which relate to motorcyclists and few
concession areas. It needs to be taken in context. The
essence of any Government is to maintain peace and
stability of the body politic, protect human rights
and promote the economic and social development of
its people. No responsible Government can condone
lawlessness, criminality and direct challenges to its
constituted authority. As the number of motorbikes in
Liberia has increased exponentially, the challenges to
the Government have also increased. Working closely
with the unions, the Government has now instituted
new measures, including limiting the use of motorbikes
to certain communities, mandatory registration
of all motorbikes, and training and licensing of
bike operators, which have considerably decreased
motorcycle-associated violence over the past five
months.

The violence in the concession areas is related
to unresolved employer-employee issues and
disagreements among the communities' leadership in
the negotiation process on the granting of additional
land beyond that covered under concession agreements.
To each incident of Violence, however, the Liberia
National Police responded and restored control. Where
human rights violations by the police have been alleged,
the accused are investigated and brought to justice if
they are found to be culpable.

With respect to the Secretary-General's
observations of public discontent, alienation and slow
pace of reconciliation, it is the Government's view
that through its ongoing programmes in areas such as
access to justice, infrastructure development, including
an improved road network that facilitates the movement
of people and commerce, and the decentralization of
governance, it is in fact promoting reconciliation and
addressing alienation and discontent.

Both Mr. Ladsous and the PBC Chair have
commented on the situation in Liberia and the
challenges that we face. We thank them for their
perspectives. However, some significant developments
have not been fully covered. First, the initial reactions
to the proposed amendment to declare Liberia a
Christian State, which caused divisions along religious
lines during the constitutional review process, as noted
in paragraph 10 of the report, have all been quietened,
as the parties realized that it was just a proposal subject
to the approval of the Legislature and a referendum.

The Constitution Review Committee has now
completed its task and submitted 25 recommendations
to the President, who transmitted them to the national
legislature along with her comments. Some of the key
recommendations advanced relate to dual nationality,
ownership of land, and reduction of the terms of the
President, Senators and members of the House of
Representatives. These recommendations, if approved,
will be subject to referendum, which will take place
concurrent with the 2017 general elections.

While it is true that corruption continues to
dominate public attention, as reported in paragraph 14
of the report, some progress continues to be noted. The
Government obtained indictments and prosecuted a
number of high profile cases including the National Oil
Company ofLiberia case, the case ofthe illegal issuance
of logging permits involving officials of the Forestry
Development Authority, and the case involving the
National Drug Service. As I noted in my most recent
statement to the Council (see S/PV.7438), in response
to the twenty-ninth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/275), capacity and resource constraints still pose
a threat to the fight against corruption. The Ministry of
Justice has restructured the Prosecutorial Department
and created five new divisions, one of which is focused
on anti-corruption litigation, exclusively handling cases
referred to the Ministry by Liberia Anti-Corruption
Commission and the General Auditing Commission.
The Government of Liberia remains committed to the
fight against corruption and calls upon its partners
to help strengthen the investigative and prosecutorial
capacity of the Ministry of Justice.

On regional issues, the Government has made
diplomatic representations to the Government of Cote
d'Ivoire regarding the cross-border movement and
activities of Ivoirians and Burkinabes. With general
and presidential elections slated for October in Cote
d'Ivoire, and with more than 38,000 registered Ivorian
refugees still within the proximity of the border, it is
imperative, and the Government has taken steps to
ensure, that the borders be routinely monitored with
a view to taking actions to avoid conflict along this
corridor. We welcome the joint aerial reconnaissance
initiative by the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire and UNMIL in that regard.

On the human rights front, it is important to
underscore that no country is free from human rights
violations. The insatiable yearning of the people of
Liberia for respect of their rights, grounded by our
historical commitment to make Liberia a beacon
of hope and freedom, makes it very difficult for any
Government in Liberia to engage in any persistent
patterns of violations of human rights. Therefore,
Liberia is making progress. We have intensified efforts
to address sexual and gender-based violence, rape
and pretrial detentions. Following our participation in
the second round of the Universal Periodic Review in
Geneva in May, Liberia will be returning to Geneva
on 24 September to react to the recommendations put
forward by the Human Rights Council. Liberia has
complied with its reporting obligations under several
human rights conventions, including the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Liberia remains committed to enhancing the work of the
Independent National Commission on Human Rights.

In conclusion, when the Council mandated the
Government of Liberia to formulate a plan to assume
full responsibility over the security architecture of the
country by June 2016, the Government entertained
the hope that the financial requirements for the
implementation of the plan would not be left to Liberia
alone, especially given the steep decline in the economy
due to the Ebola crisis. The Secretary-General's report
buttresses this hope when, in welcoming the progress
made in Liberia, it states that

"challenges remain that will require additional
assistance on all fronts in order to complete
the transition by 30 June 2016 in line with the
expectation of the Security Council." (S/2015/620, para. 72)

The Government and the people of Liberia
therefore call upon the Security Council to leverage
its position to mobilize international support for the
implementation of the transition plan. We also look
forward to forging increased engagement with the
Peacebuilding Commission to fully consolidate peace
in Liberia. The support of Council members will
facilitate Liberia turning the corner from conflict to a
future of sustained peace.

