Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his briefing and,
in particular, for sharing with us his assessment of the
functioning of the cross-border assistance mechanism.

The first point I would like to make is that we
must take every possible action to ensure humanitarian
access throughout Syrian territory. I will not repeat the
figures cited by Mr. Lowcock because they speak for
themselves. Cross-border humanitarian aid is essential
and irreplaceable. That point is clearly demonstrated by
the ever-growing number of recipients of cross-border
aid, at a time when hostilities continue in north-eastern
and north-western Syria. France calls on the members
of the Council to show unity and responsibility in
preserving this essential asset by adopting another
technical rollover of resolution 2165 (2014). There is
no alternative to helping the millions of people in need
while the regime of Bashar Al-Assad continues to use
humanitarian aid for political purposes.

The Syrian population is preparing to face the
rigours of a new winter of war. As in previous years,
it is imperative to have access to the whole Syrian
territory by the most direct roads and the fastest means.
The survival of men, women and children depend upon
it. It also means maintaining the whole-of-Syria aid
architecture and maintaining the role of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Amman,
which is crucial. The development of a first instalment
of the Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund for north-
east Syria should be encouraged in that regard and
represents a major step in addressing the needs of more
than 700,000 displaced people in the region. We call
once again on actors with influence over Damascus to
ensure safe, full and unhindered humanitarian access
throughout Syrian territory, including in areas where
the regime has recently regained control and where
access remains particularly inadequate, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
international humanitarian law.

The second point I would like to highlight, which
we tirelessly repeat, is that respect for international
humanitarian law by all is essential and not negotiable.
The protection of civilians must be an absolute priority.
We strongly condemn attacks, specifically by the
regime, against civilians and civilian infrastructure,
especially against humanitarian and medical
infrastructure. We are very concerned about reports
of new strikes on four medical facilities in Idlib last
week. The intensification of fighting in the north-west
in recent weeks is unacceptable. The board of inquiry
set up by the Secretary-General on those attacks, to
which we give our full support, should make it possible
to shed light on those incidents. Everything must be
done to restore the ceasefire in Idlib.

It is essential to make progress in three directions
in the north-east - the continued fight against
terrorism, the protection of the civilian population and
the full implementation of the humanitarian response.
The continuation of hostilities also serves to underline
that conditions are not in place to allow the return of
refugees in conditions that respect international law.
The fight against terrorism is an indisputable crucial
issue for all of us, but it cannot be used to justify the
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law
that we are witnessing. Those who commit such acts
will have to be held accountable before the courts. We
call for the cooperation of all parties with the board
of inquiry and with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic.

The third point I would like to reiterate is our
support for the Syrian political process, which is the only
way out of war. Outside of the humanitarian response,
only an inclusive political solution can put an end to
the suffering of the Syrian people. Resolution 2254
(2015) remains our road map and must be implemented
in all its components. The launch of the Constitutional
Committee is a starting point, but progress must be
made parallel to other aspects of the political process.
That means creating a safe and neutral environment.
It means that weapons must be silent throughout the
entire territory. It also requires confidence-building
measures, specifically the release of detained and
abducted persons. In addition, there must be complete
clarity on the fate of victims of forced disappearances.
Such an environment is crucial for the holding of free
and fair elections, under United Nations observation, in
which all Syrians participate, including those who have
fled the war.

All of those elements are fundamental to a credible
political solution. Until such a solution is firmly in
place, France, like its partners in the European Union,
will not participate in financing reconstruction.

