Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the special report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the
strategic review of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2018/530). I
will also provide an update on the latest developments
in Darfur.

Today's meeting comes as the Mission is finalizing
a year-long process of reconfiguration, which saw 11
team sites closed and a shift towards peacekeeping in
the Jebel Marra and peacebuilding in the rest of Darfur.
As we reflect on the situation on the ground and the
needs of the Darfuri population now and in the future,
we should consider how the United Nations system as
a whole, in partnership with the African Union (AU),
can best address those needs. The special report that is
before us today points a way forward as we adapt to the
changing reality in Darfur.

Let me first turn to the situation on the ground. With
the second consecutive dry season without large-scale
fighting now behind us, the security situation in
Darfur during the reporting period remained stable
overall. Fighting between the Government and rebel
groups remains confined to parts of the mountainous
Jebel Marra area, where the Sudan Liberation Army-
Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) maintains a presence.
Intermittent clashes that started in March continued,
with Government forces putting pressure on SLA/AW
strongholds in the Jebel Marra. Offensive attacks by the
rebel group were largely limited to ambushes - likely
an attempt to obstruct the progress of Government
forces. The verification of these incidents has proved
challenging owing to access restrictions placed on the
Mission and the humanitarian community. The clashes
have caused civilian displacements the extent of which
is only partially verified. We regret that the fighting
has again caused hardship for the civilian population,
and we call on the Government to give UNAMID and
our humanitarian partners access to protect and assist
those affected.

Intercommunal violence remained low, consistent
with the previous reporting period, with a marginal
increase in the number of incidents. These included
confrontations in the area of Graida, South Darfur,
where fighting over land ownership between the Fallata
and the Misseriya, as well as between the Fallata and
Massalit, resulted in deaths and injuries.

Violence against internally displaced persons
(IDPs) , including attacks on IDP camps and reports of
forced evictions, remains a concern. Allegations were
received from IDPs in the area of Kass, South Darfur,
of harassment by Rapid Support Forces to force them
off of public lands and buildings. Confrontations in
the Khamsa Dagaig, Ardayba and Jedda IDP camps in
Central Darfur between 21 and 23 May resulted in a
number of IDPs being killed and injured.

Efforts to reinvigorate the stalled peace process
continued, with a meeting between the Government
of the Sudan and the non-signatory movements in
Berlin on 16 and 17 April to discuss a pre-negotiation
framework. While talks stalled over the creation of
new and independent implementation mechanisms for a
subsequent peace agreement, parties agreed on all other
elements of the proposed pre-negotiation framework.
For the first time, the non-signatory movements
accepted the principle of negotiating on the basis of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
The conflict in Darfur has changed, and to best
serve the Darfuri people, UNAMID must change with
it. The peacekeeping mission should be directed to
the area where it is most needed, namely, at the site
of continued conflict in the Jebel Marra. In the rest of
Darfur, the United Nations system should leverage the
capabilities of the agencies, funds and programmes
best suited to tackling the problems that remain there.
Now is the time to plan for the future of the United
Nations and African Union support to Darfur by closely
linking the drawdown in peacekeeping to the build-up
in peacebuilding and development.

This linkage, between focusing peacekeeping
efforts on the one hand and increasing peacebuilding
and development capacity on the other, is at the heart of
the special report before the Council today. The report
presents two central concepts that would work hand in
hand over a two-year time frame: first, a peacekeeping
concept, which focuses on the most precarious areas
where the protection of civilians, humanitarian support
and the mediation of local conflict remain a necessity
to further the peace process; and secondly, a transition
concept, which, in collaboration with the United
Nations country team, aims to bridge the transition
from peacekeeping to early recovery and development.

Within the peacekeeping concept, UNAMID
would focus its activities on three strategic priorities:
first, protecting civilians, monitoring human rights
and facilitating humanitarian assistance; secondly,
mediation between the Government of the Sudan and
non-signatory armed movements on the basis of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur; and thirdly,
local-level mediation to address intercommunal or
other local conflict. The area of operations would be
reduced to 13 team sites in the greater Jebel Marra and
the mission headquarters would move from E1 Fasher to
Zalingei, Central Darfur. The supercamp in E1 Fasher
would be downsized and continue to serve as a logistics
hub, while all other team sites and supercamps outside
of the new area of operations would be closed. Overall,
the force strength would be reduced from 8,735 to 4,050
military personnel, and the police component would be
reduced from 2,500 officers to 1,870.

The whole-of-system transition concept focuses on
addressing the critical drivers of conflict and preventing
relapse. To operationalize this, four substantive areas
have been identified to enable the Government, the
United Nations country team, civil society partners, as
well as international actors to carefully and responsibly
prepare for the Mission's envisaged exit: first, the
rule of law, including police; secondly, resilience and
livelihoods, including durable solutions for IDPs and
host communities; thirdly, immediate service delivery
to IDPs; and, fourthly, human rights. UNAMID would
support the establishment of joint UNAMID-United
Nations country team liaison offices in each Darfur
state capital, except Zalingei, with the country team
leading work tailored to the needs of each state.

The two linked concepts in the special report provide
a road map for whole-of-system support to long-term
peace and stability in Darfur. For this to be realized, it
is essential that longer-term funding arrangements be
in place and that we raise voluntary contributions, use
funding from the assessed budget during the transition,
and work closely with the Peacebuilding Support
Office to access funding. We rely on the support of our
partners to bring that vision to life.

The situation in Darfur has changed radically
for the better since the height of the conflict, and the
needs of the people have changed with it. The special
report that is before the Council is a recognition that
the international community must adapt its support
accordingly. What it proposes is a way to draw on the
capabilities of the entire United Nations system, in
partnership with the AU, to better tailor our work to the
reality on the ground. As the United Nations refocuses
its support on Darfur, it will need the committed
backing of the Government of the Sudan, the United
Nations country team and humanitarian partners, as
well as the troop- and police-contributing countries and
the members of the Council, to navigate the significant
changes. We thank the Council for its continued support
as we work to achieve peace and stability for Darfur,
and security and development for its people. We believe
that, working together, this new approach can help
establish a future of United Nations and AU support to
Darfur that will help to improve the lives of the Darfuri
people now and in the long term.

