Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks the
Uruguay presidency for convening this open debate on
a highly important topic. We also thank the Secretary-
General; Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, Deputy Executive Director for
Advocacy of Human Rights Watch, for their comments.

We associate ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf on the
Non-Aligned Movement.

I should first like to begin by reminding us all
of our obligation under international humanitarian
law to distinguish between civilian populations and
combatants, and the obligation to do everything
feasible to avoid attacks on civilians, civilian property
and medical personnel and their facilities in situations
of armed conflict. Resolution 2286 (2016) and others
before it have called for effective measures to safeguard
medical and humanitarian personnel and their
equipment. Yet it is deeply disturbing that not only have
attacks against them increased, but State authorities in
a number of cases are unable to prevent, counter and
investigate them properly, owing to a lack of capacity.

At this important juncture, I would like to share
some important points pertaining to our topic today.

First is the primary responsibility of States to
protect the population. Indonesia believes that the
protection of civilians is the primary responsibility
of the host country. In that regard, all parties to
armed conflict must uphold that principle and fully
comply with the obligations applicable to them under
international humanitarian law related to the protection
of civilians and medical personnel in armed conflict.

The second point is the nexus between the
protection of civilians and counter-terrorism activities.
In the context of peacekeeping, the operating
environments for United Nations peacekeeping
missions have become more dangerous with the threats
posed by armed groups and violent extremists. There
has to be a better focus on increasing the situational
awareness and response capabilities of peacekeepers
through better predeployment training and adequate
protection equipment, including in combat first aid,
medical evacuation and casualty evacuation. All of this
is covered in our peacekeeping training in Indonesia.

The Security Council also needs to engage better
with the relevant State and non-State entities to deter
violent extremists and terrorists. However, that situation
should not be ajustification for peacekeepers to engage
in counter-terrorism, which can have a very different
dimension. Being perceived as neutral and credible
actors is essential for Blue Helmets to discharge their
tasks. We fully agree with the Secretary-General's
assessment in his report on the work ofthe Organization
(A/71/1) that peacekeeping operations should not
engage in counter-terrorism activities, which was also
stressed in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446).

Third is the close relationship between the
protection of civilians and health care. Provision of
sufficient and quality medical and health facilities is
required for United Nations peacekeeping operations,
as well as for combatants. That is in the interests of all,
not just for personnel and parties to conflict, but also
for people besieged in an armed conflict. That is then
all the more reason for the United Nations to establish
standards and facilitate improved medical capabilities
and facilities in armed conflict.

The fourth point is the improvement of medical care
to respond to emergency situations. Some situations
of armed conflicts and peacekeeping missions have
experienced challenges in consistently responding
to medical emergencies and in evacuating casualties.
Indonesia stresses the need to ensure the swift and safe
passage for injured, wounded and sick peacekeepers,
medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties.

Our fifth point is the increasingly important and
positive role of women peacekeepers in community-
building and preventive and primary health care, as well
as secondary health care such as post-traumatic care and
pandemic cases in conflict areas. Our experience and
training of peacekeepers in Indonesia has shown that
Indonesian women peacekeepers are far more effective
in gaining the trust and confidence of the community,
particularly women and children. That is also especially
evident in addressing health issues involving serious
cases of sexual violence and exploitation. We recognize
that both the United Nations and its Member States
must do more to further strengthen the role of women
in peacekeeping, as clearly outlined in the London
Communique of 2016.

The United Nations system should continue its
efforts to improve measures to help protect civilians,
health and humanitarian personnel and their facilities.
The improvement of health care in conflict situations is
an important element to build trust and hope for a better
future. The life of civilians is at stake.

