Mr. Misic (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. The task
before you is challenging and I recognize the able manner
in which you have led the deliberations of this body so far.

Allow me also to extend my sincere congratulations to
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby of Oman, who presided over the
Council last month. His leadership was outstanding.

Today, the Council will decide upon a comprehensive
resolution on the various aspects of the implementation of
the Peace Agreement reached in Dayton and signed in Paris
yesterday. Allow me to express our appreciation to all the
members of the Contact Group for their tireless efforts
towards a peace agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My
special gratitude goes to President Clinton, his
Administration, the American people and the United States
Congress, and to the French people, President Chirac and
the French Government for their recent hosting of the peace
talks in Dayton and yesterday's signing ceremony in Paris.

As we move on, ushering the new mission for the
implementation of the Peace Agreement into my country -
for too long a victim of aggression - I note with
appreciation the overall efforts of the United Nations Peace
Forces to help create the conditions for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
to provide protection for various humanitarian actions,
which has often placed many of them in perilous situations.
I also recognize the role that the United Nations has played
in the promotion of human rights, though in some
instances, regrettably, as has been the case in parts of my
country under Serb control, it had little effect.

I would also like to take a moment to remember all
those committed and devoted peace-keepers and aid
workers who have spent some of the last three-and-a-half
years of war in Bosnia and Herzegovina trying to alleviate
the suffering of the innocent civilians. In particular, we
remember all those peace-keepers and humanitarian workers
who have given their lives in the performance of their
noble duties in my country. Their work and commitment
will always be remembered with solemn gratitude, but also
with sadness for their loss, by the people and the
Government of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As a host country to the Implementation Force, we
pledge our unwavering support, cooperation and, more

 

important, partnership in the implementation of the Peace
Agreement.
With the Peace Agreement initialled in Dayton on 21
November and signed yesterday in Paris, one of the most
savage aggressions against a Member State may have
come to an end and the restoration of the culture of peace
may be under way. In this regard, the international
community must make sure that any further economic or
other assistance be tailored in such a way as to promote
peace, democracy and human rights for all.

This Peace Agreement may have many faults now.
Primarily, it can hardly be seen as a perfect or just one.
However, we believe that it is more just than the
continuation of war and that, in the long run, it can work
for all people in my country and against notorious war
criminals and the crimes they have committed. We tend
to believe that, in the course of time, this peace will
mature and become just and that, through measures
ensuring the return of refugees and guaranteeing human
rights for all, the logic of peace, tolerance and coexistence
shall gradually replace the logic of division along ethnic
and religious lines, even on the side and in the minds of
those who have pursued it for too long. They shall have
to learn that the effects of crimes must be reversed and
that they will have to abide by law and by the standards
of civilized society, since that will be the only way to
final peace.

However, they will also have to accept the fact that
there will be no refuge from justice, since absolution from
the crimes committed has never been, and will never be,
a part of a peace deal. In this regard, the commitment to
the pursuit of justice through the international war crimes
Tribunal must be unwavering on our part and on the part
of all members of the international community. Without
justice, there shall be no reconciliation. Without
reconciliation, this peace may not endure.

As for us, we will not seek revenge. We have
learned, despite painful concessions for peace, to define
our victory in the lives that we can save and in the
opportunity to rebuild and reinstate, throughout our
country, democracy, the highest standards of human
rights, safety and security for all our citizens, and at least
a minimum of conditions necessary for a decent life.

In this context, I should like once again to stress the
reassurances of my Government to the Serb population
that will come under the control of the Government of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Federation, emphasizing that we

 

have always believed that a multi-ethnic Bosnia can be
preserved only with Bosniacs, Croats, Serbs and others
living together in equality, tolerance and respect for all.

In the coming days, we will have to exercise
enormous patience, sensitivity and forgiveness. But above
all, we are committed to furthering existing democratic
institutions and establishing new ones in order to restore the
rule of law and order in every part of our country, which
will guarantee safety, justice and respect for all citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of their ethnic or
religious background.

Restoration of mutual confidence will be possible if
Bosnian Serb authorities do the same in the territories that
will be under their control at the beginning of the process
of peace and normalization in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This will be possible if those who have committed war
crimes are brought to justice and are prevented from
playing any future political role. Justice must not be
sacrificed, as such a sacrifice would only threaten to
destroy this whole peace project.

Not a single part of this peace package may be
undermined, abandoned or deformed in its implementation,
as that would shake confidence in the wholesomeness of the
good intentions of the international community, a
confidence which, after years of disappointment, has begun
to return.

Bosnia and Herzegovina and its people have the
courage for peace. Our ultimate goal is an undivided Bosnia
and Herzegovina, with democracy and human rights fully
restored throughout the country and with prosperity for all.
We do not want to build ethnic divisions or walls in our
country. We have a long tradition of tolerance and of a
common and harmonious life among diverse communities.
Sarajevo, as a united and undivided capital and as an open
city for all its citizens, shall again be not only a symbol of
the ethnic, religious and cultural diversity and richness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but a new Babylon and the
birthplace of new international hope and solidarity.

We have endured horrendous suffering during this
long aggression, and we hope we shall even better endure
the challenges of peace.

In conclusion, I would like remember and pay respect
to all those Bosniacs, Croats and Serbs for Whom the
promise of peace came too late.

 

