Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): It is my pleasure to see
you in the Chair, Mr. President, and we appreciate your
initiative to call this important debate on the situation in
Africa. We are equally grateful for the lead your
Government has taken in devising a new partnership with
our dear continent.

I would like to make a few points about this topic.
One, which is more obvious today than it was yesterday,
is the need to learn more about Africa.

As we debate the complex issue of conflict
prevention, we should ask ourselves several crucial
questions before we analyse the crux of the matter at
hand, namely, how we should prevent conflict. There is
a generalized tendency to always put the cart before the
horse when we deal with African issues. The easy way
out when we have failed to find adequate responses to
problems that arise has been to conveniently call African
issues tribal or ethnic, then adopt resolutions, take
decisions and go on. Ultimately, the problems resurface
some days later - or months after - and the lessons to
be learned are never learned, and crises go on unabated.
It is this trend of putting the cart before the horse and the
failure to identify the real problem in real time that
culminated in what this family of nations had said "never
again" to.

Many so-called international experts on Rwanda
have for a long time failed to relate the history of my
country to the crisis it was drawn into. For example,
calling people who spoke the same language and who had

 

the same culture, the same religion and the same political
system "tribes" or "ethnic groups" and even "different
racial groups" was and still is nothing but a sign of
ignorance and double standards. The Council knows very
well that in the same kind of blind anthropology we could
be talking of Welsh, English, Irish or Scottish tribes today.
But, thank God, that is not the case; and it should not have
been the case in Rwanda either.

Not addressing the issues at stake in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo today and dwelling on concepts or
notions of invited or non-invited guests in the business of
this Council is nothing but a diversion from the real
problems to be solved. But, no, I am not saying that the
meetings were useless.

Previous speakers have rightly said that it is high time
we got people to learn about Africa as it is today, not as it
was during or before colonial times. Africa has changed
and is changing. It is certainly changing for the better, and
we should help and assist it to take the next steps ahead
and not discourage it through silence or conveniently
undocumented decisions. More visits to the continent by the
members of this body - and here we are grateful for the
visit made by Ambassador Holbrooke - could add
knowledge and enlightenment and provide corrections
which is all we need in order to take the right decisions at
the right time.

We need to position real and proper experts on Africa
at all levels within this Organization if we mean well and
good for Africa. You will tell me that, "Yes, there are
experts". But are they really experts in every sense of the
word? We should avoid piling mistake upon mistake while
believing that we are doing well. We should never do that.
Wrong approaches stem from wrong and false expertise;
they, naturally, generate wrong notions and concepts that
lead to wrong policies and wrong decisions towards Africa.
This should be corrected, and it is correctable.

There is a need to do research and to coordinate
findings and results with the African continental
organization, the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and
the Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution. You cannot ignore
the OAU any more, and you should not ignore it under any
possible pretext. Africa has to have a say and should be
assisted in doing so. The ideas we and they have, along
with logistics and the resolutions of the Security Council
would complement the findings I referred to earlier. This
ought to be revisited so as to give a chance for proper
coordination and understanding between actors in the
search for common ground. The OAU and the Security
Council should take the lead, as was emphasized earlier
by previous speakers.

I would now like to speak about peacekeeping.
Peacekeeping is a United Nations responsibility, and so it
remains. Today, thanks to the large number of books,
articles, eyewitness accounts, "lessons learned in Rwanda"
units and so on that have emerged since 1994, we are
beginning to know something about the events that led up
to the genocide and how punctually and implacably it was
carried out. We can measure the blindness of the
international community at the time the order was given,
at the very start of the killings, to withdraw the forces of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR) - the peacekeeping force stationed in the
country in 1994 - thereby abandoning Rwandan
nationals to their own fate and to the mercy of the
bloodthirsty Interahamwe militias, which are still active
across the borders.

The problem is not the number of troops. The
problem is the kind of mandate the Security Council gives
and should give. We keep saying that we have learned
our lessons after the pull-out of the peacekeeping forces
that were stationed in Rwanda in 1994. We have come to
learn that we actually had the full potential to halt the
genocide if the Security Council had only mandated
UNAMIR to do so. With just a change of mandate
brought about with the flick of a pen and the adoption of
a Council resolution under Chapter VII, we could have
avoided the loss of more than 1 million lives. The
intervention would not have required a major military
operation. The killers were militarily incompetent mobs
armed mostly with clubs, spears and machetes.

The Commander of UNAMIR at the time, General
Dallaire - to whom we owe great respect and admiration
for speaking out in due time - claimed that 5,000 men
and a mandate would have been sufficient to stop the
killings. To revisit the resolutions and actions taken
afterwards is to understand the extent to which this body
genuinely needs to be improved and to act in more
thought-out manner. My delegation is glad to see such an
initiative stemming from your presidency, Sir, which runs
through to the year 2000 - a year we would like to see
as the year for Africa.

As regards political will for timely action, and
speaking from my delegation's point of view, the conflict
we are witnessing today in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is a legacy of the failure of the international

 

community to intervene in Rwanda during the awful spring
of 1994. It is not the result of non-intervention on the part
of some members of the Council in 1996, as a handful of
people are attempting to make the world believe today.
They should have intervened then, in 1994, or soon after -
not later.

They should intervene now and put the Lusaka
Agreement into practice. The failure to maintain the
momentum of July and August 1999 has led some actors to
sing the same old tune of aggressors versus invited guests,
as if this were timely and what people should be
concentrating on at this stage of events. My colleague from
South Africa said it better and in a more concise way.

Today's reports, which members have probably heard,
say that President Masire of Botswana has finally been
accepted by the two parties - the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the rebels - as
their facilitator. We all know how forceful President Masire
is, and we wish him well. We need to see more political
will from this body in reinforcing its own decisions. We
need to see sanctions committees, such as those on Angola
and on Rwanda, take on their responsibilities fully and
produce results, instead of the convenient status quo of
silence, which sounds to some like complicity.

Let me conclude by saying that after Rwanda we had
Sierra Leone, Liberia, the resurgence of the Interahamwe in
the Great Lakes region, and the continuation of Somalia
and other forgotten wars in Africa. We should ask ourselves
questions in this respect. Why is it that this year, as tragedy
unfolded in Kosovo, we referred to those who were
masterminding the killings as "generals", whereas those
masterminding killings in Africa are called "warlords"?
Why are killings between Africans always described as
tribal warfare, while killings between Europeans in the
former Yugoslavia, for example, are always described as
"ethnic cleansing"?

It is more imperative than ever that we all engage in
some serious introspection and ask ourselves if we have
truly learned our lesson. When we really come to terms
with our past failures and arrive at a better understanding
of the ever-changing and different social and political
realities around us, only then will we be able to prevent the
occurrence of future conflicts in Africa and in the world.

