Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): First of all, I would like to
thank the Presidents of both Tribunals, Judge Meron
and Judge Mose, as well as the Prosecutors of the
Tribunals, Ms. Del Ponte and Mr. Jallow, for their
reports to the Council.

Japan appreciates the fact that both Tribunals
have been making efforts for the efficient conduct of
their trial activities. It is particularly noteworthy that
the Prosecutors of both Tribunals completed their
investigative work at the end of 2004 and submitted the
indictments of senior indictees in accordance with their
completion strategies.

We appreciate the recent positive developments
in the activities of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugosoavia (ICTY), which include the
arrival in The Hague of a number of indictees and
fugitives. However, the impact of those new arrivals on
the scheduling of trials should be duly addressed in
order to ensure that the speed of the trials will not be
impeded. We hope that the ICTY will continue its
efforts in that direction by considering the schedules of
trials well in advance.

We appreciate, as well, the continuous effort of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
to conduct judicial trials as efficiently as possible by
utilizing the courtrooms at their full capacity. The
efforts by Prosecutor Jallow to visit many countries to
discuss various issues, including the arrest and transfer
of fugitives and the transfer of cases from the ICTR to
domestic courts, are also welcome. We hope that the
ICTR will maintain the current speed of trials as long
as possible, and thereby fulfil President Mose's
projection that trials and judgements, in the range of 65
to 70 per cent will be completed by 2008.

My Government is concerned about two remarks
in the report presented by President Meron. The first is
the observation that the ICTY's trial activities at first
instance will run into 2009. The second point of
concern is the possibility that President Meron raised
of establishing a fourth courtroom. With regard to the
latter point, careful consideration should be given in
the light of the fact that the Tribunal will be proceeding
with a phasing-down period in the near future, in
accordance with the completion strategy. Concerning
the former point, it is recalled that resolution
1534 (2004) emphasized the importance of full
implementation of the completion strategies, including
the completion of all trial activities at first instance by
the end of 2008. The ICTY should take all possible
measures to meet this goal, as it has previously
confirmed its commitment to the full implementation
of the completion strategy.

At the same time, the cooperation of States in the
region with the ICTY is essential for the achievement
of its objectives. While recognizing that cooperation
has improved, Japan believes that those States must
further enhance their cooperation in order to expedite
the arrest and the transfer of fugitives, especially
Radovan Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and Ante
Gotovina.The transfer of cases from the ICTY to
domestic courts in the region should be facilitated as
well.

In that regard, we welcome the inauguration of
the War Crimes Chamber of the State Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which took place in March of this
year. Japan has donated half a million United States
dollars for the activities of that Chamber through the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Trust Fund. We hope that the international community
will provide further assistance to the Chamber.

Let me reiterate the importance of the
involvement of local people in the process of bringing
about justice. The transfer of cases from international
courts to domestic courts will contribute to the process
of reconciliation among the people of the region and to

the establishment of the rule of law. We hope that this
will be facilitated in both the ICTY and the ICTR,
while ensuring that international standards of due
process and the rights of defendants are maintained.
The question of enhancement of the judicial capacity
of States in the region should be addressed in that
direction, especially in Rwanda and its neighbouring
countries. In the case of the ICTR, a traditional judicial
system such as Gacaca can contribute to greater
involvement of the local people in the process of
achieving justice.

I should like to take this opportunity to ask,
through you, Mr. President, the Presidents and
Prosecutors of both Tribunals about their views on how
the people in the region see the work of the Tribunals.

It is time to consider further the future schedules
of both Tribunals - that is, the scheduling of appeals
cases. Better coordination and scheduling well in
advance will be needed to avoid putting too great a
burden on the Appeal Chambers of both Tribunals.

When we consider the schedules of the Appeal
Chambers, we must also take into consideration the
timing of the expiration of the terms of office of the
permanent and ad litem judges. It is desirable that the
Security Council should consider specific factors in
each case, as it did in extending the terms of office of
nine ad litem judges in January of this year.

Lastly, let me reiterate that it is essential for us,
in assessing the completion strategies of the Tribunals,
to duly recognize their current situation and to take
stock of the direction in which they headed. In that
regard, we strongly hope that the Tribunals will
continue to be accountable for their activities to the
Security Council as well as to the States Members of
the United Nations.

