Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): At the outset, let me thank
Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crimes, for their respective briefings. I
also thank Afghan Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his
statement.

I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the leadership
and the entire team of UNAMA for the important and
vital role they played in the recently concluded elections
in Afghanistan. UNAMA has made a remarkable
contribution in accompanying Afghanistan on its road
to State-building and socioeconomic stability. With
the elections in Afghanistan marking the first Afghan
transition from one democratically elected President to
another, we congratulate the Afghans and their partners
on achieving this milestone. The enthusiastic voter
participation in two rounds of votes held on 5 April and
14 June demonstrated the strong need of the Afghan
people for a democratic process. We are fully aware
that many Afghans are eagerly awaiting the election
results at the end of the election process so that normal
life can resume in their country, given how long it has
taken.
As we await the announcement of the official
results, scheduled on 22 July, it is important that voters
and candidates exercise maximum patience and respect
for the electoral process and mandate of the authorities.
We appeal to the candidates and their supporters to
refrain from inciting violence, as the country is still
in a state of fragility. We also stress that whoever wins
must be aware that an inclusive governance of the
country's diversity is vital to the long-term stability of
Afghanistan in promoting reconciliation and national
unity.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
volatile. With an increase of 22 per cent in security-
related incidents, compared to the same period last
year, Rwanda commends the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) for the consistent progress they
have made in ensuring national security. They have
proved their growing capability to respond to security
challenges, and we specifically commend their efforts
during the election period. We know that by the end of
the year, the ANSF will have full responsibility for the
security of Afghanistan as the International Security
Assistance Force draws down. It is therefore important
that the international community continue to support
and enhance the capability of the Afghan National
Security Force.

National reconciliation is also at an unavoidable
crossroads on the path towards the lasting stabilization
of the country. Rwanda supports an inclusive and
peaceful initiative, and recognizes the importance of
the process being Afghan-led and Afghan-owned.
In that regard, the contribution of regional actors to
achieving sustainable peace and stability, including by
supporting the inter-Afghan dialogue, is of paramount
importance. The strong support of UNAMA for the
High Peace Council in confidence- and trust-building
has also been indispensable.

We underscore the importance of the general
mutual commitment made at the Tokyo Conference
on Afghanistan of July 2012 as an indispensable tool
for guiding cooperation between Afghanistan and its
development partners. The implementation of the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework is fundamental
to the long-term stability and future success of
Afghanistan. We encourage the Afghan authorities to
honour their commitments in the areas of promoting
good governance, implementing the necessary reforms,
fighting corruption and protecting human rights. On
that note, we recognize the significant progress that has
been made in the process.
Narcotics remain a key problem in Afghanistan and
beyond. They are a threat to international peace and
security. Continued efforts to suppress drug trafficking
would enable the Council to effectively fight against
drug-financed terrorism and criminality. No concrete
results have been attained to date, due to lack of serious
joint efforts on the part of all the stakeholders in the
region to curtail its production.

We welcome the draft presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/12) on drug trafficking that the Security
Council shall adopt shortly, which fully expresses
the position of the Council on the issue and supports
the existing regional, interregional and international
mechanisms in the fight against illicit drugs. We hope
that it will contribute to the fight against the scourge of
illicit drugs.

In conclusion, let me say that Afghanistan
institutions have a great role to play in ensuring that
their transition is successful, that the progress made
is self-guided and forms the basis for Afghanistan's
future peace, security, growth and development. We
will continue to advocate that UNAMA, the United
Nations system as a whole and the international
community continue to accompany Afghans towards
their aspirations.

