Mr. Darii (Moldova): From the very outset, I wish to
join previous delegations in expressing our condolences
to the family, friends and colleagues of Ambassador
Churkin, who passed away suddenly yesterday.

As for the thematic debate today, I would like to
thank the Ukrainian presidency for its initiative to
convene this ministerial open debate dedicated to
conflicts in Europe. This initiative is not only timely
but highly necessary, given the fragility of the overall
security situation in our region.

We fully share your assessment, Mr. President,
that the unresolved conflicts that erupted at the end of
the twentieth century and the conflicts that emerged
in Europe in the twenty-first have reached a tipping
point and constitute a serious challenge to European
security and a threat to international peace. These
conflicts, some of them unresolved for more than 25
years i such as that in my country - continue to
impact negatively the political, social and economic
development of the States concerned. I am speaking on
behalf of a country directly affected by a protracted,
unresolved frozen conflict. Moreover, the territorial
integrity of some United Nations Member States - in
Europe, these are Azerbaijan. Georgia, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine - has been compromised and
their sovereignty repeatedly violated.

What is clearly needed for European and global
peace and security at this critical juncture is a strong
reaffirmation by the General Assembly and actual
implementation by the Security Council of imperative
United Nations norms and principles of international
law. We expect the Security Council's members,
particularly the permanent members, not only to react
but also to act promptly and impartially whenever
peace and security are threatened and when - I again
underline - the principles of international law, in
particular the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Member States, are disregarded .

I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize
the need to arrive at a common understanding in
regard to the secessionist entities outside national and
international law. It should be stressed that some of those
secessionist entities are not just so-called parties to a
conflict, but also the byproducts of broader geopolitical
games - a fact that explains why they are unwilling
to arrive at a negotiated solution. In this regard,
confidence-building measures, including the economic
and financial incentives associated with and meant to
underpin them, will not be sufficient in relation to some
protracted conflicts unless the geopolitical triggers that
started them in the first place are defused.

Despite the quasi-unanimous perception that the
Transnistrian conflict, compared to other conflicts in
our geographical area, would be the easiest to resolve,
after almost 25 years of political we have not yet
succeeded in getting closer to a solution. In that regard,
and bearing in mind that all the international actors in
the 5+2 format are represented here in this Chamber,
I would like to thank the mediators, Ukraine and the
Russian Federation, the observers of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Union and the United States for their tireless efforts to
contribute to advancing towards identifying a political
solution to the conflict in the framework described by
all the speakers who have referred to the settlement of
the Transnistrian conflict through a political solution
based on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Moldova, with a special status for Trannistria. In
that regard, I should also like to emphasize that the
withdrawal of foreign troops from the Republic of
Moldova could be an additional element to advance the
settlement process.

The capacity of the Council to uphold international
law rather than geopolitical interests, is crucial to the
smaller States that make up the majority of the United
Nations. In this regard, we believe that the presumed
need to reform the Security Council will increase with
each unresolved matter. I therefore want to express our
hope that today's debate will contribute to advancing
conflict resolution in Europe, despite the challenges
ahead of us, as well as the advancement of the United
Nations.

