Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join others
in thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his sobering
briefing. We deplore the loss of lives and the number of
people wounded, as he described.

As I said last month in the Security Council, we
cannot afford to put the peace process on the back
burner (see S/PV.8244). The gap between the two
sides is growing fast, as is illustrated by yesterday's
events. Those events serve to underline that the current
trajectory leads to loss of lives, confrontation and
despair, and it results in growing divisions between
Israelis and Palestinians.

I will focus on the three points: first, the
demonstration in Gaza; secondly, the issue ofJerusalem;
and, thirdly, the importance of the peace process and
the role of the Security Council.
As to my first point, on the demonstrations in
Gaza, we are alarmed by the new levels of Violence.
As Mr. Mladenov said, 59 people have been killed
and more than 2,600 people have been wounded, 770
of whom were injured by live ammunition. That is the
highest number of people killed in Gaza in one day
since the conflict of 2014.

The numbers suggest that almost one in 40 people
was hit by live ammunition and that one in 16 was
wounded in that manner. That raises serious questions
about the proportionality of the Israeli response. We are
particularly worried by the killing of children and other
minors and the high number of health-care workers
hurt. That underlines again the need for restraint as well
as the need for an independent, transparent and prompt
investigation into all incidents that led to casualties.

We take note of the fact-finding assessment
mechanism established by the Israeli Defence Forces
(IDF) to review IDF actions and specific incidents
that have taken place on the Israeli-Gaza border since
30 March.

While recognizing Israel's legitimate security
concerns, we repeat our call upon that State to ensure
that its responses are necessary and proportionate at all
times, in line with its obligations under international law.
The use of live ammunition should be a measure of last
resort only, as stated in the Basic Principles on the Use
of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials.

We strongly urge all Palestinian parties to ensure
the peaceful character of protests and not resort to
violence. Calls to storm Israel or for the use of violence
are unacceptable. Peaceful demonstrations should not
be used as a cover for violence.

The demolition of the Palestinian side of the Kerem
Abu Salem crossing only harms Palestinian interests.
We call upon the de facto authorities in Gaza to ensure
the safety of that crossing, which is the only crossing
for the entry and exit of food and medical supplies
and other goods. It should be protected. We call upon
the Palestinian Authority and the de facto authorities
in Gaza to repair the damage as soon as possible. We
welcome Israel's decision to resume and ensure the
normal functioning of the crossing today, despite the
challenging environment.

These developments show that a structural solution
for Gaza is needed now more than ever. At the same
time, the humanitarian crisis has to be addressed. We
would like to ask Mr. Mladenov to present his ideas and
proposals on what can be done in that regard.
My second point concerns Jerusalem. The future
status of Jerusalem is perhaps the most sensitive and
complex of all final-status issues. Jerusalem is a holy
city for Jews, Muslims and Christians. The ties of the
Jewish people to Jerusalem are irrefutable and must
not be denied. The ties of the Palestinian people to
Jerusalem are irrefutable and must not be denied. This
calls for wisdom; this calls for prudence.

Unilateral steps with regard to the future status of
Jerusalem are not only unwise and counterproductive,
they are above all in contradiction to international law.
But they cannot be used as an excuse for violence. We
will continue to respect the international consensus on
Jerusalem, as embodied in resolution 478 (1980), among
other things, including on the location of diplomatic
representations, until the final status of Jerusalem is
resolved through negotiations.

My third point concerns the peace process and what
the Council can and should do. First, looking at the
whole picture, what we need in the current situation is
de-escalation. That applies to Jerusalem and Gaza and
to Israeli-Palestinian relations generally. All parties
should focus on defusing tensions and enabling efforts
towards a better future for the region. While wisdom
and courage are needed to return to negotiations for a
political solution, both sides are taking steps that are
incompatible with resolution 2334 (2016). Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas's speech on 30 April
contained unacceptable remarks about the origins of
the Holocaust and Israel's legitimacy. Such rhetoric
will only play into the hands of those who do not want
a two-State solution. Israeli political leaders who
advocate for annexing parts of the West Bank only play
into the hands of those who do not want a two-State
solution. We call on both sides to take steps that create
mutual trust and help to preserve the possibility of such
a solution.

The current tensions should not be used as an
argument against action. On the contrary, they
demonstrate the urgency of more resolute action now.
Realistically, only a two-State solution will enable
both sides to fulfil their aspirations, put an end to the
conflict and achieve the just and lasting peace that
Israelis and Palestinians long for and deserve. We call
on the members of the Quartet to convene to address
the negative spiral. The situation in Gaza is worsening
with each passing week and we therefore believe that a
united reaction from the Council is urgently needed to
help de-escalate the situation.
In conclusion, we are willing to engage with
the other members of the Council to formulate an
appropriate public expression that addresses the recent
events and all the unhelpful steps taken on both sides.
We are convinced that this can be done in a balanced
manner, which will enable the Council to contribute to
de-escalating the current situation.

