Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): To begin, we must respond to the
host of falsehoods spoken here by the Vice-President
of the United States while we are supposed to be
discussing the humanitarian situation. I must clarify
matters before the international community, the
people of Venezuela and the media. He lied in saying
that yesterday the region as a whole rejected the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
at the Organization of American States. That is false.
He is misinformed. It is a problem with his lawyers.
Yesterday, in its eagerness to promote a coup d'etat in
Venezuela and impose a puppet Government to serve
the interests of the United States to enable it to pillage
our homeland, they sacrificed the founding Charter of
that organization, which is the equivalent of the Charter
of the United Nations. They distorted the law to the
extent that what was approved was not the expulsion
of the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela but the inclusion of a representative of the
National Assembly. What they did there yesterday is
a legal absurdity, since the Organization of American
States, like the United Nations, is an organization of
States, not of assemblies. The only State present in that
organization is the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Therefore, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was
not expelled from that organization. What they now
have is a strange individual. No one understands what
he will do, because he does not represent the State of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela but the National
Assembly. That is what is written in the resolution. So
he is lying.
I say that because the United States uses that lie to
sell its course of action to the other States Members of
United Nations to convince them to impose a puppet
Government here and that the United Nations is a club
of friends of the United States. According to him, the
only ones that can be here are the friends of the United
States, those that serve its interests and believe in the
Monroe Doctrine, which is clearly a racist policy of
more than 200 years ago, when the United States was
a slave State, and which they think can still be pushed
today when it comes to international law. But there
is no basis in international law for what he is doing.
We are certain that when the United States tries the
trick that it played yesterday at the Organization of
American States here at the General Assembly, it will
fail. We are certain of that. And we wanted to respond
to that before proceeding. It also threatens us with war:
"all options are on the table". On what legal basis can a
country come to the Security Council table to threaten
another with war? The Security Council should address
that point as well.

Turning to the topic at hand, the humanitarian
situation in Venezuela must be resolved, but if we make
a mistake in the diagnosis, we will also make a mistake
in the treatment for its relief. As has been said here,
the situation is the result of human actions. I want to
mention something that has not been said, including
by the three briefers - and they are very quick to
gather data about the smallest non-governmental
organization, while never setting foot in Venezuela,
including Mr. Stein. He knows a great deal but is blind
before the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. However, he sees the representative of the
dictator Government in Guatemala and meets with his
representatives. But he will not meet with us to learn
what the current situation is, despite the fact that we
have invited him on several occasions.

None of the three briefers, like most members of
the Security Council, recognize that the human actions
that led to this situation are part of a plan to destroy
the economy directed by the Government of the United
States and the United Kingdom in order to strangle the
national economy, cause the greatest social suffering
possible, undermine our country's ability to support
itself and, ultimately, bring about a collapse that allows
for a foreign military intervention under the perverse
pretext of the responsibility to protect, which has
been the excuse for colonial invasions of countries
with oil reserves. It is a giant inhumane experiment in
unconventional warfare, a policy of calculated cruelty
and a massive violation of human rights, going as
far as committing crimes against humanity, in order
to justify an overthrow and pillage by installing a
subordinate local Government and, in our case, using
racist ideology of 200 years ago, that is, the infamous
Monroe Doctrine.

Members may think that I am exaggerating. But let
us hear the criminals in their own words. Do not listen
to me but to what they say. In January last year, that is,
more than a year ago, the State Department declared:

"the pressure campaign is working what we are
seeing is a total economic collapse in Venezuela.
So our policy is working, our strategy is working
and we are going to keep it".

In October of last year, the United States
Ambassador, William Brownfield, said:

"We must treat this as an agony, a tragedy that
will continue until it reaches an end and if we
can do something to speed it up, we must do it,
understanding that this is going to have an impact
on millions of people who are already having
difficulty finding food and medicine We cannot
do this and pretend that it is not going to have an
impact. We have to make a hard decision. The
desired end justifies this severe punishment."

Those are not the diplomatic words or the words of
a humanitarian worker. They are basically the words
of a psychopath. There is no name for it, it is cruel
and inhumane. It is an international crime. Severe
punishment for the entire Venezuelan people, that is
what he said.

Senator Marco Rubio, the leader of the coup d'etat
in Venezuela, said:

"In the next few weeks, Venezuela is going to enter a
period of suffering that no nation in our hemisphere
has ever confronted in modern history."

On 22 March, Mr. John Bolton, infamous in this
Organization, said, sickeningly,

"It is like in Star Wars, when Darth Vader constricts
somebody's throat; that is what we are doing to the
regime economically".
That is what he said; those are not my words. This
is deliberate economic destruction, the systematic
implementation of the policy of aggression through the
use of financial instruments, through the application
of undue pressure and through the use of market
dominance to influence the banking sector, private
enterprise and other nations that engage in legal trade
with Venezuela, including extorting United Nations
agencies - all of this in order to isolate our country
from the international trade and financial system.

If it were true that the Venezuelan Government,
as has been stated here many times, as part of an
incredible litany of lies, is killing its own people,
then why is this group of countries using massively
extortionate methods that only increase the suffering?
Why would that be necessary if we are already killing
our people, as they say? In fact, they are the ones
causing our social implosion. What we want is peace
and the well-being of our people. They are the ones
who want to see social implosion in order to justify an
invasion. This is a plan under which banks, insurance
companies and the shipping system are being used with
a destructive capacity comparable to that of weapons
of mass destruction, but without those responsible for
the suffering being brought to justice or suffering the
moral sanction that they deserve.

John Bolton said, "My advice to bankers
brokers and other businesses: do not deal in
[Venezuelan] gold or oil". Mr. Elliot Abrams, also
infamous for his actions in Nicaragua and the Middle
East specifically, where he planned the killing of
thousands of people, stated:

"We are imposing our sanctions. What does the
regime do? It tries to find other ways to get around
them. It tries to find new customers. It tries to
find new sources of imports. So what do we do?
We watch carefully, and we can see ships moving
and we can see new contracts with new companies,
and when we do, we talk to shippers, or we talk
to refiners, or we talk to Governments, and we
say, you should not be doing that. That is what we
are doing."

That is what was stated by Mr. Abrams, whom
some are attempting to portray as a humanitarian actor.

One repugnant aspect of this criminal policy of
mass destruction is that it goes hand in hand with looting
and pillaging. This deprives our people of basic goods,
leading to tremendous suffering and literally robbing
the Venezuelan people of tens of billions of dollars.
The profits of our refineries are being confiscated;
they are using them to pay the debts of companies that
are friends of the Trump Government. Those friends
of the Trump Government hold Venezuelan bond
debt, which they are prohibited from transferring, so
they are receiving special licences from the Treasury
Department to collect their profits from the earnings
of our refineries, stolen from the people of Venezuela.

Now there is a plan to saddle the country with more
than $70 billion in indebtedness, as was just announced
jointly with the International Monetary Fund. This
$70 billion is to be used to pay the uncertified debts
created in opaque financial negotiations with friends
of the United States Government. Nor can we forget
about the Bank of England, which stole $1.2 billion in
gold from our people, under the pretext that they do not
recognize President Nicolas Maduro.

Unbelievably, the last time we brought up this point
(see S/PV.8476), the British representative stated that
this was not the case, that it was a money-laundering
issue. That is impossible, because the gold has been
there for more than 30 years, and they know where it
came from. In addition to taking more than two years
to respond to our questions, they have joined with the
Venezuelan opposition, the puppet Government that
they are supporting, saying that they are complying
with the sanctions imposed by the United States and
with the order handed down by the British Government
to recognize that puppet Government. The credibility
of the Bank of England as a neutral, transparent
organization has been ruined. It is now negative; it is
less than zero. It is an institution that is working for the
Trump Government and the British Government. It is a
colonial Power that is behaving as did English pirates
200 years ago.

This is the real cause of the situation of the
Venezuelan people. There is no other cause. Yes, our

people are suffering, but our Government - as the
Secretary-General can confirm, as can the Chef de
Cabinet, with whom I meet almost every week - is

working intensively with the United Nations system to
boost the number of cooperation projects as well as the
volume and capacity of those programmes, particularly
in the areas of health care, food, education, electricity
and transport.

By the way, Mr. President, if you were better
informed about Venezuela, you would know that
vaccines are available in Venezuela and that the situation
with respect to malaria, measles and diphtheria has
improved considerably owing to our cooperation with
the Pan American Health Organization. But if you keep
restating figures from two or three years ago or figures
such as the briefer presented, you will be deceiving the
public. Vaccines are available right now in Venezuela;
the situation in this respect has improved over the past
two years as a result of this cooperation.

The same is true of our cooperation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross, with whose
President our own President, Nicolas Maduro, met
yesterday in Caracas in order to make headway in the
creation of a direct mechanism that would facilitate the
provision of truly neutral, independent and impartial
assistance. The same can be said of the friendly
countries that provide assistance on a peaceful basis, in
full respect of our sovereignty.

One key factor that has been underestimated by
those who are waging war against Venezuela is the sheer
strength of our national spirit, which only grows when
we are facing difficulties. This macabre experiment in
destruction is aimed at proving that economic crimes do
work, that peoples can be broken and made to surrender
to foreign oppressors.

But they are wrong about Venezuela. The collective
suffering that they are indeed causing is resisted
by growing levels of organization on the part of our
people. Our national Bolivarian armed forces have
not broken rank despite all the calls for a coup d'etat
and are more united with the people than ever. Our
people are resisting, and our workers are reacting to
the clandestine attacks and acts of sabotage against our
vital infrastructure with a discipline and celerity that
the aggressors had not imagined they would possess.
Yes, there is pain, there is suffering, but this is not
triggering a civil war, which is what they want. Today
our people are setting an example for the world of how
to fight for peace and community.

It would be logical to think that the efforts of our
Government to overcome the difficulties caused by
this aggression would be recognized and supported
by all of those who claim to be so interested in easing
the situation in Venezuela. However, what we are
experiencing is a fresh wave of economic extortion,
which is cutting off our country's financial flows with
the exterior and is also affecting our cooperation with
United Nations agencies, which even as I speak cannot

find a way to receive our funds and send the supplies
necessary to meet the needs of our people.
Why is that? Because the Trump Government
is engaged in a campaign of terror against any
commercial or financial actors that have anything to
do with Venezuelan money. We have money; we are not
asking anyone for anything. We have money, but the
Trump Government is terrorizing economic actors to
ensure that they do not touch it. What the United States
is engaged in has nothing to do with humanitarian
assistance; it is a clandestine operation carried out
without the consent of Venezuela that violates our
territorial integrity through the threat of the use
of force, as we have seen, and is aimed at inciting a
military uprising and civil war. That is the specialty of
that Government.

The Security Council, under Articles 24, 34
and 39 of the Charter, has the responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and to
determine the existence of any threat to the peace or of
any act of aggression. We therefore ask and call on the
Council to please determine the following.

First, what is the legal basis in international law
and under the Charter of the United Nations for the
United Nations and the United Kingdom to impose
on Venezuela a programme of economic destruction
without the express authorization of the Security
Council? Are they taking measures in line with those
provided for under Article 41 of the Charter of the United
Nations - measures for economic blockade - with the
authorization of the Council? This is illegal. When will
the Council determine the illegality of this aggression?

Secondly, what is the legal authority for applying
what is now being called "secondary sanctions" against
countries that are legally transacting business with
Venezuela? What authority does the Government of the
United States have to place sanctions on any country
for doing business with us?

Thirdly, what is the legal basis in international law
for the United States to threaten Venezuela with the
use of military force? Where is that? Why is there no
pronouncement on that?

Fourthly, what is the legal authority for the United
States and the United Kingdom to appropriate our
wealth? The representative of the United Kingdom
said they were extending $9 million. Do we have to
thank them for offering $9 million for the situation in
Venezuela, when they have $1.2 billion in confiscated
funds in the vaults of the Bank of England and they
say that the Bank of England is an independent
institution - while the Bank of England says it does
not obey what the British Government says to them?
That is the subject of a case we have against them in
court at the moment. What is the legal authority for the
United States and the United Kingdom to appropriate
our wealth and gain extortive earnings by massively
violating the human rights of our people?

Lastly, what is the legal basis for the United States
to intervene in what are essentially matters having
to do with Venezuela's domestic jurisdiction, in
violation of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter of the
United Nations?

In conclusion, the diagnosis of the present situation
is that it is the result of a campaign of aggression by
the United States and the United Kingdom. Treating the
situation cannot be by way of a new dose of aggressive
intervention with ahumanitarianmask. The solution does
not lie in donations by the criminals who want to paint
themselves as saviours. It does not lie in humanitarian
channels designed to provoke armed conflicts. It does
not lie in holding donors conferences that serve to hide
the plunder against our nation. Addressing the situation
requires returning the money stolen from our people;
halting the economic and financial blockade against
our nation; stopping the sabotage of our infrastructure
through covert operations; ceasing threats of military
intervention; and ending threats against Venezuelans
who want to have a dialogue. We must stop Trump's war,
and the Security Council must meet its responsibility
by guaranteeing Venezuela its right to peace.

