Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important and unique
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica and the
Finance Minister of the Seychelles for their instructive
briefings, and all the other ministers for their presence
here today.

Let me begin, Mr. President, by applauding your
initiative in bringing this issue to the Security Council.
Small island developing States (SIDS) are a valuable
part of our diverse United Nations family, forming more
than a quarter of our membership. From the Caribbean
to the Pacific, they are important partners on so many
issues, whether they involve trade, migration or tackling
crime. And through their membership of organizations
such as the British Commonwealth, many bring shared
history and values to bear on issues of mutual interest
and concern.

But as the Secretary-General and the briefers
have made clear, small island developing States face
significant challenge that are directly relevant to
the business of the Council. Vulnerability to natural
disasters and food and energy insecurities can all have
a disproportionate and destructive impact on their
development.

In Grenada in 2004, Hurricane Ivan caused
damage that cost double the island's entire gross
domestic product. In March this year, Cyclone Pam
left thousands homeless in Vanuatu and other Pacific
islands. Sadly, the Council requires no introduction to
the damage caused by the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, the
consequences of which Haiti is still dealing with today.

It is because of these vulnerabilities that small
island developing States are often the first countries
to face the impact of emerging global problems. They
can be a bellwether for us all, so it is incumbent on
the Council to pay close attention to their situation and
offer our support in response. The challenges they face,
if left unaddressed, could eventually challenge us all.

Climate change is the clearest example. We have
seen countless instances of climate change multiplying
interlinked threats in small island developing States. For
example, in Tuvalu sea-level rises and in Palau coastal
erosion have degraded arable land and undermined food
security. In the Pacific region, ocean acidification has
damaged fish stocks, impacting both food security and
economies, and in Marshall Islands, changing weather
patterns have increased extreme weather events such as
cyclones and king tides.

If unchecked, these factors can lead to mass
migration. Kiribati is already buying land in Fiji to help
secure its future. We are already seeing real damage
to economies, lost development gains, setbacks to the
eradication of poverty and an increase in piracy and
arms trafficking. These challenges affect small islands
directly; they place additional burdens on neighbouring
countries; and they can damage interconnected
economies globally.

As an island nation ourselves, the United Kingdom
will not be immune to such climate pressures. Nor will
we be passive in the face of the climate challenge. That
is why we have committed $6 billion to climate finance
between 2011 and 2016. It is why we pledged $1.2 billion
to the Green Climate Fund and are committed to
spending 0.7 per cent of our national income on
development. The risk that climate change poses goes
beyond our shores and those of small islands. Left
unaddressed, climate change could constitute one of
the gravest threats to international peace and security
for generations.

It is clear that we all need to make climate fragility
a key consideration in our foreign policy planning,
particularly in our partnerships with small islands. For
it is through partnership that the United Nations can
offer the greatest support to small islands. Through
engaging with bodies such as the Alliance of Small
Island States, the Pacific Islands Forum, the Caribbean
Community and the Commonwealth, we can share our
collective expertise to deal with these issues together.
We saw the benefits of this approach at last year's SIDS
conference, hosted by Samoa.

There are some further opportunities for
partnership in the months ahead. Just a week before the
Paris Summit, many small island States will take part
in the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting,
where they will discuss climate change. A strong
Commonwealth message on this issue ahead of Paris
would be a welcome call for wider action.

Beyond climate change, I look forward to the
General Assembly special session on drugs, to be held
in April next year. Issues of organized crime and illicit
financial flows linked to the drug trade are of particular
concern to many Caribbean small islands. Here, too,
we need to recognize in the Council the importance of
international cooperation to tackle organized crime and
the threat it poses to the stability of States.

So let me conclude, Mr. President, by thanking
you again for bringing this issue to the Council. It is an
excellent example of how the Council, by working with
partners, can look ahead and identify risks upstream.
In doing so, we can pre-empt issues that could lead to
instability and conflict, and address them together:
conflict prevention in action. We hope that we will
continue this approach with small island developing
States in future.

