Ms. Hay (New Zealand): The theme of today's open
debate is apposite. Comprehensive measures by States
and the international community as a whole continue
to be required if progress is to be made in reducing
the threat posed by international terrorism. Terrorism
is a complex and multidimensional challenge. Each
State must of course adopt an approach suited to its
individual needs and circumstances. One size does
not fit all. Nevertheless, the enduring threat posed
by international terrorism means that the prevention
of terrorist acts must remain a key national security
priority.

I will focus my comments on the approaches that
New Zealand has taken domestically to reduce the
risk of terrorist acts occurring by countering violent
extremism at the grass roots.

While the threat from terrorism in New Zealand
remains very low and levels of social cohesion are high,
the Government remains vigilant to possible terrorist
threats from disaffected or alienated members of the
community. New Zealand's approach is based on a
coordinated, whole-of-Government response at the
national level, in close cooperation and consultation
with the community.

Prevention lies at the heart of the operational ethos
of the New Zealand Police in meeting this challenge.
With this in mind, New Zealand has treated the threat
from violent extremists as a social as well as a criminal
issue. While we have strengthened our legal framework
to criminalize involvement in terrorism, we have
also developed innovative social approaches aimed at
diverting young people from involvement in violent
extremism at the earliest stage possible.

Community policing, tailored strategies for
engaging minority and religious groups, a strong
emphasis on inter-faith dialogue, and initiatives fostering
community trust in the Police have all been effective
tools for addressing and combating radicalisation
and violent extremism. They have helped to keep
New Zealand relatively unaffected by religious and
ethnicity-related violent extremism. These efforts are
deeply rooted in the philosophy of community policing
and grounded in high levels of trust between society
and the police. They also rely on accurate assessments
regarding those communities most vulnerable to
recruitment by extremists or to self-radicalization, as
well as strong national and international partnerships.
New Zealand exercises zero tolerance for
violence and other serious crime. When police
become aware of individuals involved in low-level
extremist activity, priority is given to using social
support measures to divert them from any antisocial
behaviour. Communities are engaged in a manner
that addresses the underlying causes and ultimately
reduces offending and victimization. Authorities also
constructively engage communities in situations where
no crime has been committed but where evidence
exists that individuals may be vulnerable to terrorist
recruitment. This strategy has met with considerable
success in preventing terrorist acts at the earliest stage
possible, while also maintaining excellent relationships
with ethnic and religious communities upon whose
cooperation and goodwill law enforcement efforts
ultimately depend.

Given our own experience of the success of
community policing, New Zealand is pleased to
support a new programme of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate on the practical
utilization of community policing in countering violent
extremism. Beginning in 2013, the programme will
seek to enhance the capacity of police officers in South
and South-East Asia to recognize possible indications
of violent extremism at an early stage and to strengthen
the emphasis on developing cultural understanding
and human rights-compliant practices in detecting and
addressing it.

This initiative is one of the ways in which New
Zealand has sought to draw on its own domestic
experience to support our regional and international
partners in their efforts to implement the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We will continue
to partner with United Nations counter-terrorism
entities, including in areas such as preventing terrorist
financing and by strengthening criminal justice and
law enforcement capacities and cooperation.

