Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by expressing
the appreciation of my delegation to the presidency of
the People's Republic of China for convening this open
debate, and to the Secretary-General for his briefing.

My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to express condolences to the Governments
ofEcuador and Japan for the tragic loss oflives resulting
from the devastating earthquakes last week.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of the State of Kuwait on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

This debate comes at a time when there is
increasing global concern about the prospects for peace
in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Last January, the
Secretary-General spoke about the growing frustration,
alienation and despair felt by the Palestinians with
regard to the prolonged occupation of their homeland.
Since then, violence in the occupied Palestinian
territory has continued to grow at an alarming pace. No
progress can be seen in the efforts to halt the violence
or address the injustice and oppression committed
against Palestinians. Indonesia is following with deep
concern that troubling development. Not only does the
continued violence reflect the hurdles on the way of
peace, it also symbolizes the hardening of suspicion
and animosity between the two peoples, which could
hinder efforts to restart the political process.

Indonesia remains convinced that the occupation
must be brought to an end and that all efforts must
be exerted to achieve the two-State solution. Indeed,
last month, the fifth Extraordinary Summit of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, hosted by the
Government of Indonesia, drew the attention of the
international community to the urgency of attaining a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question
ofPalestine. The Summit also called on the international
community to support the boycott of products produced
in or by the illegal Israeli settlements.

Israel's continued construction of illegal settlements
in and around East Jerusalem, along with other illegal
activities, poses a further challenge to efforts to find a
wise course of action. It is the responsibility of Israel,
the occupying Power, to observe and comply with its
international obligations, such as the protection of
the fundamental rights of the Palestinian people and
to prevent the occurrence of extrajudicial killings,
which have been rampant in recent times. Israel must
also realize that its restrictions on the movements of
Palestinians and the arbitrary conduct of its security
forces against Palestinians can only breed anger and
resentment and that it must refrain from committing

collective punishment.

The United Nations has adopted hundreds of
resolutions on the question of Palestine since the
Organization was established. Last month, the
Commission on the Status of Women adopted yet
another resolution on the situation of Palestinian
women, which Indonesia co-sponsored. Sadly, despite
the overwhelming support of Member States for all
resolutions on the question of Palestine, no substantial
efforts have been undertaken to implement them.
Indonesia has repeatedly called on the Security Council
to delay no further in ensuring that Israel complies
with international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. The Council must also pave the way for the
resumption ofa credible peace process aimed at putting
an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestine and the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The world cannot wait any longer for us to hold
briefings and closed consultations while people are
losing their lives and the two-State solution is fading
away. In that regard, I would like to express Indonesia's
appreciation for the initiative on the part of the relevant
parties to mobilize the support of the international
community and push the peace process forward.

With regard to the conflict in Syria, Indonesia
once again urges all concerned and interested parties
to work hard to bring the conflict to an end and allow
humanitarian assistance to reach all those in need. It is
absolutely intolerable that the conflict, which has been
ongoing for approximately five years, has dragged on
for so long, with repercussions now being felt around
the world. That fact only underlines the imperative of
an inclusive process involving all Syrians to settle the
conflict.

Indonesia remains hopeful that the round of peace
talks that began in Geneva last week will build the
momentum needed for an inclusive political process.
We commend the work of the United Nations in
facilitating the talks, especially the dedication shown
by the Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and
encourage all parties to the conflict to respect the goals
of peace and humanity. We urge all Syrians to make
full use of the current diplomatic impetus by swiftly
reaching a political settlement that can serve as a basis
for future peace and stability in Syria.

With respect to Yemen and Libya, we welcome the
continued dialogue that could boost efforts to restore
national unity and peace in the region. What is at stake
are the lives of many innocent civilians.

Lastly, Indonesia remains steadfast in its
commitments to ensuring peace and stability in
the Middle East and will do its utmost to attain that
noble objective.

