Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway attaches the
utmost importance to a prompt and lasting settlement
of this issue. At the same time, we recall the
background and purpose of sanctions against Iraq,
which are clearly linked to preventing Iraq from yet
again constituting a threat to peace and security in the
region. We are committed to the premises for ending
these measures. A lasting settlement can happen, and
will happen, only on the basis of full Iraqi cooperation
with the international community in conformity with
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
including its resolution 1284 (1999).

The basic requirements of cooperation with the
international community are simple. They are shared
by all members of the Council. They are reasonable,
seen against the background of earlier records of
compliance by the Iraqi authorities.

The essential message from the international
community is, therefore, that the key to unlocking the
door of sanctions is through full cooperation. Iraq
holds the key. On our part, we have been eager to see
that key being properly turned in order to lift the
sanctions.

Weapons inspectors must be given entry to Iraq,
and Iraq must demonstrate its willingness to cooperate
fully with the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC). We have
full confidence in the Commission's Chairman,
Mr. Hans Blix, and his team. In the field of weapons of
mass destruction, particularly after Iraq has
demonstrated use of such weapons, the international
community could not issue a clean bill of health
without reasonable guarantees. The international
community has been demanding nothing more, and
nothing less.

Moreover, we regretfully have to revert to the
issue of missing persons and stolen property. We are
deeply concerned by the plight of the missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals, as well as their families. It
is disturbing that there is no progress on this matter.
We urge Iraq to ensure the expeditious repatriation or
the return of all Kuwaiti and third-county nationals or
their remains. Iraqi statements attacking the integrity of
the high-level Coordinator, Ambassador Vorontsov,
must be clearly rejected. We fail to understand why the
required transparency with regard to missing persons
and stolen property cannot be achieved through
cooperation with the United Nations.

Paramount among Norwegian concerns is the
humanitarian situation of the Iraqi people. We remain
dismayed by the dire living conditions of various
segments of the civilian population. It would be too
simple to attempt to identify one single reason for these
difficult living conditions and health problems. There
are various reasons for this situation. Nevertheless, we
all have solid evidence not only on the usefulness but
also of the necessity of the humanitarian programme in
Iraq pursuant to resolution 986 (1995). Therefore, it is
a matter of particular concern that $2.2 billion of the
funds destined to meet these humanitarian objectives
remain unused in the United Nations escrow account.

It would be naive to claim that full utilization of
the oil-for-food programme would by itself solve all
the outstanding issues related to the development of the
social and economic infrastructure in Iraq, and we are
not doing so. However, the Iraqi authorities bear the
main responsibility for utilizing all means put at their
disposal by the United Nations to meet urgent needs.
Moreover, they must ensure budgetary priorities and
take other appropriate measures to accommodate these
needs.

Norway attaches great importance to a
humanitarian cash component under the humanitarian
programme in order to allow for the purchase of locally
produced goods and thus stimulate development of
local resources. Needless to say, our primary wish
remains, however, full Iraqi cooperation with the
United Nations, leading to an end to sanctions, and
thereby allowing for a normalization of the economy.
Security Council resolution 1284 (1999) remains the
overall framework and stipulates the conditions for the
lifting of sanctions against Iraq.

Pending the cooperation we all hope for, and
which so far has not been forthcoming, we find on our
part that it would be irresponsible not to engage in a
result-oriented and concrete attempt to revisit how
current sanctions work. It is our collective
responsibility to make a thorough assessment of current
practices and consider how they could be improved.
Drawing on my own experience from chairing the
Security Council Committee established by resolution
661 (1990), I think I have all members with me in
saying that certain immediate improvements and
changes are called for in the handling of imports of
goods into Iraq. This has also been highlighted by the
Secretary-General in his latest report dated 18 May
2001 (S/2001/505) on the implementation of the oil-
for-food programme. We should heed his call to
Council members to ensure a more effective
implementation of the programme. This can be
achieved by doing away, as far as possible, with certain
cumbersome and time-consuming procedures involved
in today's practice.

We believe that the focus of the Committee
should be solely on items which represent a military-
related threat or clear dual-use risks. We would
welcome significant simplification and streamlining of
procedures towards this objective.

Such a step requires the adoption of a list of
goods to scrutinize, a so-called goods review list. I
believe it is important to note here that such a notion,
although new, reflects the fact that, in reality, we have
already had a comprehensive control list for 11 years.
With the exception of a few items that have been fast-
tracked, the overwhelming majority of items destined
to Iraq have been undergoing the scrutiny of the
sanctions Committee. We all know how cumbersome
and, in my View, unnecessary such an approach can be.
More importantly, it can lead to unwanted obstacles to
the flow of important items. Limiting the scope of
control by the sanctions Committee to potentially
sensitive items by leaving all other items aside is, in
our view, plain common sense.

Moreover, Norway is in favour of the increased
involvement of Iraq's neighbouring States in upholding
effective United Nations measures and thus of sending
a signal of renewed unity from the international
community to Iraqi authorities. At the same time, their
legitimate concerns need to be taken into full account.
In exploring ways to enhance United Nations controls,
we should be guided by a thorough analysis, in close
consultation with the States concerned.

By the unanimous adoption of resolution 1352
(2001), the Council is faced with both the challenge
and the responsibility of reforming the implementation
of the humanitarian programme. This is the main task
that we have undertaken to do by 3 July.

In summing up, the basic issue before us today is
the following choice between two alternatives: either
we seize this opportunity to radically simplify and
promote the flow of everyday civilian goods into Iraq,
thereby establishing beyond any doubt that the
international community is giving paramount
importance to humanitarian concerns, while keeping
sensitive goods under control; or we preserve the status
quo. This appears in reality to be the only other option.
A continuation of the current state of affairs would
mean carrying on with a cumbersome and time-
consuming scrutiny of almost all goods destined for
Iraq. Such a course of action would be contrary to the
interests of the Iraqi civilian population.

The choice is clear. We must seize the
opportunity before us and mark a clear departure from
the status quo.

