Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for his briefing on the
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000) in relation to
United Nations forces. I should also like to thank Dr.
Piot for his informative and exhaustive briefing on how
the various United Nations organizations, in
cooperation with the World Bank, have responded to
the devastating effects of the AIDS epidemic at the
global level.

I should also like to express, through the
representative of the United States, my gratitude to
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke for his active efforts in
encouraging the Security Council to deal with this
matter. As this is his last meeting with us in the
Council, I should like to wish him great success in his
future endeavours.

For my delegation it is clear the world AIDS
epidemic around the world is a phenomenon that
requires the greatest efforts on the part of all nations,
acting individually as well as collectively.

We are encouraged by the adoption, at the most
recent session of the General Assembly, of resolution
55/13, through which it was decided to convene a
special session in June of this year to deal with various
aspects of this problem, including those linked to the
peace and security of nations. We hope that the
Assembly will continue to be the appropriate forum for
dealing with this topic, in order to ensure that it
receives the consideration it deserves from all of the
States Members of the United Nations.

The global problem of AIDS is a daunting
challenge for the authorities of many of our countries
in the areas of public health, economic development
and national security. Of all that has been said and
written on this topic, my delegation is clear, at least, on
the following aspects.

AIDS, having claimed 20 million lives so far,
represents the greatest global epidemic the world has
known since the appearance of the bubonic plague in
Europe six centuries ago. Of the 36 million people who
live with the disease today, two thirds of them live in
sub-Saharan Africa, where 8 million of them are
orphaned children.

The best strategy to fight the epidemic consists of
national programmes aimed at preventing the spread of
the disease, alleviating its effects on its victims, and
access to low-cost medications, including a vaccine.

AIDS also poses a threat to economic
development. A World Bank study estimates that thus
far we have seen only 10 per cent of the potential
manifestations of this disease and 10 per cent of the
number of deaths. People with AIDS in developing
countries will not have access to a vaccine or to low-
cost medication for another 10 years. Indicators
relating to productivity, family income and the training
of human resources will also be broadly affected by
this epidemic.

As a result, this situation requires political
leadership on the part of Governments, action by the
affected communities and a responsible attitude on the
part of international pharmaceutical companies.

As concerns the impact of AIDS on peace and
security, the Council clearly pointed in resolution 1308
(2000) of July last that an out-of-control epidemic
could threaten the stability and security of countries,
and adopted a series of measures within the scope of its
jurisdiction.

Let us imagine an extreme and complex scenario
resulting from the effects of AIDS. A town that is
overwhelmed by the incidence of this disease and
facing the collapse of its public health system decides
to seek the assistance of the health authorities of a
neighbouring country instead of passively awaiting its
gradual destruction. Thus the humanitarian emergency
is transferred to the neighbour, generating resistance
among the local population, and there we have the
beginning of a new conflict.

We realize, nevertheless, that this is an extreme
scenario. What we are seeing today is that wars and
armed conflicts help to spread the epidemic. Where
there are armies on the march, camps overflowing with
refugees and women who are sexually assaulted, the
probability of spreading the disease increases.

In this respect, studies by non-governmental
organizations carried out before and after the Rwanda
genocide are revealing. The average rate of infection
among refugees increased sixfold while they were in
the camps.

The Council, acting within its jurisdiction, has
repeatedly urged countries that provide troops to
peacekeeping operations to provide the necessary
education and assistance to troops in the field. We are
encouraged by what is being done by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and what it will continue
to do to strengthen such preventive actions.
My delegation is committed to the action begun
by the Council and is in favour of continuing to
consider at future meetings the potential repercussions
of the AIDS phenomenon on various areas of
international peace and security.

