Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is difficult for anybody to take the floor
after Ambassador Greenstock' s valuable remarks.
However, the statement by the representative of Israel
makes it hard for me not to say a few words.

Syria has always been proud of having been
among the first countries to combat terrorism, and of
having been successful in doing so. It is also very
proud that it cooperates with all countries of the world
- in the North, South, East and West - to combat and
eliminate terrorism. High-level officials in more than
one country have affirmed that Syria' s cooperation
with them in combating terrorism has saved lives.

The countries of the world elected Syria almost
unanimously to membership of the Security Council, in
appreciation of Syria' s role in international political
life and in the Middle East. For some 14 months, Syria
has done everything possible to enhance the work of
the Council, especially in combating terrorism. States
members of the Security Council are well aware of
Syria' s effective and rich contribution in fighting
terrorism. Council members and other States Members
of the United Nations, contrary to allegations by the
representative of Israel, know full well the effective
role that Syria plays in that regard.

Let me caution that the greatest danger to the
international campaign against terrorism is the Israeli
terrorist approach to combating terrorism. It appears
that the representative of Israel' s ignorance of the
principles and methods of international action, of
Security Council debate, of how the Council discusses
the items before it and of the work of its subsidiary
bodies has blinded him to the truth. He thus resorted to
cheap tricks when we were discussing such a serious
issue in the work of the Council. Does the
representative of Israel seriously believe that he can
mislead Council members and the international
community? I do not believe so.

Palestinians in Syria, about whom the
representative of Israel spoke, estimated to number
more than 400,000, are the victims of Israeli terrorism.
The entire world sees and hears about Israeli terrorist
practices. In 1948, Israel was founded on terrorist
organizations. The records of the United Kingdom
Foreign Office are replete with evidence of that. The
killing of Count Bernadotte, the United Nations peace
mediator, at the hands of Israeli terrorist gangs is well
known. Recently, United Nations officials have been
killed in the West Bank and Gaza.

It appears that Israel cannot understand that
occupation is terrorism. It has killed more than 2,180
Palestinians during the past two years alone. Thirty
Palestinians have been killed in the past day and a
half- that is one Palestinian killed every hour. An
entire army is practising terrorism. What does it mean
consistently to demolish the houses of Palestinians,
throwing thousands of innocent children into the rain,
snow and cold of the winter? What does it mean to
demolish a house yesterday while four people were still
living in it - killing all of them? Is not that terrorism?

The problem is that Israel thinks only about its
own children, its settlements and its occupation and
about the need to maintain that occupation. The
representative of Israel referred to the Israeli
occupation soldiers who escort the poor Israeli children
to their schools. But Palestinian children are being
killed in cold blood every single day, with Israeli tanks
at their doors to stop them from going to school. But
killing them is not enough. According to Israeli logic,
they are not human beings.

A four-month-old child, Iman Hajjo, was killed
when four bullets penetrated her little head, shattering
it completely. We all watched as the child Mohamed al-
Durra was killed by the Israeli occupation forces. Is
that life or death? Is not that terrorism?

Everybody has the right to talk about terrorism
except Israel; Israel is the symbol and embodiment of
terrorism. Israel must stop its occupation of our
territory; it must stop its settlers; it must stop violating
our rights. We have said before and will say again that
occupation is terrorism - it is the apex of terrorism.
Occupation is occupation, and occupation is terrorism.

We support the fight of all people against
occupation, even though some have claimed that such
fights constitute terrorism. Let me reaffirm that Syria
will continue its close cooperation with all countries to
combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
and it will make every effort to support the Counter-
Terrorism Committee with a view to fully
implementing resolution 1373 (2001) in all its aspects.

I would like to express my gratitude to
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock for all of his efforts as
Chairman of the Committee. We promise the next
Chairman of the Committee - our neighbour in the
Council, Ambassador Arias, Permanent Representative
of Spain - that we will continue that cooperation.

