Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I, too,
want to thank the High Representative for his briefing.
I feel the need to express my gratitude to all speakers
who have expressed firm support for the process of
State-building and the integration prospects of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in the European Union.

However, after 15 years, instead of considering
how we could stop discussing Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the Security Council, we are again discussing certain
aspects of peace and security in the country. It must
therefore be understood that, for me and my
delegation, it is quite a personal and emotional issue.
We nevertheless feel the need to express both our
gratitude and certain concerns.

Allow me to note that, when we discuss the
situation in Bosnia, we have to be aware that we are
not discussing the situation that prevailed 15 years ago.
The current situation is one in which a lot has been
achieved. My country is dealing with issues that were
not a part of the problem 15 years ago, but are
preventing the country from entering a new phase of
integration and prosperity. In that regard, it is
important to say that a lot has been achieved. The
State- and institution-building processes, the return of
refugees and the overall building of the State have been
achieved and have been successful. In the current part
of the process, domestic parties have played a major
role, in cooperation with the international community.

As a member of the Security Council, we have
had the privilege not only to discuss policies across the
world, but also to have had many lessons and examples
before us that we are using today as a reminder that
such instruments are being built on the basis of the
experience of Bosnia and Herzegovina. When we deal
with issues of post-conflict justice, we have to
remember how much has been done in that field with
regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, and the process of
building institutions within a State in order to address
the issue ofjustice.

For that reason, I have to express my concern
over some comments that have been made with respect
to the percentages of cases before domestic institutions
involving the various ethnic groups. The point is that
all war crimes have to be tackled, and that is the only
way we should discuss this particular issue.

In that regard, I should also like to consider the
position of the international community. The role of the
High Representative is still important in supporting the
capacities of State institutions to resolve institutional
deadlocks. Such activities of the High Representative
are aimed at the continuation of Euro-Atlantic
integration, which is the strategic goal of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Office of the High Representative, as
the executive body of the Security Council in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, not only is the main player in the
theatre, but also represents the determination of the
international community to support the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
mandate of the High Representative is defined by
annex 10 of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
confirmed by Security Council resolution 1031 (1995),
pursuant to the request of the signatories to the
Agreement to follow-up on the Agreement's
implementation. Moreover, the Bonn powers of the
High Representative were confirmed by resolution
1144 (1997). However, that does not involve the Peace
Implementation Council, which has only a
non-obligatory advisory role defined later by an
international conference.

Another issue that I have to address - and I
understand that it is not easy to comprehend, but is
important to stress in the light of certain comments that
have been made - is the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is not solely the sum of three constituent
peoples. It is a country with a tradition of
multiculturalism and of people living together in cities
and villages and working together. When we discuss
the political situation in Bosnia, we have to be aware
of the fact that we have more than just ethnic parties
and structures; we have people working together. Thus,
when we consider the internal affairs of the country in
terms of the creation of a Government, we have to be
fully aware that we are discussing not only ethnic
groups trying to make political deals, but also political
forces in which people of different ethnic groups work
together for the common benefit of the country. I
believe that this approach should, at the very least, be
supported.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize the need for
and prospects of regional cooperation. Our Presidency
has done a lot in that regard. We have to stress that it is
necessary to ensure mutual respect and
non-interference in our internal affairs. We truly
believe that this is a real and promising prospect.
Certainly, in recent times Bosnia and Herzegovina has
gone through a difficult political situation, but at the
same time the Government has been structured at the
entity level and at most of the local level. The
Presidency is functioning; we are taking many positive
steps in terms of working on regional cooperation, and
our caretaker Government is also functioning in a way
that is necessary to create one society.

For that reason, we believe that it is necessary for
the international community to continue, together with
domestic actors, to work resolutely to achieve the
major goals of the country: integration and State-
building. That is a prospect towards which we must
look together with our neighbours in the region. I
believe that this prospect is strong and the only correct
path towards a common future.

