Mr. O'Brien: I wish to add my condolences for the
tragic loss of Ambassador Andrey Karlov today.

I fully align with the Secretary-General's request
of the Council and of the Government of South Sudan.

I thank you, Mr. President, for this timely
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan. In my briefing
to the Council on 22 June, and in the written submission
issuedjointly with the Office ofthe High Commissioner
for Human Rights in August, I highlighted the
spread of violence to new areas and its humanitarian
consequences. Six months later, the humanitarian
situation has deteriorated dramatically. This will not
come as any surprise to anyone in the Council, since
they have heard and have been following the reports, as
I have, month upon deteriorating month. Violence and
attacks against civilians have continued. Hundreds of
thousands of people have been driven from their homes
and hunger has deepened. There are numerous accounts
of horrific gender-based and sexual violence, with most
perpetrators walking free.

Last week, the conflict in South Sudan entered
its fourth year. Since December 2013, civilians have
borne the brunt and faced increasingly appalling
humanitarian conditions. We are now witnessing a
scale of need for assistance and protection that demands
our urgent, relentless attention and action. This year,
some 6.1 million people - half the population of that
young nation - required humanitarian assistance. The
humanitarian community expects that number to rise
by a staggering further 20 to 30 per cent in 2017, due
to the destructive violence on the ground and forced
displacement compounded by food insecurity, economic
decline, destitution and a breakdown of basic services.

Approximately 3.1 million South Sudanese have
been forced to flee their homes - 1.3 million of them
across borders as refugees and more than 1.8 million
internally. Many South Sudanese have been displaced
multiple times, failing to find the safety and security
they so desperately need. Since July alone, more than
383,000 people have gone to Uganda while the others
have moved to Ethiopia, the Sudan, the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
People flee with almost nothing - just the clothes
on their backs and whatever few belongings they are
able to carry. Their journeys are mostly perilous, due
to insecurity, leg-sapping marshland to slog slowly
through, or desiccated, inescapable heat, and always
with a lack of food, water and shelter. I have received
more and more harrowing reports of families being
separated with little to no provisions. The sick, disabled
and elderly are simply, terrifyingly, being left behind to
an inhumane and unknown or sadly at times a too well-
known fate and of attacks, including killing, rape and
the abduction of young men.

For children, as ever the future of that young
country, the cost of protracted conflict continues to be
particularly brutal. Children make up around half of all
those who are displaced, and more than 9,000 children
are registered as being unaccompanied, separated or
missing. More than 17,000 children are believed to
have been recruited by armed actors since the conflict
began. Fewer than half of primary school-aged children
are currently enrolled in schools. One in four schools
is closed, primarily due to insecurity, and learning
in general has been disrupted by the displacement of
teachers and schoolchildren alike. There has been one
lost generation and now another, and much capacity to
rebuild South Sudan one day, somewhere ahead, has
also been lost.

Hunger and malnutrition levels are disconcertingly
high and encompass communities in places that were
considered to be relatively food secure less than a
year ago. More than 1 million children under the age
of five are now estimated to be acutely malnourished.
Recent screenings in Torit, Lafon and Ikotos in Eastern
Equatoria have found proxy global acute malnutrition
rates above the emergency threshold. At the height
of the lean season in 2016, approximately 4.8 million
people - more than one in every three people in
South Sudan - were estimated to be severely food
insecure. That number will increase in 2017 because
of the ongoing conflict, economic decline and poor
agricultural yields.

Basic services are severely stretched and in many
areas only partially functioning, if at all. Fewer than
half of the country's medical facilities are operational,
and even when operational they have the capacity to
provide only minimal services, given chronic lack of
essential medicines. Since December 2013, 106 health
facilities have closed, while at least 29 have been
looted or destroyed. As a result, the sick or wounded,
including survivors of rape, often have nowhere to go
to get treatment.

Women and girls continue to face heightened risks
of sexual violence, particularly by armed actors, with
rape used as a weapon of war. In Wau in February and
June, and in Juba in July, hundreds of women reported
rapes and gang rapes. Other reports have come in from
Bentiu, Leer, Malakal, Yambio and other locations
across the Equatorias, including of abductions and
rapes. Those reported attacks often occur at armed
checkpoints. There have also been multiple reports
of sexual violence perpetrated against women and
girls who leave protection-of-civilians sites to gather
firewood and food. With reference to the prevalence of
gang rape, the Commission on Human Rights in South
Sudan said last week that it is "running out of words to
describe the horror".

At the very moment when needs are growing and
deepening, the ability of humanitarian partners to
provide life-saving assistance timely and effectively
is diminishing at an alarming pace. National and
international organizations continue to work tirelessly
to provide assistance in one of the most dangerous and
challenging operating environments in the world today.
I want to express my deep respect and admiration for
their commitment and courage. But everyone needs to
know that it comes at a high cost. So far, at least 67
humanitarian workers have paid with their lives - 12
ofthem since July. The humanitarian community is also
being targeted in other ways. During the horrific attack
on the Terrain Hotel in July, humanitarian workers were
sexually assaulted, raped and murdered. Over the past
months, reports of harassment have become numerous
and routine.

Beyond the ongoing insecurity, aid organizations
are now facing increasing levels of bureaucratic
obstruction and intimidation, mainly by the Government
of South Sudan, but also by parts of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition. In the past
four weeks alone, there have been four serious incidents
in which South Sudanese authorities have arrested,
detained or deported senior staff of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). No formal charges have been
presented in any of those cases. In another case, one
of the largest South Sudanese NGOs had their office
in Juba shut down by authorities, again without
documented cause. Despite demarches from the United
Nations, there have been no explanations.

That is simply unacceptable, and those incidents
must stop. To be clear - our NGO partners deliver
around 70 per cent of all humanitarian assistance in
South Sudan. Their presence and programming are
fundamental to the continued life-saving response.
Without national and international NGOs on the
ground, food cannot be delivered to scale; emergency
medical relief cannot be provided to all those who
require it; malnutrition cannot be adequately treated;
and life-saving access to clean water to prevent the
spread of diseases such as cholera will be hampered.

Despite those immense challenges, humanitarians
have delivered life-saving aid to approximately
4.7 million people this year, including nearly
3.6 million, who were reached with food assistance
or emergency livelihoods support; more than 195,000
severely malnourished children, who were admitted
for treatment; more than 2 million who were provided
access to clean water; more than 1 million, who were
reached with emergency shelter and vital non-food
items; and nearly 200,000 children, who were
administered with the pentavalent vaccine against five
major diseases. More than 18,000 survival kits - an
inter-agency lightweight package of supplies designed
to be easily carried by people on the run - have been
dispatched to some of the most remote locations. That
assistance has been delivered based on assessed needs,
targeting people in the most severe need in all areas of
the country.

Against the backdrop of a humanitarian situation
that is a relentless descent into this catastrophic abyss
ofhopelessness, fear, intimidation, irreversible damage,
destruction, stunting and death, an increasing number of
South Sudanese are looking to humanitarian actors for
assistance. Yet access to those most in need continues to
be restricted in some areas of the country. Last month,
100 reports of humanitarian access incidents were
documented - the highest number in any month since
June 2015. I am appalled to highlight that approximately
67 per cent of those incidents involved violence against
humanitarian workers or assets.

Where towns are controlled by one party to the
conflict and surrounded by another, we continue to
face major challenges to reaching people in need owing
to the active conflict and access denials, particularly
in Yei, Central Equatoria, in which we estimate that
tens of thousands of people who have been unable to
make the long and costly journey to Uganda remain
displaced in areas surrounding the town and unable to
access assistance and in Wau, Western Bahr el Ghazal,
in which tens of thousands of people outside the town
have been largely cut off from aid for months. The
recent proliferation of armed actors has increased the
complexity of access negotiations and heightened risks
to aid workers.

As I have stated before, including in Juba, Wau and
Aweil, during my visit in August, steps and action must
be taken once and for all to remove those obstacles,
which are unacceptable and run contrary to the parties'
obligations under international humanitarian law. It is
critical that all humanitarian organizations are granted
free, safe and unhindered access to all people in need
wherever they are. While we welcome steps taken by
the Government to address some of those challenges,
including the establishment of the Humanitarian
High Level Oversight Committee, it is vital that
commitments be translated immediately into concrete
and effective action.

South Sudan is on the brink. Decisive action to end
the violence is needed, and it is incumbent upon the
Council to make sure that the necessary action is taken.
My message today is therefore three-fold.

First, if a political solution is not urgently found
to stop the violence, the humanitarian crisis in South
Sudan will not only grow but will cascade way beyond
anyone's control, not least, that of the Council. There
must be a cessation of violence. There is no alternative.

Secondly, collective leverage must be exerted to
ensure the facilitation of unhindered access to all those
who require assistance in all areas of the country. As
part and parcel of that, there must be real commitment
to protect humanitarian workers. Meanwhile, those who
killed, attacked and raped humanitarian workers must
be prosecuted and held to account just as the impunity
of those who attack civilians must come to an end.

Finally, I draw the Council's attention, as did the
Secretary-General just a moment ago so powerfully,
to the recent call made by his Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide on the imminent risk ofviolence
escalating along ethnic lines with the clear potential for
genocide. There is no greater urgency than to prevent
that from happening. Millions ofwomen, men, girls and
boys are already suffering. It is imperative that all do
what is in their power to stop the current trajectory and
collectively help South Sudan and, above all, the South
Sudanese people avert a cataclysmic infernal event and
find a path to get back on a track to peace and security
for all its citizens.

I was going to stop there, but allow me as the
Council's humanitarian adviser to add one more point.
I say this with the representative of South Sudan
present here today. The international community and
the Council itself have repeatedly said, "Never again"
-after Srebrenica and Rwanda. Given the clear facts
and evidence in South Sudan presented this evening,
how many more clues do we all need to move from
our anxious words to real, preventative action? How
many lives, women, men and children can we all save
if we and those with influence over the parties act
decisively today?

