Mr. Schori (Sweden): As you know,
Mr. President, I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia - as well as the associated countries of
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey and the European Free Trade
Association countries of the European Economic Area,
Iceland and Liechtenstein, align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union welcomes the visit of
Foreign Minister Kerim to the Security Council and
thanks him for his statement on the situation in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

The European Union is deeply concerned about
the recent escalation of violence in the border region
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Kosovo
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. The
European Union strongly condemns the growing
number of violent incidents in this area, including the
ethnic Albanian extremist attack of Sunday, 4 March,
near the village of Tanusevci, which led to the death of
three soldiers. Violent acts such as those endanger the
stability and security of the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia and its citizens and should stop
immediately.

The European Union calls upon all political
leaders in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Kosovo to isolate the forces behind those violent
acts and to shoulder their responsibility for peace and
stability in the region.

The European Union reiterates its strong
attachment to the principle of the inviolability of all
borders in the region, including the territorial integrity
of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

The European Union welcomes the efforts
initiated by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) aimed at
increased control of the border area in the region, and
the further strengthening of coordination between the
authorities of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and KF OR to contribute to the stabilization
of the situation in the area.

A peaceful and stable former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia within internationally recognized borders
is an important condition for furthering the integration
of that country with the European Union, as well as a
key factor for stability in the region.

