Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. Angela Kane for her briefing. I
also wish to associate myself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the representative of Finland on
behalf of the European Union.

I would first like to express my country's sorrow
at the news of the terrible events of recent days that
have taken the lives of so many Palestinians in the
Gaza Strip, especially yesterday's occurrence at Beit
Hanoun. On behalf of the Government of France, I
wish to extend our heartfelt condolences to the families
of the Palestinian victims. France would like to see
light shed on the circumstances surrounding that attack
as possible. It will be up to the Secretary-General to set
out the parameters for an eventual independent inquiry.
We join the Secretary-General in calling on Israel to
immediately put an end to its military operations in the
Gaza Strip.

More generally speaking, France would like to
reiterate its condemnation of indiscriminate Israeli
artillery fire into populated areas. Those actions, which
endanger civilian populations and constitute a violation
of international humanitarian law, especially the
Geneva Conventions, must end. Israel's legitimate
right to self-defence on behalf of its citizens must be
exercised in full respect for international humanitarian
law.

France also condemns the firing of rockets into
Israeli territory, as well as the appeal of certain armed
Palestinian groups for a resumption of suicide attacks.
The Palestinian Authority has the duty to maintain law
and order and combat terrorism. We would like to
reiterate our support for the efforts of President Abbas
to strengthen national Palestinian consensus and to
form a Government whose political platform would
reflect the principles of the Quartet and of the peace
process.

As the Minister for Foreign Affairs said here in
September, there is no military solution to the Arab-
Israeli conflict. Violence only feeds frustration,
resentment and hatred. It also runs the risk of dragging
the entire region into a new dangerous escalation.
Today more than ever, the two parties must
demonstrate a spirit of responsibility and abstain from
any action that could further complicate efforts to
arrive at a political solution at a time when peace and
dialogue should be everyone's objective.

The international community - and the Quartet
first and foremost - must become involved without
delay in resolving this conflict, which remains central
to the region. The tragic escalation of recent days
underscores the need for an urgent meeting of the
Quartet to follow up the commitments undertaken in
New York in September, with a View to reinvigorating
the prospects for peace. There is no alternative to the
establishment of a viable, democratic and sovereign
Palestinian State living in peace and security with
Israel.

Given the worrisome growing number of civilian
victims in recent months, we wonder about the
possibility of possibly putting in place a mechanism to
protect the civilian population. We believe that, in
collaboration with the Secretary-General, we should
collectively consider potential options in that regard.
The next meeting of the Quartet may provide an
opportunity for that. France, along with its European
Union partners, will continue to work towards a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution based on
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid Conference
terms of reference, the principle of land for peace and
the Arab peace initiative.

