Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I will not waste the Council's time replying
to all those who have abused this meeting to push the
so-called International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011.

We have sent many letters to the Secretary-General,
as have many other countries, pointing out that the
establishment of that mechanism is a flagrant violation
of international law and a deliberate distortion of the
law's provisions. We would like to recall here the truth
that reveals the malicious goals behind that murky
mechanism's establishment. Among the countries
that support it are some that have been financing the
Al-Nusra Front terrorist organization; some that are
home to financial institutions that facilitate money-
laundering for financing terrorism; and some that, along
with their intelligence agencies, have been implicated in
the creation of the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon
and have facilitated their funding, training and entry
into Syria and Iraq.

My delegation has studied the concept note
(S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex) by the Permanent
Representative of Poland carefully. We affirm that its
contents could be a guide for us and our work if the
Governments of the world adhered to it without double
standards or selectivity. In that case we could avoid
many conflicts and halt various acts of aggression
and oppression, and would be able to guarantee the
implementation of international law and maintain
international peace and security.

Syria is enduring the seventh year of a terrorist war
that was imposed onus. We have a real stake in apeaceful
settlement led by Syrians without external or foreign
intervention, through diplomacy, negotiation, good
offices and mediation. My Government is participating
seriously in every initiative that seeks to achieve a
sustainable solution to the crisis. However, we cannot
ignore or deny the truth that we now live in a politically
polarized world because some Governments believe
that political, military and economic power gives them
the right to determine the fates of other peoples.

Most countries in this Organization, however,
believe in the rule of law at the international and
national level, without double standards or selective
measures. They believe that international relations
must be governed by respect for national sovereignty,
cooperation, partnership and development for all so as
to prevent conflicts and maintain international peace
and security. This meeting is an important opportunity
to assess the position of international law in the
framework of the maintenance of international peace
and security. However, that requires us to be serious
about upholding the rule of law, guaranteeing equality
for all and ending hotspot issues around the world. It
also requires us to be serious about ending all forms
of aggression and occupation, as well as attempts to
abuse international law or distort its concepts in order
to interfere in the domestic affairs of States.

We are true believers in the concept note's
positions. The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility by working for the peaceful settlement
of conflicts. Respect for international obligations and
the rule of law must be shown by responding effectively
to violations of international law, and we believe that
the Council has the necessary tools to achieve those
goals. However, noble goals and theories are one
thing and reality is another, and there are so many
examples to prove that. The Palestinian people and the
Syrians under Israeli occupation have been waiting
for more than 50 years for the Council to implement
the resolutions of international legitimacy that would
put an end to their brutal occupation. But the reality
is that permanent Member States of the Council are
obstructing that implementation, providing cover
for the Israeli occupation to expand its settlement
activities and displace and kill Palestinians while the
world watches.

The Council has been unable to fulfil its mandate
when it comes to holding the racist terrorist entity of
Israel accountable. Just two days ago Israel brutally
killed 60 defenceless civilians and injured more than
3,000 others. The Syrian people are still waiting for
the Council to fulfil its mandate with respect to the
aggression ofthe so-called global coalition to defeat the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant led by the United
States against our sovereignty and unity. We are also
waiting for it to respond to the aggression by Turkey,
the continued aggression by Israel, and the tripartite
act of aggression against Syria on 14 April led by the
United States, the United Kingdom and France.

However, the reality is that some permanent
members have been able to render the Council unable
to act. It has not even been able to release a statement
of condemnation because some of its members are
accomplices in those crimes of aggression and have
abandoned their responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. The peoples of the
world, and the Syrian and Iraqi peoples in particular,
are waiting for the Council to fulfil its mandate to hold
those Governments and their intelligence agencies
accountable for creating the monster of foreign terrorist
fighters, who are still killing thousands ofinnocent Iraqi
and Syrian civilians. However, the reality is that some
in the Council are obstructing the implementation of
resolutions established under Chapter VII that provide
for holding to account all those implicated in the influx
of foreign terrorist fighters to Syria and Iraq.

In conclusion, now more than ever the credibility
of the United Nations and the Security Council is being
put into question by the conscience of the peoples of
the world. If we truly seek to restore that credibility
and the role of the United Nations, the path is crystal
clear and the tools are available. All that remains to
be done is for some Governments to show a genuine,
sincere and serious will to bring their practices in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter and the
provisions of international law.

