Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): As a
country neighbouring Sierra Leone, Guinea is certainly
the first country to have suffered as a result of the
crisis in Sierra Leone. We had asked the international
community for a long time to do its best to stabilize the
situation in Guinea, primarily because we are in an area
that has been a conflict zone for 10 years: first, there
was the protracted war in Liberia, which had an impact
on Guinea. When we saw that the conflict was shifting
towards Sierra Leone, we began sounding the alarm to
warn that Guinea had to be helped to bear the burden of
refugees and to stabilize its own situation.

Specifically on Sierra Leone, I would say that
everything that happens in Sierra Leone is immediately
felt in Guinea. At various times three former Presidents
of Sierra Leone have found themselves in our capital,
not because we wanted them, but just because we are
close by. There are hundreds of thousands of refugees
who cross the border because of our proximity and
particularly because of the similarity between our two
populations. We believe that the artificial border with
Sierra Leone has not worked and Guinea has
immediately found itself a major host country.

So we have felt the impact in terms of the
economy, public expenditures, the environment,
deforestation and health problems. We have had no
shortage of security problems, because some of the
refugees have settled along the border, contrary to
international regulations, which has enabled rebels
often to conduct raids in Guinea to seek supplies and
even recruits among the refugees. Finally, what we had
always said would happen did happen: the rebels
attacked the country. Even now, despite the departure
of a significant number of refugees, Guinea is still
suffering the consequences of that situation.

Turning to Guinea's role, we have always worked
to restore peace in Sierra Leone and Liberia. Guinea
worked with Nigeria and Ghana to stop the massacres
in Liberia. Even before the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) arrived, those three
countries intervened on a massive scale in Sierra Leone
to restore peace. That was done through the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). We represent a
significant part of ECOMOG in Sierra Leone and we
played a stabilizing role in Sierra Leone. We call on the
international community to help stabilize the situation
in Sierra Leone, because we know that whenever things
go bad in Sierra Leone, Guinea is the first to suffer. We
continue to play this role regarding Sierra Leone and
Liberia.

