Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and
your team on your continuing leadership and successful
presidency in July. We welcome the convening of this
open wrap-up meeting, which we consider an essential
tool in the Council's work. We urge that it be maintained.

I wish to begin by mentioning two lessons learned
in July that we believe contribute to improving the way
the Council addresses challenges to international peace
and security.

The crash of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17
on Thursday, 17 July in eastern Ukraine again put
pressure on the Council to confront a crisis, one
that caused the death of dozens of civilians and is a
threat to international stability. Despite existing
differences regarding the issue, we were able to adopt
a press statement on 18 July that sought to ensure the
conduct of a complete and impartial international
investigation of the incident. That call was reaffirmed
shortly afterwards through the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2166 (2014).

Moreover, the adoption on 14 July of resolution
2165 (2014), on the humanitarian situation in Syria, also
showed that when we decide to focus our discussions on
specific issues and concrete measures on the ground,
it is possible to make progress and achieve results.
In that particular case, discussions were focused
on opening four border crossings and establishing
a monitoring mechanism and responsibility for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance once it enters
Syrian territory - all concrete and pragmatic issues.
It was possible to see in those discussions ways in
which member States showed flexibility and worked
constructively to achieve consensus.

While it is too early to analyze the implementation
of the resolution, the entry of the first convoy of
humanitarian aid through the Bab al-Salam border
crossing on 24 July is an encouraging sign. We hope
it is the beginning of a process to help alleviate the
critical humanitarian situation affecting millions of
Syrians and that the resolution will continue to be
implemented - unlike resolution 2139 (2014) and
the presidential statement of 2 October of last year
(S/PRST/2013/15).

Nevertheless, we are aware that only a political
solution will put an end to the humanitarian crisis. The
unanimous approval of both resolutions bolstered the
Council in creating a sign of unity. It also showed that
it is possible that the Council can be capable of forging
a common vision to fulfil its responsibility.

However, one cannot address only the positive
aspects. If we are to take a moment to analyse
the Council's effectiveness in the maintenance of
international peace and security, there is no better
example than the situation in the Middle East, including
the peace process, to demonstrate that the Council is
not completely fulfilling its role under the Charter of
the United Nations. Indeed, the situation in the Middle
East has been addressed by the Security Council nearly
since the earliest days of the United Nations, with the
first resolution on the matter dating back to 1948. Yet
today the Council appears irrelevant when it comes
to preventing the ongoing escalation of violence that,
since 8 July and the launch of Operation Protective
Edge, has caused more than 1,000 fatalities, including
civilians - women and children - in Palestine and
more than 50 in Israel, through the disproportionate
use of force in Gaza and continuous rocket attacks on
Israel.

To us it seems crucial that this body do everything in
its power to achieve an immediate ceasefire and impose
respect for international humanitarian law, preventing
a worsening of the conflict. In that sense, the adoption
on 28 July of the presidential statement introduced by
Jordan (S/PRST/2014/13) is highly important as this
body resumes its rightful role in regard to the conflict,
but it does not exhaust the ongoing discussions on other
actions. As that conflict persists, the Council should
consider new options, especially strengthening the
Quartet's role. We also underscore that the Council
must firmly demand compliance with its resolutions
under Article 25 of the Charter. We particularly wish to
emphasize compliance with resolution 2143 (2014). We
repeat that it is crucial that the Council address the root
causes of conflict and echo the call of the Secretary-
General for a comprehensive solution to this grave
crisis, including the political, humanitarian, security
and development aspects, to enable the peaceful
coexistence of Israel and Palestine within secure,
internationally recognized borders.

Finally, we wish the United Kingdom every success
in its upcoming presidency.

