Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and Venezuela
for convening this timely and important debate on
the theme "Post-conflict peacebuilding: review of the
peacebuilding architecture", as we are in the final
stages of the intergovernmental process to which
we, Angola and Australia have been appointed by
the Presidents of General Assembly and the Security
Council respectively. As already mentioned, a draft
resolution is under negotiation, and we aim to secure
its adoption soon by the General Assembly and the
Security Council, in conformity with the mandate
received from the Presidents of the General Assembly
and Security Council.
I am very pleased to see Ambassador Rosenthal,
Chair of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture,
back in the Council Chamber, and I thank him for
sharing with the Council his views on how we should
move forward regarding peacebuilding. The Advisory
Panel's excellent report (see S/2015/490) provides
a comprehensive assessment of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. I would also like to
thank my friends Ambassador Macharia Kamau and
Ambassador Olof Skoog, current and previous Chairs
of the Peacebuilding Commission. I am very pleased
that they have shared their views with the Council to
guide our debate this morning.

Finally, when I look at the list of Member States
whose representatives inscribed their names to
participate in this open debate, I am also pleased to see
that the membership believes that our theme has great
significance, both for the Council's work and for the
international community itself. The maintenance of
peace is indeed what we need to do.

In establishing the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office 10 years ago, the General Assembly and the
Security Council had as their objective to provide the
United Nations with the institutional, financial and
structural capacity to support countries emerging
from conflict. The Peacebuilding Commission has
played an important role in assisting States on its
agenda and is a forum for sharing of experiences, best
practices and expertise in post-conflict situations.

In a world facing continuous threats to peace and
the proliferation of conflicts, regular reviews of the
peacebuilding architecture are critical to ensuring that
the United Nations system is adapted to contemporary
challenges. As such, we would like to focus on two
aspects stressed in the report of the Advisory Group,
namely, the need for a change in mindset with regard to
the role of peacebuilding in the United Nations system
and the need to adjust the approaches to peacebuilding.

As the report of the Advisory Group points out,
in the report entitled "An Agenda for Peace" (S/24111)
peacebuilding is a logical follow-up to peacekeeping
and peacemaking, with a main objective of preventing
a relapse into conflict once a peace settlement had been
secured. According to the Advisory Group, the new
mindset in peacebuilding should be based on the concept
of sustaining peace, built on a vision that peacebuilding
is aimed at preventing the outbreak and recurrence of
armed conflict, and therefore encompasses a wide
range of political, developmental, humanitarian and
human rights programmes and mechanisms. Sustaining
peace is a permanent undertaking before, during and
after conflict.

With regard to the responsibility of the United
Nations system, and based on the outlined objectives,
peacebuilding covers the three pillars and the main
organs of the United Nations whose activity is devoted
to the prevention of armed conflict and the maintenance
ofpeace, while promoting the high values and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. In
the past 10 years, the Peacebuilding Commission has
been striving to connect the activities of those organs
by identifying the root causes of conflict, creating
a favourable environment for trust among parties
to a conflict, strengthening States' capacities and
promoting the inclusive participation of a wide range of
national stakeholders.

In Burundi, C6te d'Ivoire, Haiti, Kosovo, Liberia,
Timor-Leste and Sierra Leone, the United Nations has
helped to consolidate peace by promoting inclusive
socioeconomic development, economic growth,
poverty eradication, the rule of law and human rights.
As part of the United Nations comprehensive activities,
peacebuilding must be understood as an evolving
concept based on the need to constantly adapt to the
reality on the ground. That has been stressed once
again today. Peacebuilding takes place on the ground,
where conflicts have to be dealt with, and must
entail time frames for political transformation after
violent conflict.

With regard to time frames, based on Angola's
experience, we believe that the achievement of peace
has a dynamic ofits own. Each country has specificities
that define the time needed to address root causes and
avoid a relapse into conflict. In that regard, while facing
delays in the political transition of a given country, the
Security Council can either look into the deep-rooted
causes of such delays and contribute constructively to
address them, or adopt a rigid position by increasing
pressure on the parties and seeking strict compliance
with an agreed time frame and a negotiated peace
settlement. We believe that by taking the appropriate
time to resolve outstanding disputes and accepting the
need to adapt the time frames of peace agreements to
the existing challenges might significantly contribute
to sustaining an unsustainable peace.

To conclude, I would like to like to once again
underscore that which is at stake in the current review
of the peacebuilding architecture, namely, the strategy
of the United Nations system in addressing conflict
prevention, the root causes of conflict and the creation of
sustainable peaceful societies in a context of diversity,
challenges and continuous threats to international peace
and security. That is a goal that international authorities
and international partners, including international,
regional and subregional organizations, should address
together through coordinated efforts. It is our shared
responsibility, and this is the right time to fulfil it.

