Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, Mr. President, I would like to say how
pleased my delegation is with the initiative you have
taken. The fact that you have come to chair this debate
in person shows very well the importance that Algeria
accords to the question of protection of civilians. We
are also pleased to see that Secretary-General has
joined us, since he has done so much to protect
civilians in armed conflicts. I would also like to thank
Mr. Egeland for his statement, which has provided a
great deal of information.

I associate myself with the statement that the
Ambassador of the Netherlands will make shortly on
behalf of the European Union. For my part, I will just
make a few remarks.

The protection of civilian populations in armed
conflicts has become a major issue for international
peace and security. To us it seems important that this
matter be treated, at least in part, from the standpoint
of collective security and the use of force in the report
of the group of eminent personalities. There is a
collective obligation to protect when a State is no
longer in a position to exercise one of its primary
responsibilities - to protect the population living on
its territory - or no longer has the will to do so. It is
therefore crucial that the question of protection of
civilians in armed conflict be on the Council's agenda.
It has been on the agenda for five years, but it is now
high time to fine-tune our analysis and our strategy
regarding the Security Council's responsibility to
protect.

I note first that the protection of civilians has
become an integral part of the mandates of most
peacekeeping operations. It is worthwhile that there be
discussions on integrated missions between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the office
of Mr. Egeland, with the purpose of better defining
relations between the military and humanitarian
components. But we must distinguish these integrated
missions, which have other objectives besides
protection, from actions taken by the Council that are
centred on protection, which could be authorized in
future on the basis of the emerging norm of collective
obligations to protect.

France welcomes that development and has very
logically made some proposals on that subject.
Furthermore, this is the idea behind the
recommendations of the group of eminent
personalities, which in this area will bring up military
interventions as a last resort. We believe the Council
should deal directly with massive Violations of
international humanitarian law. It has a range of
possible options. In the most dramatic situations, a
military intervention might be the only option to avoid
or stop substantial loss of human life, but I would
recall that such an this option would be without
prejudice to other actions that the Council might
undertake first - preventive diplomacy or deployment
of civilian or military prevention forces.

At any rate the role of the Council must be
properly connected with the protection mandate of
other United Nations bodies - the General Assembly,
Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Commission of course - but also the agencies that,
alongside the International Committee of the Red
Cross and other international organizations and NGOs,
are often the first responders on the ground when there
is a humanitarian emergency. The recent experience of
Darfur shows the need to establish a comprehensive
protection strategy, which will allow us to better
coordinate actions among all participants. Proper
coordination on the ground is, in fact, a guarantee of
effectiveness.

The Council's taking effective action in terms of
protection also depends on what tools and what
information are available to it. Excellent work has been
done in this regard with the aide-memoire in particular.
The 10 action points identified by Mr. Egeland are a
very useful platform and will allow us to take up all
aspects related to civilian protection.

We perhaps could go further. I have a few
suggestions.

First, the reports of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians could be presented to the
Council annually, instead of every 18 months. They
could also more systematically catalogue the elements
that constitute protection crises and include, for
example, a listing of particularly serious situations
pertaining to the refusal to grant humanitarian access
and cases in which camps for refugees or displaced
persons are attacked or infiltrated by armed elements.
The reports could also be more specific when it comes
to those victimized by sexual violence who are used as
a weapon of war.

Moreover, when necessary, the practice of
providing biannual briefings could be supplemented by
more specific briefings. Those briefings could deal
with especially worrisome situations, as has already
been done, for example, with regard to Darfur and
Uganda. These briefings would be given without
prejudice to other measures - for instance, the
Council hearing the High Commissioner for Human
Rights.

Mr. Egeland has just given us a rather bleak
assessment of the situation. Allow me to respond to
some of the points made in his briefing.

I should first like to take up the right to
humanitarian access, which is the logical corollary to
the right of civilian populations under threat to
assistance and protection. It is unacceptable for that
right or its legal underpinnings to be contested. It is
equally intolerable for combatants to target
humanitarian personnel providing assistance on the
ground. We have the duty to continually reaffirm the
right to humanitarian access in the texts we adopt.
However, such a necessary standard reminder is clearly
not enough. In cases where a crisis of access arises, the
Council often needs specific information, for which it
might be useful, and even necessary, to deploy fact-
finding missions to very precisely identify the causes
and scope of a problem. While insecurity in combat
zones is difficult to deal with in the absence of a
ceasefire, other obstacles to access - such as
administrative impediments and the refusal to issue
visas and laissez-passers - can be dealt with quickly,
as was done in the case of Darfur.

It is often necessary to establish contact with all
parties to a conflict, and in particular with armed
groups controlling parts of a territory in which people
under threat live. I know that carrying out a dialogue
with non-State actors is a delicate matter. However,
once again, the need to assist and protect should be
more important than anything else. If, for obvious
reasons, officials are unable to negotiate access, they
should not stop humanitarian personnel, agencies or
non-governmental organizations from doing so.

As Mr. Egeland pointed out in his briefing, the
fact that the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war
is increasing is another very serious issue. The reason
for that can usually be summed up in one word:
impunity. For example, thousands of women have been
raped and attacked in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Darfur. The people who committed those
crimes, which are serious violations of international
humanitarian law and are so defined by the Rome
Statute, have to date not been subject to proceedings.
That situation cannot be tolerated, whatever the
reasons for the impunity - be it voluntary inertia, the
physical inability of authorities or the collapse of
national judicial systems. The culprits must
nevertheless be identified and held accountable for
their actions. Whether to name and shame those
responsible should be considered in very serious
situations; it is a matter that deserves to be looked into
further.

More generally speaking, the international
community has not yet satisfactorily addressed the
issue of impunity regarding those who launch
deliberate attacks against civilians. We have made
some progress, but it is not enough. There are several
reasons for that. One, and certainly not the least, is the
lack of consensus with regard to the International
Criminal Court. As a result, the division that exists in
that connection has led to considerably limiting the
Council's action today. This is a real problem.
Combating impunity follows the same logic as the
provision of protection, to which I referred at the
beginning of my statement. The international
community should react unanimously when a State
cannot charge individuals who commit gross
violations. In particular, the Council must be able to
turn to article 13 (b) of the Rome Statue, which
provides the Council with the option to approach the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. It
seems to me that there must a minimum of consistency
in that regard. We cannot use article 98 of the Statue
and then block the use of article 13 (b), which would
make it possible to effectively combat impunity.

Lastly, allow me to say a few words with regard
to a matter that France has been following very closely,
and that is the situation of children in armed conflict.
International humanitarian law provides special
protection for children because they are the most
vulnerable members of a civilian population. It is
therefore especially intolerable that not only would
such protection be denied them, but that they would
also be recruited as combatants. The Security Council
must continue to be involved in this area in order to
effectively combat such terrible practices. I am pleased
that, on the initiative of Benin, the Council will address
this matter in greater detail at the beginning of next
year. I hope that the report of the Secretary-General on
this question will soon be available. The matter is too
serious for there to be any overriding considerations
other than the interests of children - be they legal,
political or bureaucratic in nature.

In conclusion, I would like to express France's
full support for the draft statement that has been
prepared by the Algerian presidency. That text is very
useful in that it focuses on the major problems
associated with the protection of civilians, including
those that I have just mentioned. I hope that it will be
possible to go further next year and to adopt a
resolution that takes into account the considerations
that have been raised with regard to the Council's role
in the area of protecting civilians.

