Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (Spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for organizing this very important meting. I
would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the
Director of The Liaison Office, Mr. Masood Karokhail,
for their briefings.

Today's meeting is being held as we mark World
Humanitarian Day 2014 and as we commemorate the
eleventh anniversary of the terrible attack against
United Nations headquarters at Baghdad in 2003, which
claimed victims among the ranks of United Nations
personnel. In that regard, we pay well deserved tribute
to the humanitarian workers and actors who have lost
their lives in the line of duty. I would also like to pay
tribute to all those who continue to face danger in order
to provide humanitarian assistance in areas of conflict.

Recently, there has been an increase in the rate
of attacks perpetrated against United Nations staff
and individuals associated with the United Nations.
In fact, peacekeeping missions are no longer spared
by the frequency of armed conflicts and continued
attacks. United Nations personnel face threats and
even abductions, as well as restrictions that hinder
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. All of that
has adverse consequences for the ability of missions
to carry out their duties in order to meet the needs of
victims, who include civilians, namely, the victims of
internal conflicts.

The fact that the international community is
not present in areas of conflict endangers the lives
of humanitarian workers. The Security Council
must therefore assume its responsibility to restore
international peace and security in conflict zones and
to provide the necessary means within the framework
of mandates for humanitarian agents to assure the
necessary protection for humanitarians, as well as to
guarantee humanitarian access to those who need it. The
deficiencies with respect to humanitarian personnel in
conflict zones weakens the civilian population, which
means that there are additional burdens with regard
to the mandates issued by the Security Council. It is
therefore in the interests of the United Nations and the
Security Council to ensure the necessary protection
for humanitarian workers. In that regard, we reiterate
the need to uphold the provisions of international
humanitarian law and the need to implement them, while
taking all the necessary measures to protect civilians
affected by conflict with a view to putting an end to
their suffering. We also stress the need for the parties
to a conflict to respect their commitments regarding
humanitarian workers under the relevant conventions,
as well as the provisions of international humanitarian
law. That should be clear in the light of the flagrant
and massive violations we are witnessing in places like
Gaza, Syria, Iraq, the Sudan, Afghanistan, Pakistan,
Somalia, the Great Lakes region and the Sahel.

We should also focus on the practical measures we
can take in order to improve the observance of World
Humanitarian Day and to guarantee the safety of such
actions.

In the light of the changes we have seen in United
Nations peacekeeping activities with respect to
concepts, mandates and missions, we have emerged from
the traditional military model into multidimensional
and multifaceted operations that include the role of
protecting civilians. That means that roles must be
defined in a clear, unambiguous manner. They must also
be coordinated in order to ensure that they correspond
to the respective mandates of their missions, whose
implementation sometimes requires clarification.
The Council, within the framework of the Charter of
the United Nations, must facilitate the cooperation of
United Nations missions with humanitarian agencies
and workers to ensure that they are provided with the
necessary protection. In order to address the challenges
related to attacks on humanitarian workers, we must
analyse the causes of such attacks, which could be
attributed to problems in defining humanitarian actors.
That can lead to a lack of distinction between roles,
because humanitarian workers, in the view of the
warring factions, are linked to military forces, There is
therefore a lack of clarity with regard to humanitarian
action.

We must also step up our efforts to promote the
preventive aspect by strengthening early-warning
mechanisms within peacekeeping missions in order to
be able to anticipate situations that may arise, as well
as address humanitarian needs and the need to protect
civilians in order to tackle the wave of violence to
which civilian and humanitarian actors are exposed in
conflict zones.

We must also ensure that humanitarian workers
are committed to upholding the basic humanitarian
principles related to neutrality, impartiality and
independence so that they are able to build trust
between themselves and the parties to a conflict and
thus contribute to reducing the number of attacks that
target them.

Finally, the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with States. However, the international
community must remain focused on practical measures
that are likely to improve respect for international
humanitarian law, while bearing in mind certain
guarantees that will facilitate the implementation of
humanitarian action.

To conclude, I would like to reaffirm the need for
the perpetrators of such violations to be brought to
justice and to be held accountable for their acts. Those
responsible for such crimes must be held accountable
for their acts before international courts.

