Mr. Puri (India): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your leadership of the Council
this month. I would also like to begin by thanking
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement, and to
join you, Mr. President, in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. J an Kubis,
for his contribution and for his strong leadership of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

My full statement will be circulated; let me read
a few extracts. We commend the efforts of the Afghan
Government to ensure completion of all the technical
preparations necessary for holding a successful
presidential election. A peaceful and free election
process that elects an Afghan President acceptable
to the people of Afghanistan remains key. The
international community must strongly support the
Afghan authorities' preparations in that endeavour, and
at the same time should strongly oppose any outside
efforts to derail the process.

The security situation in Afghanistan is fragile, not
because of the weakness or incapacity of the valiant
Afghan security forces, but because of the continued
threat presented by terrorist and extremist groups to
Afghanistan's security. This was demonstrated most
recently in the deplorable attack on the Indian consulate
in Jalalabad on 3 August, which resulted in injuries
to several Afghan security personnel guarding the
consulate and the deaths of innocent Afghan citizens,
including 10 children.

India does not have an exit policy in Afghanistan
and will not be deterred by such attacks. We do not
see the attack as aimed only against India; it is also
directed at the efforts of the Afghan people to overcome
the tragic consequences of the last several decades
of war and conflict. The Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/535) cites a figure of 3,500 Afghan servicemen
killed and wounded in action in the second quarter
of 2013. We salute the valour of the Afghan National
Security Forces personnel who have made that supreme
sacrifice. The recent merciless killing of Sayed Kamala
Sushmita Banerjee, a woman medical worker of Indian
origin who was married to an Afghan national, reflects
the intolerance of those who oppose Afghanistan's
socioeconomic development as well as the challenges
that lie ahead for Afghanistan.

Many of the terrorist attacks in Afghanistan
have been coordinated by the Taliban and AI-Qaida
and their affiliates. They are clear indicators that we
must be unceasingly watchful for the designs of those
terrorist organizations. The Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities
must remain proactive and attentive in its listing and
delisting process of individuals and entities for targeted
measures. The international community should
continue to back the Afghans' efforts to address the
security and terrorist challenges they face. Concerted
action is also needed to isolate and root out the
syndicate of terrorism, which includes elements of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist
and extremist groups. It is therefore important that the
transition plan take into account the threats posed by
those terrorist organizations and factors them into the
security situation on the ground.

The international community must reassess the
role it wishes to play in Afghanistan's internal political
processes, which brings me to the issue of the renewed
mandate we will be conferring on UNAMA. We
should define UNAMA's political mandate to ensure
that it keeps its focus on supporting the institutions of
politics rather than the political process itself, which
must be left to Afghanistan's own leaders. At the same
time, the new mandate for UNAMA must expand its
humanitarian and developmental role by aiming for
better delivery of assistance in Afghanistan. To the
maximum extent possible, delivery of the humanitarian
and development services must be done through Afghan
State institutions, because it is not capacity-substitution
but capacity-building that we are seeking to achieve in
Afghanistan.

In conclusion, 2014 will be a watershed for
Afghanistan. The international community's support
for Afghanistan will be critical in the transition. We
appreciate the good work being done by UNAMA in
often trying conditions, and assure the Council that
India will continue to stand by Afghanistan during this
period of transition and thereafter.

