Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Sir, for convening this
open debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive briefing earlier today.

India has long had a clear and consistent position on
the Middle East peace process. We support a negotiated
solution that would result in a sovereign, independent,
viable and united State ofPalestine, with East Jerusalem

as its capital, within secure and recognized borders,
side by side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in
the Quartet road map and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. India's approach to Palestine is built upon
three core dimensions of solidarity with the Palestinian
people: support for the Palestinian cause, support for
Palestine's nation-building and support for Palestine's
capacity-building efforts.

Our continued commitment to the Palestinian cause
and our friendship with the Palestinian people remain
an integral part of our foreign policy. That is reflected
in the ongoing high-level exchanges, such as visits
to Palestine by Indian leaders in the recent months,
including our President, Prime Minister and Minister
for External Affairs.

As part of ourongoing support forthenation-building
efforts of Palestine, India has consistently extended
technical and financial assistance to that country. India
contributes $1 million annually to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. India also contributed $4 million in response
to the National Early Recovery and Reconstruction
Plan for Gaza.

We are concerned that, since the previous attempts
at serious direct talks, which broke down two years ago,
there has been a downward trend in the peace process,
despite efforts to hold serious negotiations between
the parties - efforts that have been inconclusive.
Instead, we have seen an unfortunate escalation of
tension in Gaza. Unilateral actions by the parties
are, unfortunately, moving them further apart. India
remains firmly convinced that dialogue is the only
viable option that can effectively address the issue. We
remain hopeful and urge both sides to resume the peace
process soon in order to reach a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Palestinian issue.

In Yemen, India has been urging all of the parties
concerned to resolve their differences amicably with
a view to finding a consensus-based solution. We
are encouraged by the planned peace talks and hope
that those talks will commence soon and lead to
positive outcomes.

With regard to Syria, India has consistently called
for a comprehensive political solution to the conflict
based on bringing all parties to the negotiating table.
We hope that the intra-Syrian talks held under the
auspices of the United Nations will ensure a Syrian-
led and Syrian-owned political transition, bringing
an end to the violence there and contributing to the
stabilization of the country and the region.

The humanitarian situation in Syria and
neighbouring countries has to be addressed effectively.
India has contributed $4 million in humanitarian
assistance for Syrian refugees. India also participated
in the London conference on Syria in February and
has committed to providing bilateral humanitarian
assistance to Syria.

