Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Allow me to
begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General for his
briefing, the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/277) and you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. I would also like to confirm our support for
the statement that will be made by the representative of
the Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.

The tenth anniversary of the Council's first
decisions on protecting civilians is an important moment
to take stock and to identify the current obstacles to
work on this issue. We welcome the fact that
humanitarian access is given particular profile in the
report's annex, as well as the quality of the evidence
presented. We hope that the report's five core challenges
will provide a coherent framework for the consistent
inclusion of information on protection issues in the
Secretary-General's reports on country situations.

We share the Secretary-General's view that there
is still insufficient accounting and redress for violations
of international humanitarian law. We believe that this
Council should be ready to address flagrant and
widespread violations committed against civilians, even
when they take place in situations of internal armed
conflict.

Allow me briefly to mention a few of our
concerns in the context of specific country situations.

In Burma, civilians are caught up in the conflict
between the Government and ethnic groups. This was
most recently highlighted by the flight of thousands of
Karen people to Thailand, following the violence along
the border. The Burmese Government must fulfil its
responsibilities under international humanitarian and
human rights law and begin an inclusive political
dialogue that can lead to national reconciliation in its
country.

In Sri Lanka, the priority now is to ensure that the
immediate needs of internally displaced persons in the
camps are met. While we recognize the steps that have
already been taken by the Government, there must be
unhindered access for the United Nations and
international humanitarian aid agencies. Further efforts
are also needed to ensure steady progress in the political
process towards national reconciliation. We welcome
the commitments entered into by the Government of
Sri Lanka to address a number of post-conflict issues,
including the need for an accountability process to
address violations of international humanitarian law
and the grievances associated with them. We expect
these commitments to be fulfilled.

The Under-Secretary-General and some delegations
have mentioned the situation in Afghanistan. Let me be
clear that we deeply regret incidents in which civilians
are killed as a result of actions by international forces.
We have strict procedures and training regimes,
frequently updated in the light of experience, intended
both to minimize the risk of civilian casualties and to
investigate any that do nevertheless occur. We intend to
remain at the forefront of United Nations discussion
and activity to ensure that the protection of civilians in
Afghanistan remains high on the political agenda.

As we noted in the debate on international
humanitarian law held in January (see S/PV.6066), the
Security Council must find new and better tools to
follow up on our decisions and ensure that international
humanitarian law is fully implemented and enforced in
specific conflicts. The report rightly underlines the
importance of supporting accountability measures at
the national level. But we must also consider
international accountability mechanisms to combat
impunity, including referral to the International Criminal
Court where appropriate. United Nations engagement
with non-State actors presents an opportunity to embed
an understanding of obligations under international
humanitarian law without granting recognition or
status to those parties. This is an opportunity that is too
often missed.

We look forward to seeing the results of the
independent study which has been commissioned by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on
the implementation of protection mandates. It will be
important for this Council to consider that report
carefully as part of continued consultations between
now and November. We sincerely hope that the General
Assembly will consider that report too. We also support
the Under-Secretary-General's suggestion of an Arria
formula meeting focused on the experience of engaging
armed groups. These meetings can be very valuable, as
was, we believe, the Arria formula meeting we held
earlier this week on the harrowing and pressing subject
of sexual violence.

Deployed military contingents are just one part of
a larger equation when it comes to peacekeeping
missions fulfilling their protection mandates. To date,
we have relied on the flexibility of military actors, but
no military in the world has a comprehensive doctrine
on how to undertake the protection of civilians.
Nevertheless, the outstanding protection work that
United Nations peacekeeping personnel are creatively
doing in the field provides many examples of good
practice. Where individual missions have protection
strategies and plans of action, we would like to see
more detail about them in country reports.

We should also make use of existing mechanisms
to deal with these substantial issues. Like Ambassador
Mayr-Harting, we are encouraged by the work of the
informal Security Council Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians thus far. We have some ideas on
how to enhance the format, for example by improving
the timeliness of the Group's inputs to Council
deliberations and the format and quality of
documentation for the Group.

An inherent part of the initiative on peacekeeping,
which we are pursuing with our French colleagues, is
the improvement of the information upon which the
Council bases its decisions on mission mandates. We
acknowledge that there has been at least a perceived
disconnect between protection language in mandates
and what is realistically achievable in the field. We
must work harder to achieve consensus on the extent
and feasibility of protection activities.

Finally, we would like to see the Council show
genuine readiness to engage at the prevention stage of
the conflict cycle, rather than at the resolution stage.
As our Chinese colleague, Ambassador Liu Zhenmin,
said earlier, it is important to tackle these issues
upstream. This will require the Council to be more
receptive to information, more willing to become
seized of threatening situations and more ready to take
appropriate early action. The United Kingdom stands
ready to play its part in this.

