Mr. Sareer (Maldives): On behalf of the Maldives
delegation, I would like to express our sincere
appreciation to Jordan, as President of the Council, for
taking the initiative to convene this open debate on an
important topic. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his engagement in this debate. We have read with
much interest the concept paper (S/2015/231, annex)
circulated by the Kingdom of Jordan and we welcome
the call for a more in-depth analysis of this issue by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.

When we speak of violent extremism, terrorism and
conflict, it is sad to note that young people are always
somewhere in the picture. We catch horrifying glimpses
in the news of children as Victims of Violence - a
massacre at a school last year in Peshawar, Pakistan;
hundreds of children kidnapped by Boko Haram in
Nigeria; an attack on a school bus in Yemen; the killing
of teenagers in the West Bank; and the bombing of
a soccer game in Baghdad. As a Pakistani official
poignantly put it, "the smaller the coffin, the heavier
it is to carry".

As the scourge of terrorism sweeps the world, it
robs innocent children oftheir childhood, their parents,
their sisters and brothers, and sometimes even their
short-lived lives well before their time. Around the
world, children are losing the sacred sense of safety to
walk the streets, go to school and pursue their dreams. It
affects us all: acts of terror disrupt international peace
and security and undermine the inalienable rights of
children.

My delegationjoins others in condemning terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. Terrorism and other
forms of violent extremism cannot be justified by any
means. It should not be associated with any religion,
race, faith, theology, values, culture, society or group,
nor can it be localized to one nation. The Government of
Maldives denounces the acts of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham terrorist organization, which are fuelling
narratives of violence and promoting radicalism among
young people. We condemn in the strongest term the
acts of this un-Islamic and anti-Islamic group and its
recruitment of young people to engage in conflict and
commit grave Violations against innocent people.

We will not let Islam, a religion of peace and
compassion, be hijacked by radical and extremist
elements to perpetuate hatred and Violence. Nor will
we let these extremists spread ignorance, preach hate
and corrupt our youth. The Maldives has always called
for inculcating the true values of Islam - mutual
understanding, respect, tolerance and dialogue * in
our society. In particular, the Maldives has urged the
spread of good social and Islamic values and principles
among young people.

More than 25 years since the Convention on
the Rights of the Child was adopted by the General
Assembly, it is shocking to hear of the continuing role
of young people in violent extremism. We the nations
of the world promised a better life for children when we
signed that landmark Convention. We cannot let them
down.

Even more shocking than the Victimization of
children is the radicalization of young people. Young
people, especially those searching for a sense of
belonging, purpose or identity, are highly vulnerable
to manipulation by those with violent agendas or
ideologies, who radicalize young minds, recruit them
to a cause, and mobilize them as child soldiers, terrorist
fighters or accessories to Violent crimes. The Maldives,
as a party to the Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, strongly opposes the
recruitment of children in armed conflict, and urges
States to take all necessary measures to prevent children
meeting with such a fate.

The Government of Maldives is committed to paving
the way for youth to be more involved in the building
of the nation and to create socioeconomic opportunities
for them. We are committed to empowering our youth
and implementing better programmes and mechanisms
to protect them.

To bring our young people back from the front
lines to classrooms, we need a long-term game plan.
A critical part of the solution is, first, to invest in
education. Education is a powerful tool in empowering
young people to take control of their own futures.
Secondly, we need to create opportunities for
young people to find meaning and purpose in other
pursuits - for example, through youth skills training
and vocational programmes. Thirdly, we need to build
strong, supportive communities for our young people to
grow up in. Our children learn from us adults; we need
to set a positive example for them to follow.

We have been listening intently and taken note
of the initiatives on involving youth in peacebuilding
that we have heard about today from Member States.
However, as we discuss solutions, let us not forget to
engage young people themselves. We need to harness
their limitless imaginations, optimism, energy and
hope. What can children and youth teach us about
bringing peace to the world?

