Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
the presidency of Peru for convening and organizing
today's meeting. We would also like to welcome
the presence of Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the
Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, Mr. Graeme
Simpson, Ms. Sophia Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Kessy
Ekomo-Soignet and to thank them for their briefings.

There are currently nearly 2 billion young people
around the world, more than 400 million of whom live
in areas affected by conflict or organized violence,
according to the report presented by Mr. Simpson (see S/2018/86). It is therefore the duty of the international
community to pay particular attention to that
sector's needs.

War and conflict tend to create a vicious circle for
young people as for others. In the case of young people
who live in conflict-affected areas, living without
expectations of being able to develop in a secure
environment, in many cases being prevented from
going to school or receiving training and forced to leave
their homes, they have fewer options and are therefore
susceptible to recruitment by armed or terrorist groups.
In order to break the vicious cycle of war, we must
address the structural causes of conflict as well as its
consequences. Interventionist policies and attempts at
regime change have had collateral effects, including on
young people.

We must also take into account inclusiveness and
the prevention and the protection of young people in
conflict situations, as well as the intrinsic relationship
between youth, peace and security and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Resolution 2250
(2015) touches on those aspects and is a good starting
point, but it is not enough. The recommendations of the
progress study on youth and peace and security, as it
establishes, are intended to serve as the starting point
for a large-scale transformation in which multilateral
organizations, States, civil society and other actors
must play their role.

Turning to inclusiveness, resolution 2250 (2015)
makes a clear call for the participation of young
people in decision-making, especially in the areas of
peacebuilding, political participation and conflict
resolution. In order to do that, an enabling environment
must be created and the necessary mechanisms provided.
We also believe that the role of young people must be
strengthened through social and economic inclusion.
To achieve that goal, young people's participation and
needs must be taken into account both during and
after conflicts. The case of Colombia, where young
people gave the peace process a considerable boost is
a clear example. Those young people represented hope
by being willing to forgive and move forward. With
regard to prevention, the contributions of civil-society
organizations led by young people, and the impact of
the work they do, as well as their experience, must be
taken into account because they have great potential
for mobilizing their peers as well as the advantage of
understanding the local dynamics and priorities that
can be fundamental to lasting peace.

Young people can contribute positively to conflict
resolution, but that potential has not been harnessed
enough, owing to a lack of resources and to certain
stereotypes that depict young people as agitators
or victims of conflict. That is why they have been
systematically excluded from decision-making and
political processes, as has been the case with the young
people's civil-society organizations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that have been formulating
strategies to peacefully address the lack of security and
how to deal with such issues as basic services, medical
care and education. We call on the international
community to support such organizations with flexible
financing and to take their specific needs into account.
We should also support demobilization, disarmament
and the reintegration of adolescents and young people
formerly linked to armed groups, with particular
emphasis on reintegration. That includes providing
rehabilitation, psychosocial support, education, gender-
specific needs and socioeconomic opportunities,
as well as sustained support for their families and
communities, including the destigmatization of former
child soldiers.

Within the framework of the fight against terrorism,
comprehensive programmes for recruitment prevention,
rehabilitation, reintegration and deradicalization
programmes should also be developed, particularly
with regard to the issue of foreign terrorist fighters who
are returning to their countries of origin, while taking
into consideration the issue of accountability when
cases warrant it.

Lastly, we should not fail to mention the problems
of young people in the occupied Palestinian territories.
We reiterate our concern for the young people who have
been detained in recent months by the Israeli security
forces, including Ahed Tamimi, who has become a
symbol of Palestinian resistance and who is being tried
in a military court. That is inadmissible. We call on
the international community to respect and protect
the fundamental rights of young people. If we do not
start working on inclusiveness, prevention, and the
protection of this sector of the population, we will not
break the vicious cycle of war and we will have great
difficulty consolidating peace.

