Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I thank you for the
choice of theme for today's debate, Mr. President. It is
timely and reflects evolving thinking on consolidating
the efforts of the United Nations system to promote the
three pillars of its activities.

The current thinking presented for our collective
judgement emphasizes without equivocation that the
most important goal ahead of us is creating synergies,
coherence and coordination across the entire United
Nations system. That there is a need for such coherence
is beyond dispute. The three recent reviews of our
peacebuilding architecture and peace operations state
this clearly. The often conspicuous fragmentation of
the activities of all the actors involved undermines the
sustainability of the mutually reinforcing, interrelated
and indivisible primary objectives of our Organization,
its three pillars. It is true, of course, that the recognition
and pursuit of this goal are not new. We hope that the
current drive to revisit the continued objective of
synergies, coherence and coordination will produce
tangible results. Of course, we acknowledge and
commend the progress achieved so far. The collective
endeavour within the United Nations to develop a
legislative and operational capacity for coherence is a
welcome and encouraging development.

However, in highlighting the goal of concrete
results, we must emphasize the prevention at an early
stage of situations that, if not addressed, can result in
conflicts, major humanitarian crises and, not least,
atrocity crimes. The Secretary-General makes a cogent
and eloquent point when he concludes in his report
(S/2015/730) that prioritizing conflict prevention is by
far our most pragmatic and cost-effective option. While
we fully concur with that conclusion, it is of course
the human cost of conflicts that eventually moves the
conscience of the United Nations system. It is now
an accepted truth that, in the words of the Secretary-
General, the rhetorical battle on conflict prevention
has been won. It is equally true that it is possible to
detect conflict situations at a considerably earlier stage,
because more often than not they are a reaction to the
persistent injustice, discrimination and the denial of
rights that are major examples of the root causes of
conflict.

We speak from experience. The human-rights aspect
of conflict prevention should be a prominent focus
for the entire United Nations system, including, not
least, the Council. In that regard, the Security Council
could draw useful lessons from its own commendable
leadership on the particular issue of women, peace and
security. One such conclusion might be that all human
rights are a function of security. In fact, the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture has provided a useful and elaborate
analysis of inclusive societies (see S/2015/490). Civil
society is indispensable to conflict prevention.

From the international perspective, preventing
the outbreak of or relapse into conflict also involves
a change of mindset. Assessing the root causes in any
conflict situation and debate about the action to be
taken has never been isolated from a specific context
involving the multiple and not necessarily concurring
interests of international actors. From our own particular
experience, we have been witness to systematic abuse
of the international system and the manipulation of
interests aimed at disrupting an international mediation
effort, forum shopping and selectively interpreting
international law.

The international consolidation of peace efforts
is a desirable and indispensable objective in conflict
prevention and conflict resolution. Whether it is
achievable and sustainable in all situations is the
dominant challenge, since it revolves around the
basic capacity of Member States to surmount narrow
interests for the sake of broader peace efforts. There
is clearly an urgent need for effective collective
action on conflict prevention. However, the function
of prevention is debated against the background of a
deteriorating international context, as a result of which
smaller States suffer the strains of vulnerability. The
Council needs to be reminded that the powers bestowed
on it by all nations are to enable it to advance peace and
security for all.

Today's debate is taking place in the immediate
aftermath of some atrocious acts ofterrorism committed
against the people of France. The depth of cruelty has
left us shattered and shaken. We bow our heads before
the victims and express our deepest condolences to
our brothers and sisters, the people of France. The
persistence of terrorism reveals the international
system's vulnerability to those who are outside
international norms and laws. The current change in
the conflict paradigm is equally a challenge to the
prevention paradigm. As ever, we need consolidation
and urgent solutions. We welcome the Secretary-
General's efforts to create specific tools under the
leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force.

Armenia has been a constant and committed
supporter of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide. The Special
Adviser, jointly with the Special Adviser on the
Responsibility to Protect, has put together an important
tool for prevention, the Framework of Analysis for
Atrocity Crimes. Resolution 28/34 of the Human
Rights Council, sponsored by Armenia, duly reflects
that tool. The Special Adviser and his Office deserve
recognition of their efforts to detect emerging risks.
The Office is indispensable to the overall machinery of
prevention and therefore merits continued support for
strengthening its capacity.

Finally, the regional context of conflict prevention
requires broad recognition and support. The division
of labour, coordination and the non-duplication of
efforts and activities are the building blocks for the
effective use of the capacities of regional organizations
in conflict prevention and conflict resolution. There is
a good example of such regional efforts in our case.
Armenia consistently welcomes the support that the
international community, the United Nations and the
Secretary-General provide to the co-Chairmanship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Minsk Group in the peaceful resolution of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict.

