Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I thank you for organizing
this debate, Mr. President. I would like to join others
in thanking Special Representative Augustine Mahiga
for the update and for his forward-looking observations
today. I would also like to commend him and his team
for their work and efforts, as well as the work of the
African Union, and to acknowledge the role and
contribution of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and its leaders to the peace process in
Somalia, particularly that of the late Prime Minister
Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia.

During the past year, Somalia has been a stage
for major political and security developments. On the
political front, August marked the completion of the
transition period, which began eight years ago. After
the adoption of a new Constitution, the Somali political
leadership, traditional elders and other stakeholders
rose above their differences and acted in the best
interests ofthe Somali people, in a process that led to the
establishment ofa new Parliament, the election ofa new
President and, subsequently, the nomination of a new
Prime Minister. On the security front, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the Somali national
forces and regional partners continued to expand their
areas of control, significantly weakening Al-Shabaab.
Portugal commends the Somali stakeholders and the
Somali people for their achievements and pays tribute
to the sacrifices that have been made by the women and
men serving in AMISOM.

The same degree of commitment, integrity and
endurance we have witnessed during these months is
now needed from the Somali authorities, to enable them
to respond to the demanding challenges that this new
chapter brings: creating a secure and stable country
that will be ready for elections under universal suffrage
in four years' time. We welcome the resolve and vision
of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and the priorities
he has already outlined: national reconciliation, the
delivery of social services, economic development,
improved justice and security. Those should become
part of the finalization of the pending elements of the
provisional Constitution and of stabilization in general,
that is, through reform ofthe security sector, establishing
inclusive and representative administrations throughout
the country, delivering basic services to the population,
stimulating business and comprehensively addressing
the threat of piracy. Beyond that, they should translate
into improvements in good governance, the rule
of law, transparency and accountability, as well as
respect for fundamental rights and freedoms. At the
same time, more attention should be given to the role,
full participation and representation of women in the
Somali peace process.

Because the tasks ahead are extremely complex
and demanding, this is the moment for the international
community to renew its commitment to the Somali
people and, at the same time, to strengthen coordination
among all actors in Somalia. In that regard, we look
forward both to the results of the thorough joint African
Union-United Nations assessment of AMISOM, which
has thus farbeen instrumental in creating an environment
capable of advancing the political process and efforts
to achieve the country's economic revitalization, and
to those of the current United Nations strategic review,
aimed at considering the Organization's presence in
Somalia for the next four years.

However, as the African Union recently pointed
out, while we reflect on the future of AMISOM. and
the important contribution it is making towards the
maintenance of peace, security and reconciliation
in Somalia, it is important to take into account the
issue of the Mission's funding. We therefore take
this opportunity to urge all parties to give due
consideration to the need to improve the predictability
and sustainability of AMISOM's funding mechanisms.

On our part, Portugal will continue to play an
active role, at different levels and in various forums, in
contributing to improving the Somali people's daily life,
in particular through the outstanding contribution of the
European Union, which has been evident on multiple
fronts: development assistance, support for AMISOM
and common security and defence policy operations
such as the European Union Training Mission, the
European Union Naval Force Operation Atalanta and
the new maritime capacity-building mission in the
Horn of Africa. In that context, we naturally share the
position of the European Union that will be expressed
later on in this meeting by Ambassador Mayr-Harting.

I conclude by once again acknowledging and
commending the decisive steps Somalis have taken so
far towards achieving a more representative, democratic
and peaceful Somalia and by reiterating our support for
helping to make the long path of reconstruction ahead
a successful one.

