Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the presence here today of President Jose
Ramos-Horta. His briefing was very encouraging. I
also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Haq for her briefing and her work.

Since the Council's review of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) late last
year, the situation in Timor-Leste has achieved further
positive progress. At present, the overall situation in
the country remains stable. State institutions are
working normally and police capacity-building has
been especially successful. Economic and social
development is advancing steadily, with good
prospects for development. All of this is the result of
the unremitting efforts of the Government and people
of Timor-Leste, as well as of the critical, vigorous
support of the international community and the United
Nations over the past many years.

Timor-Leste will hold presidential and
parliamentary elections this year, and UNMIT's
peacekeeping activities will come to an end. This will
be a crucial year for Timor-Leste's development. As to
the next phase of priority work for the international
community, I should like to make the following
proposals.

First, we must work tirelessly to support the
Government of Timor-Leste in its capacity-building.
The Government and people of Timor-Leste, under the
leadership of President Ramos-Horta, have
energetically pursued capacity-building for many years
and striven to take control of the fate and future of
their country, for which China expresses its
appreciation. The development and long-term security
of Timor-Leste will ultimately depend on the efforts of
its Government and people. China hopes that the
international community will further enhance its
support to the capacity-building efforts of the
Government of Timor-Leste, especially in the crucial
areas of institution-building, security, justice, the
economy, education, health and women's issues. In this
process, the opinions of the Government and people of
Timor-Leste should be taken into account and their
leadership respected.

Secondly, priority efforts must be made to ensure
the successful holding of the presidential and
parliamentary elections in Timor-Leste. The upcoming
elections are a major event in the country's political
life and are of particular significance. China hopes that
the international community and the Government of
Timor-Leste will join forces to ensure orderly and calm
presidential and parliamentary elections. We support
UNMIT in its ongoing close coordination with the
Government of Timor-Leste as it provides necessary
support and plays a constructive role.

Thirdly, it is essential to ensure a stable and
smooth transition process. Ever since its establishment,
UNMIT has made a positive contribution to the
stability and development of Timor-Leste. China
supports the extension of the Mission's mandate and
the Joint Transition Plan prepared by UNMIT and the
Government of Timor-Leste. We also support the
Secretary-General's proposal for a phased drawdown
of UNMIT. We hope that the parties concerned will
prepare further arrangements to improve the transition
process and help conclude UNMIT's mandate in a
stable and orderly manner with a view to ensuring
Timor-Leste's stability and full capacity to achieve
sustainable development. UNMIT will thereby become
a success story in the peacekeeping activities of the
United Nations.

As to the future United Nations presence in
Timor-Leste, China hopes that the Secretariat will
enjoy close cooperation with the Government and fully
heed and respect its opinion. We expect the Secretariat
and the Secretary-General to offer further proposals to
the Council in that respect. As a developing country,
China has always actively sought out friendly and
mutually beneficial cooperation with Timor-Leste.
Going forward, we will continue to provide our
assistance and support to Timor-Leste within our
capacities.

