Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): First of all,
Madam President, I would like to welcome your
country's selection of the theme for this very important
debate, which is directly in line with the international
efforts aimed at supporting initiatives on
non-proliferation, disarmament and the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.

Following the adoption of resolution 1887
(2009), which reaffirmed the leading role of the
Security Council in the field of non-proliferation and
disarmament, many events of no less importance have
occurred on those topics, thereby proving the existence
of a climate conducive to dialogue and negotiation. In
that context, the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on 24 September 2010, preceded by the
Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, DC, on
13 March 2010, may be cited as examples and as
reaffirming multilateralism as the fundamental
principle underpinning negotiations on nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation.

The entry into force of the new Treaty between
the United States of America and the Russian
Federation on Measures for the Further Reduction and
Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, on 5 February
2011, represents an important milestone in the process
of reducing nuclear stockpiles. The Paris meeting on
30 June and 1 July 2011 of the five permanent
members of the Security Council, as part of the 2005
London conference on confidence-building measures
towards nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation,
has enabled the nuclear-weapon States to renew their
full support for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which is the cornerstone of
the non-proliferation regime. I should not fail to
mention the latest Nuclear Security Summit, held in
Seoul on 26 and 27 March. Togo welcomes those
various initiatives, which attest to the growing political
resolve of nuclear-weapon States and the international
community to promote disarmament and
non-proliferation.

Today's debate is therefore taking place at a time
when the international community is continuing its
efforts to make further progress in those areas. Our
enthusiasm, however, cannot conceal the fact that the
non-proliferation regime is still facing considerable
difficulties, in particular the threat of nuclear arms or
materials falling into the hands of non-State actors,
especially terrorists.

It is in that context that violations by certain
States of their commitments continue to be of concern
to my country inasmuch as they shake the confidence
of the international community and undermine the
integrity of the NPT regime. In that regard, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea are particularly notorious and have also been
subject to sanctions in connection with their nuclear
programmes. The launch on 12 April of a missile by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, intended,
it claimed, to be put into orbit as an Earth observation
satellite, confirmed that that country has not halted the
development of its military nuclear programme, despite
the Council resolutions prohibiting it.

Iran, for its part, has continued to pursue its
sensitive nuclear activities, according to the latest
report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), also in violation of the relevant resolutions of
the Council. While we reaffirm the right of those and
all other countries to use nuclear power for peaceful
purposes, Togo asks that they comply with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and with their
commitments under the international legal instruments
to which they are party. We also ask them to spare no
effort in continuing good-faith negotiations aimed at
reaching agreements that preserve the rights of all the
parties and that help ensure international and regional
peace and security.

While article IV of the NPT permits all countries
to acquire nuclear technology for peaceful purposes,
developing countries, in particular those in Africa, do

not currently derive genuine benefit from that right, as
the severe energy crises they have faced in recent years
have shown. Besides helping them to deal with such
energy issues, nuclear technology should be available
for them to use in the fields of health, industry,
agriculture and other related activities. Doing so would
enable them to cope with the numerous challenges they
face in meeting the Millennium Development Goals.
My country believes, however, that African countries
will be able to achieve those goals only in the context
of cooperation with nations that possess such
technology.

All States, whether or not they are parties to the
NPT, should contribute to the global goal of
disarmament by helping to create the necessary secure
environment, to reduce regional tensions, to promote
collective security, to ensure that the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime remains solid and
reliable and to make progress in all areas of
disarmament. In that regard, my delegation wishes to
reiterate its firm commitment to the goal of general and
complete disarmament, as well as to the elimination of
all nuclear stockpiles. We remain convinced that
cooperation in the field of non-proliferation must also
involve strengthening the regime established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) on weapons of mass
destruction. In addition to being a key element of the
fight against terrorism, resolution 1540 (2004) is also a
crucial instrument in combating weapons of mass
destruction. In that connection, we welcome the efforts
that the representative of South Africa, as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), has made in this area.

Multilateralism and international cooperation
remain essential to achieving the goals of nuclear
disarmament, non-proliferation, security and the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. That is why
negotiations on all matters involving disarmament and
non-proliferation must be conducted in a spirit of
openness and commitment, with the single aim of
preserving international peace and security through the
adoption of confidence-building measures and the
protection of nuclear sites. We therefore believe that it
is crucial that negotiations be resumed within the
Conference on Disarmament on every subject area,
including fissile material. The Conference can no
longer be held hostage by a small minority of States at
a time when humankind is haunted by the potential
threat of terrorists acquiring such materials.

My country requests that the International Atomic
Energy Agency continue to play a central role in
negotiations on nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. The IAEA remains the go-to
international mechanism on issues of nuclear security,
while giving international efforts coherence and
consistency. It should therefore continue to receive
sufficient financial resources.

In conclusion, Togo believes that the international
community must spare no effort in responding more
firmly to nuclear proliferation crises, supporting the
work of the IAEA and pursuing concrete efforts
towards achieving nuclear disarmament while also, as
the NPT stipulates, cooperating in order to promote the
responsible development of non-military nuclear
technology.

