The Secretary-General: It gives me great
pleasure to join the Council today for this open debate
on the implementation of decisions taken last
September, when this Council met - for only the
second time in its history-at the level of heads of
State or Government. Let me thank you, Mr. President,
for initiating this timely review. The Security Council
Summit was, indeed, a historic occasion that
demonstrated in a most eloquent way the commitment
of the States represented on this Council to making its
work more effective. That commitment was spelled out
in resolution 1318 (2000), adopted at the Summit, in
which the Council undertook to act preventively in
future; to improve the capacity of the United Nations to
act effectively; and to act quickly and decisively.

I told the Council on that day that it was facing a
crisis of credibility. We are here today to assess
whether that is still true, and what progress has been
made in overcoming that crisis.

Before we begin the debate, I should like to ask
members to consider one point very carefully. The
resolutions of this Council are not self-implementing.
In themselves, they hardly do more than express a wish
or an aspiration. Their impact on reality depends on a
great deal of subsequent effort, by Member States, as
well as by the Secretariat. It is therefore vital that the
delegates who attend the Council's meetings regularly
maintain a constant dialogue with their capitals, which
should stimulate dialogue in those capitals focusing on
how to translate the aspirations contained in each
resolution into real change on the ground. This
dialogue needs to start before a resolution is passed,
and it needs to continue long afterwards.

I know that all, or most, members of the Council
are now engaged in such dialogues. The Secretariat
stands ready and willing to assist them. But too often
these dialogues involve only a handful of experts. Only
through the much deeper and broader involvement of
Member States, reaching up to the highest political
level, can the will and resources needed to implement
Council resolutions be mustered.

That, of course, applies to resolution 1318 (2000)
itself. In that resolution, the Council, meeting at the
level of heads of State or Government, pledged, among
other things, to make the United Nations more effective
in addressing conflict at all stages, from prevention
through political settlement to post-conflict peace-
building. It also affirmed its determination to
strengthen United Nations peacekeeping operations. It
listed the measures by which it would do so, and
resolution 1327 (2000), adopted two months later,
spelled out those measures in much greater detail.
Those two resolutions, therefore, are ones to which
Member States have committed themselves in a
particularly solemn way. I hope that not only you,
Excellencies, but your colleagues and political masters
back home, will make the most strenuous efforts to see
those resolutions translated into concrete action.

Let me thank you, Mr. President, for the most
useful working paper which you prepared for this
meeting, in which you ask a number of very pertinent
questions. Let me sum up my remarks by adding one
question of my own: are your capitals now engaged in
an active debate on the best way to fulfil the
commitments made by the Council in resolutions 1318
(2000) and 1327 (2000)? Indeed, are they seriously
discussing how to implement resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security, or the recently
adopted presidential statements on strengthening
cooperation with troop-contributing countries and on
peace-building?

There is no doubt that, with these decisions in the
past six months, the Council has undertaken important
new commitments. I hope the next six months will be
marked by equally vigorous action to put those
commitments into effect.

I look forward eagerly to hearing your
conclusions.

