Mr. Pham Binh Minh (Viet Nam): I thank the
Burkina Faso Presidency for the initiative to organize
this open debate of the Security Council. And I thank
you, Mr. President, for personally presiding over the
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for their participation and
statements.

More than ten years have passed since the
General Assembly's special session on the world drug
problem in 1998 and the international community has
recorded encouraging achievements in this area. With
greater importance attached to the prevention and
control of drug trafficking, 95 per cent of United
Nations Member States have acceded to the three
international conventions on drug control - the
highest rate of accession enjoyed by any United
Nations legal document. The production of drugs and
the number of drug users in the world have shown a
downward trend, as reported by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. We recognize the efforts
made by the United Nations specialized agencies,
especially UNODC, in coordinating international drug
control activities.

However, the situation of drug crime in the world
continues to see complicated developments. As the
profits from drug trafficking reach around $500 billion
per year, second only to that from arms smuggling,
drug criminals have exerted every effort to maintain
drug trafficking at all costs. In addition to sophisticated
means and advanced technology, they have taken
advantage of globalization to expand drug production
and consumption, increased contacts with criminals in
other dangerous fields such as money laundering and

arms smuggling, and established transnational criminal
organizations. The super profits from drug trafficking
are used to finance terrorist groups and acts of
violence, causing unstable or even anarchic situations,
and aggravating crises where they occur, and thus
producing long-term negative impacts on security,
public order and economic development.

The prevention and suppression of such
dangerous crimes require joint efforts on the part of the
international community. In the fight against drug
trafficking, production and transport, we support
enhanced international and regional cooperation, with
the United Nations entities, in particular the UNODC,
playing the leading role. While primary responsibility
rests with the States concerned, United Nations bodies,
including the Security Council, and other international
and regional organizations have an important role to
play in supporting and coordinating these efforts with a
view to ensuring their effectiveness and avoiding
duplication and waste of resources.

While we are fully aware of the challenges posed
by drug trafficking, Viet Nam gives high priority to
drug prevention and control. Viet Nam adopted the law
on drug prevention and control in 2000 and amended it
in 2008. Our Government established the National
Committee on Drug Prevention and Control and
endorsed the Master Plan and National Target
Programme on Drug Prevention and Control until
2010.

Viet Nam has ratified the three United Nations
conventions on drug control. In the context of the
continuing spread of the drug menace and the
increasing consensus of the international community
on the need to strengthen the fight against drug
trafficking, we hope that these important conventions
will soon achieve universality. Viet Nam has also
expanded cooperation with countries in the region,
especially those in the Mekong subregion, and we have
worked closely with UNODC. So far, Viet Nam has
signed eight bilateral agreements on drug control, with
Cambodia, Lao People's Democratic Republic, China,
the Russian Federation, Thailand, Myanmar, Hungary
and the United States. We hold that bilateral and
multilateral cooperation play a critical role in the fight
against drug trafficking.

As a constructive and responsible member of the
Security Council, Viet Nam has actively participated in
the work of the Council, thus contributing to the

09-6381]
maintenance of international peace and security as well
as the fulfilment of the Council's mandate in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
During its two Presidencies, Viet Nam worked
intensively to promote consensus among Member
States in resolving important issues, organizing an
open debate on "Children and armed conflict" and
another on "Women and peace and security", which led
to the adoption of resolution 1889 (2009).

I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General, the
Secretariat and Member States - and to Council
members in particular - for their support for and
cooperation with Viet Nam, which helped us fulfil the
duty entrusted to us by the United Nations
membership.

