Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2012/907), Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jan Kubis for his briefing and
for his leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his comments and contribution this
afternoon. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank Ambassador Wittig for his chairmanship
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011) and for his guidance to the Council on the
Afghanistan dossier.

I will focus my statement today on four key
areas - the 2014 elections, the peace and reconciliation
process, human rights and the role of the United Nations
in Afghanistan.

First, with regard to the elections, as the Secretary-
General's report suggests, the 2014 elections are
central to the success of the Afghan political transition.
They will bring many challenges, but we should not

underestimate their importance. The United Kingdom
looks forward to credible and inclusive elections that
deliever a peaceful transition of power to a Government
chosen by the people of Afghanistan. The Afghan
people will demand nothing less, and the international
community should strongly support that objective. The
timetable for elections remains ambitious. The United
Nations has an important role to play in supporting the
electoral process, providing expertise and facilitating
open dialogue. We fully support the analysis outlined
in the Secretary-General's report on the issue.

Turning now to the peace and reconciliation
process, a political settlement in Afghanistan remains a
top priority for the international community, including
the United Kingdom. The offer to the Taliban and
other armed groups remains the same. It is for them
to sever ties to Al-Qaida and other terrorist networks
and participate in peaceful dialogue with the Afghan
Government. The time for dialogue is now. We welcome
UNAMA's work to date in support of that peace process.

Last year, when the Council split the former regime
established by resolution 1267 (1999) , it sent a clear
message. Resolution 2082 (2012), adopted on Monday,
built on that and introduced a highly flexible travel-ban
exemption procedure and greater consultation with the
Afghan Government. It further reinforced the Council's
commitment to ensuring that sanctions work in support
of the peace process, and never as a brake on it.

The United Kingdom will continue to do all that
we can to support the efforts of Afghanistan and
Pakistan in strengthening their bilateral relations.
In the past few months both nations have stepped up
their engagement and taken practical steps towards a
genuine partnership in the pursuit of peace. The United
Kingdom has convened three trilateral meetings in the
past six months and will continue to offer a forum for
open dialogue.

Thirdly, on the subject of improving human
rights in Afghanistan, we welcome the Afghan
Government's continuing commitment to protecting
the human rights of the Afghan people, as enshrined
in the Constitution, but there is still much work to be
done. The United Kingdom is deeply concerned by
reports of serious violence against women and harmful
traditional practices, as reflected in the Secretary-
General's latest report. We urge the Government of
Afghanistan to continue its important work to ensure
the full implementation of the law on the elimination of
Violence against women.

The United Kingdom also noted with concern the
figures on civilian casualties in the Secretary-General's
latest report. We note that the overwhelming and
increasing majority of such incidents are caused by the
insurgency. The United Kingdom condemns all such
acts.

Finally, I want to address the long-term role of the
United Nations in Afghanistan. UNAMA is doing an
important job. The renewal of its mandate next March
will provide a further opportunity for the Council to
focus on the next steps in Afghanistan. We will work
to ensure that UNAMA continues to have a clear set
of priorities and deliverables and that it has adequate
resources to allow it to deliver.

We note that the transition of security responsibilities
continues to make progress. With the third tranche now
in place, 75 per cent of the population live in areas
where the Afghan national forces have the security
lead. In line with that progress, the British Prime
Minister announced today that British force levels will
be reduced from 9,000 to around 5,200 by the end of
2013. That drawdown is in line with planning by the
International Security Assistance Force and the NATO
strategy agreed in Chicago this year. But even as the
drawdown progresses, our commitment to supporting
the Afghan Government remains steadfast. The United
Kingdom will deliver on all the commitments it has
made in Chicago and Tokyo to Afghanistan's long-term
security and development. We will continue to work in
partnership with the Government of Afghanistan and
the United Nations to meet our shared objective of a
stable, inclusive and prosperous Afghanistan.

