The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the third
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III),
document S/1995/350.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
Secretary-General's third progress report of 3 May
1995 (S/1995/350) on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) and the oral
briefing from the Secretariat.

"The Security Council welcomes the positive
developments in Angola. It welcomes in particular the
meeting in Lusaka on 6 May 1995 between President
Dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi, which took place in a
positive atmosphere and gave new impetus to the
consolidation of the peace process and the furthering
of national reconciliation in Angola. The Council
commends the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, of the observer States to the
Angola peace process, of States of the region and, in
particular, of the President of Zambia which assisted
in bringing about this meeting. It expresses the hope
that the meeting will mark the beginning of a regular
and constructive dialogue between the President of
Angola and the leader of UNITA.

"The Security Council notes with satisfaction the
progress in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol
(S/1994/1441, annex) concerning inter alia the
reduction of cease-fire violations, the disengagement
of forces, the cooperation among the parties and
UNAVEM, the signing of the status of forces
agreement and the providing of logistic facilities for
the Mission. The Council welcomes the ongoing
deployment of UNAVEM. support units and stresses
the importance of a timely deployment of the
infantry battalions of UNAVEM. III.

"The Security Council is however concerned by
the slow progress in other areas. It stresses the
necessity for the increased cooperation of the
Government and UNITA with the United Nations in
carrying out all major provisions of the Lusaka
Protocol and relevant Security Council resolutions.
While welcoming the release of the first group of
prisoners, the Council urges the parties to expedite
this process. Urgent attention should be given to the
quartering of UNITA soldiers by the parties as well
as the United Nations and the withdrawal of
government troops to their barracks in order to
permit the incorporation of UNIT A troops within the
national army and police in accordance with the
Lusaka Protocol. The Council stresses also the
importance of the completion of the disengagement
process and the improvement of communication
links with UNITA in all regions. It recalls the
conditions set forth in Security Council resolution
976 (1995) for the deployment of infantry units and
calls upon the parties in Angola to take all necessary
steps to ensure that these conditions are met
promptly for the timely deployment of sustainable
infantry units throughout Angola capable of fully
discharging their mandated tasks.

"The Security Council particularly underlines
the urgency of a mine-clearance programme and
calls upon the parties to provide, as promised, the
funds and equipment necessary in order for the
programme to become operational, and to begin
mine-sweeping operations on major roads under their
control. The demining, the opening of major roads
and repair of air fields and other infrastructure are of
crucial importance for the expeditious deployment of
UNAVEM. infantry units, the distribution of
humanitarian aid, and the return of displaced persons
to their places of origin. The Council invites the
donors as well as the United Nations, its agencies
and non-governmental organizations to support
actively demining actions.

 

"The Security Council notes with satisfaction the
amelioration of the humanitarian situation in Angola
and calls upon the parties to cooperate without
restriction with the United Nations and other
humanitarian international organizations to facilitate
the distribution of aid in all the regions and to
intensify their efforts to guarantee the security of
humanitarian transports and of UNAVEM. personnel.
It requests Member States to continue to support the
ongoing humanitarian activities in Angola and to
disburse as soon as possible the contributions pledged
during the donors' meeting in February 1995.

"The Security Council will continue to monitor
the situation in Angola closely and looks forward to
the next monthly report of the Secretary-General."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1995/PRST/27.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The

Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 3.50 pm.
