Mr. Rokanas (Greece): Allow me first to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the duties of
your high office and on the excellent manner in which you
have been conducting the Council's proceedings. May I
also take this opportunity to express my gratitude and
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Martin
Andj aba of Namibia.

My delegation fully subscribes to the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Finland on
behalf of the European Union. I wish, however, to dwell
further upon a number of issues that my country considers
of particular importance.

The Greek Government is gravely concerned at the
dramatic deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situation in East T imor. Violence is rampant and
escalating, causing devastation and taking a heavy toll on
innocent civilians, who are forced to flee their homes in
great numbers. East Timor is rapidly descending into
anarchy and chaos. The will of the overwhelming
majority of the people of East Timor, as expressed in the
popular consultation of 30 August organized by the
United Nations, is being trampled upon, and so are human
rights. The Indonesian Government, which is responsible
for maintaining peace, security and stability, has thus far
been unable to do so on its own.

In view of this tragic situation, the Greek
Government is convinced that only a strong peacekeeping
presence of the international community, within the
framework of the United Nations, can effectively
contribute to quelling the catastrophic violence, restoring
law and order and ensuring respect for the wishes of the
people of East Timor, through the unimpeded
implementation of the results of the ballot of 30 August.

The international community should indeed spare no
effort, not only to help bring back peace, security and
stability in the area, but also to provide, promptly and
generously, humanitarian and development aid which will
enable the people of East Timor to finally reap the
benefits of a normal life, to which they are entitled.

We earnestly hope that today's meeting will have a
catalytic influence in achieving these goals.

