Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to offer my congratulations on the convening of
this meeting, which is the result of the concerted
efforts of all parties concerned. China has all along
fully supported this initiative by the League of Arab
States.

The Middle East used to be a land of peace and
tranquillity - a land of milk and honey. Yet during the
past half century, it has been awash in blood and tears,
ravaged by war and hostilities. This is a challenge to
human conscience.

China welcomes the adoption of resolution 1701
(2006). The resolution represents an important step
towards settling the Lebanese-Israeli conflict and must
be fully implemented. China calls for an early
expansion and deployment of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and is ready to
contribute additional troops to it. We have already
begun to honour our commitment to providing
humanitarian assistance to Lebanon and will continue
to do so. We urge all parties to extend a helping hand
to the Lebanese people. More importantly, the
international community should urge Israel and
Lebanon to reach a long-term political solution, beat
their swords into ploughshares, and live in peace.

The Middle East peace process is stalled, but
peace is not out of reach. The process must be revived,
and to that end I wish to make the following proposals.

First, we must respect history and face reality.
History teaches us lessons, while reality gives us the
key to creating the future. To settle the question of the
Middle East, full consideration should be given to its
historical backdrop, which involves religious conflicts,
colonialism, ethnic clashes and border disputes. At the
same time, we must face reality. Israel should respect
the choice of the Palestinian people and agree to the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine. All
forces in Palestine should recognize Israel's right to
existence and its sovereignty. We hope that the Israeli
and Palestinian Governments will act in the
fundamental interest of their peoples, respond to the
call of the times and make the right choices, so that the
two countries can live in peace and develop in
harmony.

Secondly, mutual trust must be fostered and peace
talks must continue. No one in the Middle East will
emerge victorious from war, and the use of force will
not lead to peace. Negotiation is the only way to peace.
Israel and its Arab neighbours must put an end to
violence and conflicts, in particular military actions
targeted at civilians, and take steps to rebuild mutual
trust. On that basis, they should speedily restart
negotiations and make the necessary compromises and
concessions to achieve a peace of the brave.

Thirdly, the root causes of conflicts must be
addressed and efforts made to find a comprehensive
solution. The Palestinian-Israeli conflict remains the
core and root cause of the Middle East issue. That
conflict is closely connected with the Lebanese-Israeli
issue, the Syrian-Israeli issue and other regional issues,
which have increasingly affected each other. To
achieve a just and sustainable peace in the Middle East,
it is critical that Security Council resolutions and the
principle of land for peace be adhered to. All related
issues should be addressed in a coordinated way so as
to avoid complicating the already volatile situation in
the region.

Fourthly, cooperation must be promoted for the
benefit of the people. China calls on Israel to lift its
blockade against Palestine, dismantle the separation
wall and facilitate the supply of humanitarian
assistance to Palestine. Palestine and Israel should
expand non-governmental business and trade ties, to
enable the two peoples to be the first to enjoy the
dividends of peace and to put an end to their
longstanding mutual animosity. This, in turn, will
create an atmosphere conducive to pursuing a political
solution.

Fifthly, it is key to act in an impartial way and
step up mediation. The help and support of the
international community is essential to progress in the
Middle East peace process. It is important that all
parties act in an impartial and balanced way and refrain
from using double standards.

China supports the efforts of the Quartet. We
reiterate our belief that the Security Council should
shoulder its primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, and we welcome any
new initiative that will help move forward the Middle
East peace process.

There are bound to be obstacles on the road to
peace in the Middle East. However, as long as we
engage in peace talks rather than resort to force, seek
cooperation and avoid confrontation, enhance mutual
understanding and reduce mutual hostility, we will
definitely be able to open the door to peace.

