Mr. Griffiths: I welcome those joining us from Sana'a. I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council. I want to start by congratulating the Muslims in Yemen and around the world on the occasion of Eid Al-Adha, which comes towards the end of this week. May this Eid bring to the people of Yemen calm, health and safety. The last time I briefed the Council, a month or more ago, I outlined the substance of the United Nations- brokered negotiations between the Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah. To recall: those negotiations seek to reach agreement on a joint declaration that will include a nationwide ceasefire, economic and humanitarian measures and the resumption of the political process aimed at comprehensively resolving and ending the conflict. I warned then that we had a reached a delicate moment with much at stake. Those negotiations have now been ongoing for four months. Both parties haveprovided feedback on various drafts and proposals, but they have yet to reach agreement on a final text. The process, as we discussed the last time, has been long and challenging. It has experienced bursts of momentum as well as very significant hurdles. That is normal, I suppose, for any mediation process that addresses issues of great importance to the parties. But it is important that both parties continue to engage in the process. The negotiations must be concluded before the window of opportunity of these months of early summer closes. As a mediator - not as a negotiator - I continue to attempt to bridge the divides between the parties' positions. I hope that they will make the necessary compromises to reach their agreement - _ not mine - one that meets the aspirations of the Yemeni people. Unfortunately, even as the negotiations continue - and as we will hear from all the briefers today much more cogently than from me - for Yemenis across the country, life has become even more unforgiving. I am sure that Mr. Mark Lowcock will tell us that Yemen is experiencing the worst of times. The military situation has not improved over the past month. The continued military campaign against Ma'rib has had profound humanitarian and economic consequences, and it could easily undermine the prospects of reaching agreement on a ceasefire for the whole country and the ending of the shooting war. The strategic importance of Ma'rib should not be underestimated, and that is why we have frequently made reference to it. I call for immediate and urgent steps for de-escalation now more than ever, on the eve of Eid Al-Adha. Of course, my Office stands ready to support all efforts to that end. I am concerned - and I am sure that Mr. Lowcock will be more so - about the missile attacks that have threatened and injured civilians in Ma'rib. I have been dismayed by civilian fatalities, including many children, caused by aerial attacks in Al-Jawf and Hajjah. Like Mr. Lowcock, I condemn all attacks against civilians and civilian objects. I call on all sides to uphold their obligations under international humanitarian law to protect civilians, in general, and children, in particular. In Al-Hudaydah, the level of violence has not relented and there has been an increase in the number of ceasefire violations. The Redeployment Coordination Committee and the joint mechanisms to implement the Al-Hudaydah Agreement are still not functioning. I am sure we will hear later on this from my colleague General Guha. His Mission, the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, continues efforts to overcome the mistrust between the parties and to restore dialogue, at a minimum, between them. In a further sign of how life is becoming even more difficult for Yemenis - and I apologize that this briefing is gloomy in many ways - the economic indicators are all pointing in the wrong direction. As Mr. Lowcock will explain, food prices are rising, the currency is depreciating and most Yemenis do not have enough money in their pockets to meet their basic needs. There are no quick fixes to Yemen's economic problems, but the parties need to agree on steps to keep the economy out of the conflict. It is the people of Yemen who suffer when the economy is weaponized and politicized. The joint declaration process seeks to reach agreement between the parties on key economic and humanitarian measures that can finally bring at least some tangible results to improve people's lives. We look to the parties to agree quickly on mechanisms to make that happen. Last month, I informed the Council that we were engaging the parties to find a solution to allow for the continued and regular entrance of ships carrying oil derivatives into Al-Hudaydah port. Those efforts are ongoing. The humanitarian consequences of the impasse grow greater by the day, and this situation cannot continue. It is essential that all obstacles to imports and the domestic distribution of fuel and other goods vital for the civilian population be removed. The Government of Yemen has taken the positive step of clearing a number of fuel ships in recent weeks, and we encourage them to continue to release more ships. I want to stress our position on this because it is frequently misunderstood. Of course, we need, want and would like to see those ships entering Al-Hudaydah port. Nevertheless, that can only provide temporary relief. We have shared ideas with the parties about how to move forward in the immediate term, prior to a joint declaration agreement, but a long-term solution is needed. Through the President of the Council and the Council itself, [urge the parties to engage constructively with the proposals that are in front of them so that the Yemeni people can get the fuel they desperately need. In addition, as the parties know well, they also urgently need to agree on a mechanism to disburse revenues from Al-Hudaydah port - as was agreed in Sweden 18 months ago, as a contribution towards civil servant salaries. My Office has consistently endeavoured to support the parties in reaching an agreement on paying civil servant salaries to all Yemenis, based on the 2014 payroll database. I repeat it here because there are some who publicly deny it. These civil servants have the right to receive their salaries in full and on time. We will continue to engage the parties on proposals to achieve this vitally important goal. It is a deserved entitlement of these people, but it is also of extraordinary importance in terms of the humanitarian requirements of Yemen. It has been two weeks since the Security Council's meeting (see S/2020/721) under the German presidency on the FSO SAFER, the decaying oil tanker that is threatening to spill over | million barrels of oil into the Red Sea. At that meeting, Mr. Lowcock and others raised the alarm yet again about the immense environmental and humanitarian threat posed by the tanker. At the beginning of this month, Ansar Allah confirmed in writing to us that they would authorize a long-planned United Nations-supervised technical mission to the tanker. However, we are still awaiting the permissions necessary for the team to deploy. The United Nations has it made clear to Ansar Allah that the team's mission is to assess the condition of the tanker, undertake any initial possible repairs and formulate urgently needed recommendations on what further action is required. I think we can all agree that an independent and expert-driven assessment is of critical importance to allowing us to fully understand the scope, size and threat of this issue and the possible solutions to it. With Mr. Lowcock, I will keep the Council informed of any developments in this regard in the coming days and weeks. In the southern governorates, I am encouraged that there has been a reduction in the level of military activity in recent weeks, owing to the efforts of the parties, despite some limited casualties at the front lines in Abyan. Tensions over State institutions persist in Aden and other areas, which are particularly troubling given the humanitarian context that Mr. Lowcock will describe. As we know, the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council are engaged in daily efforts in Riyadh under the auspices of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in order to reach agreement on moving forward on the Riyadh agreement. We had hoped to have specific news on that before today's Council meeting; we are given to understand that there is some good news. We hope so. It is of extremely vital importance for all of us, as well as for the joint declaration and its process. The elements under negotiation in the joint declaration are important both for the parties and for the Yemeni people. We have seen intense debate among civil society and others around these issues. I am grateful for the advice and guidance that we have received from them. My Office is fully committed to an inclusive mediation process, as is required, as Council members very well know, by resolution 2216 (2015). I will continue to engage with civil society actors, including through digital means. Gender inclusion is a high priority. I know it also a high priority of yours, Mr. President. My Office is systematically integrating gender perspectives into the joint declaration text and the planning to follow it in what we hope is its implementation. Finally, I continue to hope that the joint declaration negotiations will turn the tide away from these maudlin views, but towards peace. But I do not want to sugar-coat things today. There is a real risk that these negotiations will slip away, and that Yemen will enter a new phase of prolonged escalation, of the uncontrolled spread of the coronavirus, and of severe and threatening economic decline. The United Nations and all its entities are committed to doing all they can to support the parties in reaching an agreement that puts Yemen on a path towards a peaceful and prosperous future. Through you, Mr. President, I call on all Member States, including members of the Security Council, and others who have an interest in the stability and future of the region to lend their full support to us to persuade all involved to move forward with speed to a successful conclusion. But ultimately the responsibility lies with the parties to bring peace negotiations to a successful close. I have said it before, and I hope I will not have to say it too often again: the coming period will test the political will of the parties to bring forward a breakthrough. I hope I can bring you better news, Mr. President, when next we meet.
