Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela appreciates the Republic of Angola's
initiative in convening this timely and important
debate on the prevention and resolution of conflicts
in the Great Lakes region. We welcome the Minister
for External Affairs of Angola, Mr. Georges Rebelo
Pinto Chikoti. We also appreciate the briefings by the
Secretary-General, the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region and
the Adviser to the Office of the Vice President for the
Africa region of the World Bank.

Venezuela associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like
to highlight the valuable role played by Angola in its
capacity as Chair of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region since 2014, and believes that
concerted action on the part of the the Conference, the
United Nations, the African Union and the Southern
African Development Community is a priority if
we are to accelerate development and consolidate
regional peace.

Today, the countries of the region are facing serious
threats to their stability and economic development,
thanks to a a number of distinct conflicts in which
exclusion, the exploitation of natural resources and
poverty play a important role, which in turn affects
the States' consolidation of their institutions and
jeopardizes the progress that has been achieved in recent
years. Various criminal groups have taken advantage
of the vacuum created by that institutional weakness
to exploit and trade illegally in the region's mineral
resources and wildlife, as the Secretary-General
highlights in his report on the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region (S/2016/232),
which indicates that 50 per cent of that illegal traffic
comes from the illicit trade in gold. If such extraction
were done legally under the direction of the States in
the region, the revenues would substantially benefit
their economic and social development.

In that context, it is worth noting that since 1990
at least 18 armed conflicts have been funded directly
through the illegal extraction and trade of natural
resources. That is why the natural resources best suited
to financing conflicts are those that can most easily be
extracted, concealed and sold. In many cases, armed
groups do not have to carry out the extraction directly
but simply finance themselves through illegal taxes
on the commodities' trade and export transit routes.
In that regard, the international community should
support and strengthen the institutional capacity of the
countries affected by this issue to enable them to have
full and sovereign control over their natural resources,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1803
(XVII), adopted in 1962.

The complexity of the problems affecting the
countries of the Great Lakes region requires us to
implement an international policy of genuine cooperation
and solidarity that takes into account the countries'
individual situations in creating the economic and social
conditions conducive to eradicating poverty, exclusion
and violence. We would like to highlight the efforts of
the States and regional bodies of Central Africa to work
for peace and democracy. In that regard, we welcome
the elections that have been held in the region in recent
months. We encourage the international community
to support and respect the sovereign decision of the
region's citizens in electing their authorities while
avoiding the customary practice of interfering in those
countries' internal affairs. We also urge for stability
and national reconciliation in order to overcome the
political and security difficulties that may arise, so as
to resolve differences through political negotiation at
both the national and regional level.

Venezuela is aware that dealing with such conflict
situations is a challenge both for the Governments
of the countries in the region and for regional and
subregional bodies and the United Nations. Extreme
actions and violence represent a major challenge to
peace. We therefore firmly condemn any violation of
human rights or international humanitarian law caused
by armed clashes and emphasize the importance of
accountability for ending persistent cycles of impunity.
We also support the fight against the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. With the proliferation
of weapons being a destabilizing factor in the region,
we believe that the international community, and the
Security Council in particular, should redouble its
efforts to ban the transfer of arms to non-State actors.
It is important to give direct support to countries
that have ended fighting in order to ensure they do
not relapse into conflict, by providing them with the
capacity to manage their natural resources and their
economies themselves, including by strengthening their
institutions. Cooperation on the part of international
donors, international financial institutions and bilateral
partners, without conditions, is crucial to promoting
development projects, reducing the vulnerability of
the population and revitalizing economic activity in
the Great Lakes region. We believe that the United
Nations system in the Great Lakes region should
continue to promote economic development, which
should be handled holistically. It is vital to ensure that
the settlement of conflicts addresses the underlying
economic and social causes of the problems that have
historically plagued these States. The political process
must be addressed in a multidimensional way, supported
by the pillars of development policy, the protection of
human rights and the eradication of poverty, which will
ultimately bring shared benefits.

Lastly, we reiterate our solidarity with and support
to the work that the countries of Africa are doing to
promote peace and economic and social development
for their peoples. We believe that the priorities
established in the road map for the Regional Strategic
Framework for the countries of the Great Lakes region
should be our shared goal, supported by the entire
international community.

