Mr. Bessho (Japan): To begin, I would like to
thank the President - His Excellency Mr. Angelino
Alfano - for convening this meeting on such an
important topic. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his insightful briefing.

The Mediterranean region, which is adjacent
to three continents, has historically enjoyed great
cultural diversity as the birthplace and crossroads
of many civilizations. At the same time, its location
makes it particularly vulnerable to the spillover
effects of conflict. Today the Mediterranean region
is experiencing various challenges in addition to
conflict, including climate change, famine, terrorism,
violent extremism, transnational organized crime,
including trafficking in persons, and an unprecedented
volume of migration. Those challenges are complex,
intertwined threats to peace and security in the region
that are exacerbating or prolonging existing conflicts.
Against that backdrop, we would like to share a few
perspectives on how to more effectively address those
complex, interlinked threats to peace and security in
the Mediterranean.
First, we need to grapple with complex,
multifactoral challenges to international peace and
security through a more comprehensive and integrated
approach. In particular, we would like to emphasize
the perspective of the peace and security, development
and humanitarian nexus. It is clear that complex
driving factors to conflict cannot be dealt with from a
fragmented perspective. In that regard, it is important
to implement the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, which addresses the multidimensional and
interlinked challenges facing the Sahel region. Those
challenges are among the major factors underlying the
surging movement of people through the Mediterranean.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's leadership
to strengthen the United Nations work in the Sahel by
establishing a steering committee for the Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. Japan has been a strong
supporter of flagship projects in that regard. We have
provided support for border control, as well as for
countermeasures against the radicalization of youth
and activities to raise awareness of civic rights. Those
assistance projects aim to strengthen border control
capacity and prevent young people from turning to
violent extremism, and thereby stabilize the region.

Secondly, efforts to sustain peace in the region
cannot succeed without the States' ownership. In that
regard, we would like to commend the ongoing political
process in Libya, which is being led by the Libyan
people themselves, and express our ongoing support to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his role to facilitate that process. The Council should
continue to robustly support efforts such as the Libyan
political process, conducted with the ownership of the
affected countries themselves.

In addition, the role played by regional organizations
around the Mediterranean - which include the League
of Arab States, the European Union and the African
Union - cannot be overemphasized. We believe that
the strengthened partnership and better coordination
between the United Nations, the Security Council and
regional organizations are essential to comprehensively
address complex, regional challenges.

Thirdly, we believe that the human security
approach could serve as a useful tool in dealing with
the complex, interlinked threats to peace and security
in the region. Human security seeks to protect and
empower every individual; it necessarily addresses
multiple challenges at once, including those that are
most destabilizing to the Mediterranean region, such
as food and water insecurity, migration, internally
displaced persons and health care.

I would like to conclude by thanking once again
the presidency of Italy for organizing this holistic and
thematic meeting of the Security Council. It is important
for the Council to seek better ways to address today's
complex, multifactoral challenges to international peace
and security. During our presidency of the Council next
month, we would like to continue relevant discussions,
building upon today's discussions.

