Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Let me first state that my
delegation associates itself fully with the statement made
earlier today by the representative of the United Kingdom
on behalf of the European Union.

Less than three years ago, Bosnia and Herzegovina
was a country in flames. In the summer of 1995, intense
fighting was going on in large parts of Bosnia, the policy
of "ethnic cleansing" showed its ugly face in Srebenica
and the shelling of innocent civilians reached a horrible
climax at the Sarajevo market.

Since then, Bosnia and Herzegovina and its people
have come a long way. The Dayton Peace Agreement laid
the foundation for a better future. In implementing that
Agreement, day by day and step by step, the hope for a

 
peaceful, democratic and prosperous Bosnia is steadily
growing.

So far, progress has been made possible by the strong
support, and often active intervention, of the international
community. It is now time for the current political leaders
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as for those who aspire
to be elected in September, to rid themselves of their old
way of ethnic-oriented thinking and to make the necessary
compromises in a spirit of democracy and pluralism.

The international community has made a long-term
commitment to peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The draft
resolution we are about to adopt today, extending the
authorization of the international Stabilization Force
(SFOR) and the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), including the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), is a clear
demonstration of this commitment. As indicated in
paragraph 10 of the draft resolution, the Council stands
ready to extend the authorization of SFOR further in the
light of developments.

SFOR and UNMIBH, with IPTF, both have key roles
in the peace-implementation process. The SFOR military
presence is absolutely crucial in providing the secure
environment necessary for all civilian efforts. IPTF's work
to restructure local police and to build a democratic
Bosnian public-security capability will in time reduce the
need for an international security presence. The two
missions are complementary in a truly multidimensional
peacekeeping effort. Their fruitful cooperation, in close
coordination with the High Representative, is commendable.

That cooperation will be particularly important during
the forthcoming period, which will be marked by the return
of refugees and displaced persons to the so-called minority
areas.

Another important aspect of peace-building in Bosnia
is the programme for judicial reform coordinated by the
High Representative. In this context, Sweden supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and the High
Representative concerning an UNMIBH-led court-
monitoring programme. We look forward to the Council
expeditiously returning to this issue, as stated in its
resolution 1168 (1998).

Sweden will continue to support fully the peace
implementation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This will be
done nationally, through the European Union and through
the United Nations, and not least by the continued
participation of some 500 Swedish soldiers in SFOR and
50 civilian police in IPTF.
Finally, let me say that Sweden welcomes the fact
that Bosnia and Herzegovina has started on a path leading
towards closer integration into European structures. The
process is still very fragile and developments in Bosnia
will merit close attention. The democratic elections in
September, under the supervision of Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, will be an occasion
to lay the groundwork for taking this process further. We
urge the leaders and the people of Bosnia to seize this
opportunity.

