Mr. Seck (Senegal): (spoke in French): Before
I go into my statement, I would like to thank the
French presidency for quickly acceding, with the
Security Council having such a busy programme, to
the request by the delegation of Senegal to hold this
briefing on the situation in Guinea-Bissau. On behalf
of the members of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau for his detailed briefing. I also thank
the representatives of the African Union and of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP)
for their commitment to Guinea-Bissau.

As has been clearly pointed out, there have been
many developments in the political situation in Guinea-
Bissau since the dissolution by President Jose Mario
Vaz of the Government led by Prime Minister Carlos
Correia, on 12 May, and the subsequent appointment
Mr. Baciro Dja to succeed him, on 26 May. The African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde
(PAIGC) rejected that decision, which it called illegal,
and stated that, according to the Constitution, the
Prime Minister was to be chosen by the majority party.
In spite of the consultations held and the alternative
proposals submitted by the PAIGC, President Vaz
chose the option put forward by the Party for Social
Renewal, naming Mr. Dja as Prime Minister. Given
the tensions in the political class and the risk of an
escalation, formal consultations were held at various
levels to encourage dialogue among the stakeholders in
order to find a solution acceptable to all.

I would like to welcome the active preventive
efforts, made in particular by the Security Council, on
this matter. There were many statements by the Council
President to the press to express the Council's great
concern at the impasse in the country for many months,
as well as to call on political leaders to overcome that
impasse and return to dialogue. The Council also
adopted resolution 2267 (2016), on 26 February, which
extended the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
until 28 February 2017. The resolution also calls upon
Guinea-Bissau's President, Prime Minister, Speaker of
Parliament and leaders of political parties to abide by
their commitment to restore political stability in the
country, in the interests ofthe people of Guinea-Bissau.
The Council also visited Bissau on 7 March to repeat
the same message and to undertake an exchange with
the various stakeholders in the country's crisis. Lastly,
discussions were recently held, on 12 May, on various
issues, including as well the Council's consultations on
26 May, both of which were followed by a statement to
the press by the President of the Council, expressing the
great concern of the members in the face of the latest
developments that had exacerbated tension among the
political class and that risked undermining the country's
security and stability, especially in the then run-up the
end of the mandate ofthe ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-
Bissau (ECOMIB).

Against that backdrop, at this stage I am pleased
to refer to the conclusions of the forty-ninth Ordinary
Summit of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government,
held in Dakar on 4 June. The main elements
included the extension of the ECOMIB mandate for
an additional year; the deployment to Bissau of a
presidential delegation, made up of President Macky
Sall of Senegal, President Ernest Bai Koroma of Sierra
Leone and President Alpha Conde of Guinea, to hold
discussions with parties to the crisis in order to gain
a better understanding of the current situation in the
country; the adoption by the ECOWAS Commission
of the necessary provisions to settle the arrears due
to ECOMIB troop-and police-contributing countries;
and the launch of consultations between the ECOWAS
Commission and the CPLP with a view to the holding a
meeting of the International Contact Group on Guinea-
Bissau. It should be noted that the ECOWAS Summit
expressed its deep concern at the ongoing crisis in
Guinea-Bissau, which undermines the implementation
of commitments undertaken by development partners
in March 2015 to provide financial assistance to the
country. ECOWAS also urged political actors to engage
in dialogue to resolve the political and institutional
crisis, while also welcoming the professionalism of the
army, which had remained on the sidelines of political
developments, and encouraging it to so continue.

Those decisions by ECOWAS reflect the full
engagement of the subregion for a peaceful and lasting
resolution to the crisis in the country. Consultations are
taking place to determine the date for the visit of the West
African presidential delegation, which will be preceded
by a mission made up by a delegation of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs, Integration and/or Defence from
the three countries I mentioned, accompanied by the
Chair of the ECOWAS Commission, with the aim of
identifying, along with the political actors in Guinea-
Bissau, specific issues for the Heads of State to take up,
including potential recommendations that could follow.

On behalf of all ECOWAS member countries, the
delegation of Senegal welcomes the tireless efforts of
Guinea-Bissau's partners, bilateral and multilateral
alike, including the United Nations, the African Union,
the European Union and the CPLP. We reiterate to
them our gratitude for their very valuable support.
ECOWAS also welcomes the outstanding work done by
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and commends the latest press release,
issued on 9 June. We are convinced that by working
together and pooling all of our efforts, we will be able
to contribute to restoring the cohesion and political
stability so desired by the people of Guinea-Bissau,
who deserve to enjoy the dividends of peace.

To conclude, ECOWAS reiterates its support to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and encourages him to continue his good offices and
mediation efforts.

