Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the briefers who spoke at the outset of the meeting,
as well as the presiding delegation for convening this
important debate.

In recent months, there has, unfortunately, been no
lack of examples with respect to the problem of children
and armed conflict. Iraq, South Sudan and Gaza are
cases that remind us of the need to continue working
collectively to protect those who disproportionately
suffer the consequences of armed conflict, violence
and abuse.

As a responsible member of the international
community, Mexico firmly defends the principle of
children's interests having the highest priority under all
circumstances, and calls for increased cooperation to
address that challenge at the international, national and
regional levels. We reiterate our commitment to ensure
the full protection of civilians in armed conflicts,
especially the protection of women and children, two of
the most vulnerable groups.

My country condemns attacks on schools and
hospitals as a tactic of war, as well as the use of
explosives in densely populated areas, given their
disproportionate and indiscriminate effects on civilian
populations, especially minors. Such acts are contrary to
international humanitarian law and to the international
law of human rights.

We welcome recent advances to counter that trend,
especially the Guidance Note on Attacks against
Schools and Hospitals, which was circulated in May
by UNICEF, the World Health Organization and the
Special Representative and seeks to contribute to the
implementation of resolution 1998 (2011).

Moreover, the recently adopted resolution 2143
(2014) constitutes an innovative and positive step
forward aimed at ensuring the protection of schools and
promoting measures to discourage and put an end to the
use of schools for military purposes. Attacks on schools
not only endanger the lives of thousands of children and
teachers, they also undermine the future ofthe societies
affected by denying that sector of the population their
inalienable right to education and, consequently, the
development of their own countries.

My country has supported a number of initiatives in
this area, including the Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
which seeks to prevent and halt the recruitment and use
children in armed forces by the year 2016, as well as

the British Government's proposal to deal with sexual
violence in armed conflicts, which seeks to reinforce
the international community's response in this area.

From the perspective of the participation of children
in armed conflict, Mexico has shown its concern with
the link that exists between such conflicts and sexual
violence as a tactic of war. Such violence exacerbates
conflicts, prevents the reconstruction of the social fabric
and, when used systematically, constitutes a war crime
and a threat to international peace and security. We will
continue working hand in hand with the international
community and civil society to show that we are equal
to that great challenge.

As indicated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General at the beginning of this meeting,
impunity is a significant obstacle to efforts to grapple
with the impact of armed conflicts on children. It is
vital that national authorities and the parties concerned
take appropriate legal action to bring those responsible
to justice. The fight against impunity should be part of
the process of reintegration and the particular attention
needed by children affected by armed conflict.

In that context, the Security Council must ensure
that its Sanctions Committees take into account the
protection of children as a central component in their
mandates and that they carefully and in detail analyse
the cases of persistent perpetrators who commit
systematic violations against children, so that more
dynamic measures can be taken in that regard.

We urge the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict to promote the effective use of all the
tools available to it, such as the regular use of visits to
the field and the convening of informative meetings,
emergency or informal, when faced with cases of grave
violations, at the request of the Chair or of any member
of the Working Group.

Finally, my delegation wishes to recognize the very
worthy work of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Leila Zerrougui and her team, as well as that
of UNICEF, who, together with civil society, have
implemented a practical mechanism for investigating
and monitoring and who work tirelessly on this priority
issue on the international agenda.

We cannot, nor should we, lower our guard. The
future of our children is our chief responsibility.

