The President: I thank Judge Meron for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
President of Poland.

Let me express my gratitude for the valuable,
substantive and insightful briefings by Ms. Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Judge Hisashi Owada and Judge
Theodor Meron.

Allow me to begin my statement with a quotation
by Pawel Wlodkowic, Rector of J agiellonian University
in Krakow, who as long ago as the fifteenth century
proclaimed that there were certain rights of nations
that must be secured, namely, their existence, freedom,
independence, peculiar culture and decent and
unhampered development.

"Where force is stronger than friendship, one is
guided by his own self-interest. The law, including
natural law, condemns actions of people who attack
those wishing to live in peace, according to the
rule 'do unto others as you would have them do
unto you'".

Wlodkowic's arguments were further developed
in the seventeenth century by Hugo Grotius in what
are regarded as fundamental works of international
law, namely, On the Law of War and Peace and The
Freedom of the Seas. The conceptual work initiated
by Wlodkowic and reinforced by Grotius gave rise
to the concept of the rights of nations, the basis of
international law.

Today, 600 years later, Poland wishes to return
to those roots. We want to highlight that there can be
no peace without law. International law remains the
strongest tool for civilized nations to ensure long-term
peace - peace based on trust and mutually respected
norms and values.

The need to recover the lost meaning of the works
of Wlodkowic and Grotius is particularly visible today,
as a paradox of the modern world becomes clear. On the
one hand, there is an extensive system of international
law and institutional architecture to stand guard over it.
This is the United Nations system, with its international
courts and tribunals. On the other hand, the temptation
to place force above law and fear above trust remains
present around the world. That is why I invite all
countries and institutions sitting at this table today
to a discussion on the significance of international
law. As States, we cannot deal with those challenges
unless we invest in the very foundation of the global
order - respect for international law.

I believe that is impossible without first providing
coherent definitions of the basic categories of
international law in the context of contemporary
challenges to peace. Such definitions are also relevant
in broader political debates, for if we call an act of
aggression a conflict without properly defining the
victim and the aggressor, if we call a threat a challenge
without defining the source ofthat threat, and ifwe call
building aggressive military capabilities a disturbance
of balance without determining who it is that is
advancing the offensive military capabilities, we are
helpless in terms of selecting the legal steps to react.
In international law unnamed phenomena do not exist,
and ill-defined concepts build ill-shaped realities.

Following those general remarks, which I would
like us all to take to heart, I wish to concentrate on the
problems with regard to the functioning of three aspects
of international law: means for the peaceful settlement
of disputes, actions against violations of international
law and ways of bringing the perpetrators of crimes
under international law to justice.

First, I would like to refer directly to Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations, on the pacific
settlement of disputes. Poland considers it the most
useful tool at the international community's disposal
in the case of disagreements and imminent conflicts.
The United Nations has a rich history of envoys and
mediators. For decades, they have been sent to hotspots
all over the world in order to assist both sides with
their expertise and experience. Their aim has been to
prevent or to stop violations of international law. In
that regard, we remember the late Secretary-General
Dag Hammarskjold, who gave his life to safeguard the
international order.

It is worth underlining some recent mediation
success stories, in particular in West African States. One
example is the Gambia, where the Economic Community
of West African States intervened effectively during a
political crisis in 2017. Furthermore, we cannot forget
that the peaceful settlements of disputes also occur
outside the scope of the United Nations and of regional
organizations. They take place with the involvement
of recognized moral authorities. At this point, I would
like to mention the special role of the Pope and Vatican
diplomacy in the process of the normalization of
international relations and the peaceful settlement of
many world crises.

Currently, the importance of resolving conflicts by
diplomatic means is visible in the ongoing efforts to
reduce tensions on the Korean peninsula. Poland has
been involved in the region for more than 60 years,
including through participation in the work of the
Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission in Korea. We
have always stressed that the channels of communication
should be kept open. That is something that I personally
repeated during my visit to Panmunjom earlier this
year. We are fully supportive of the new high-level
diplomatic initiatives aimed at re-establishing peace on
the peninsula.

We also cannot forget the longest conflict in
the world - that between Israel and Palestine. As a
country with close and good relations with both the
Israeli and the Palestinian peoples. Poland has always
strongly supported all initiatives aimed at stabilization
and at strengthening peace and security in the Middle
East. Only a return to meaningful bilateral negotiations
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions
and international law might bring about a peaceful
settlement of that dispute. That is the only path towards
a two-State solution and resolving all final-status
issues. Today more than ever, we need peace in the
Holy Land, which is sacred to all major monotheistic
religions. If we want to achieve peace, terrorism and
violence are never the answer.

The second issue that I would like to highlight
concerns situations in which the peaceful settlement
of disputes is not applied or does not bring about a
satisfactory effect. That results in situations of conflict,
wars, death, suffering and a lack of hope for millions of
human beings. At this point, we need to ask ourselves
a question: How can we protect international law,
in particular international humanitarian law, in the
darkest hour?

The Security Council can introduce targeted
sanctions regimes. We welcome international solidarity
in implementing sanctions and exerting maximum
pressure on States that disregard the international
legal order. Even though they are divisive at times
and not perfect, coercive measures are often crucial
to defending the principles of international law.
Nevertheless, persistent international pressure needs
to be combined with dialogue, as sanctions should
never be an end in themselves. Imposing United
Nations sanctions requires the Council's decision.
Unfortunately, there are situations where a lack of
consensus prevents the effective countering of obvious
violations of international law.

The Syrian conflict has entered its eighth year. The
continued and widespread violence and violations of
international law, including those of human rights, are a

daily reality for Syrians. The situation in Syria demands
that the United Nations and each Member State stand in
defence of humanitarian principles. The international
community, in particular the Security Council, needs to
emphasize the importance of providing uninterrupted
access for all humanitarian actors to the whole territory
of Syria.

All actors engaged in Syria must be called on
to take action to prevent the use of weapons of mass
destruction, including chemical weapons. The belief in
the importance of terminating that shameful practice
should be shared by all members ofthe Security Council.

As President of the Republic of Poland, I cannot
help but turn to my region, Central and Eastern
Europe. The violation of territorial integrity through
the illegal annexation and occupation of Crimea and
by the separatists in Donbas, who benefit from strong
third-country support, are major challenges not only to
Ukraine but also to the stability of the whole European
continent. Poland supports the idea of deploying a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in eastern
Ukraine. The mandate of such an operation should not
be limited to the protection of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine but should cover the whole area of
the conflict, including the entire Ukrainian-Russian
internationally recognized border. The international
community should not lose its focus on the ongoing
desperate plight of the Crimean Tatars and the human
rights activists in the occupied Crimea, who are subject
to constant intimidation.

In speaking about Central and Eastern Europe
in this forum, I must also mention common concerns
related to the so-called frozen conflicts in Georgia,
Moldova and Nagorno Karabakh. We have to strive to
foster an open, constructive and respectful dialogue so
as to contribute to the successful settlement of those
conflicts. Those conflicts entail clear violations of
international law that can, and should, be addressed by
the Security Council.

Thirdly, and finally, I would like to discuss the
issue of accountability. The international community,
and the Security Council in particular, are morally
responsible for guaranteeing individual criminal
accountability for international crimes. In that context,
I would like to stress Poland's support for international
legal mechanisms aimed at bringing those responsible
for violating international law to justice. We remember
the work done by the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We have also noted the referral of
the cases of the Sudan and Libya to the International
Criminal Court.

In 2016, Poland welcomed the establishment of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic, which recently published
its first report. The Mechanism remains a unique
initiative that contributes to the prevention and
prosecution of the immense atrocities and human rights
violations committed in Syria. At the same time, as we
have stated on many occasions, the impunity of those
responsible for chemical attacks in Syria is not only
contrary to international law, it also undermines the
peace process and our common security. We therefore
fully support the establishment of an independent,
impartial and professional mechanism to attribute
responsibility for the use of chemical weapons. Any
such crime must be properly investigated, and those
responsible must be held accountable. Such crimes
should never happen again.

Let me underline that the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction has always been an
important element of Poland's security policy. In our
work in the non-proliferation regimes, including as
the Chair of the second session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and Chair of The Hague Code of Conduct against
Ballistic Missile Proliferation, we have constantly
advocated for the primacy of international law, strong
international institutions, binding non-proliferation
norms, widespread and credible verification
mechanisms, the implementation of good practices and
closer international cooperation.

In conclusion, let me refer to the principle of
good faith. Acting in line with that principle is an
inherent element of respect for international law.
If we notice some States' actions against the spirit
of international law, we cannot pretend that they
are legitimate and tolerate them. We cannot accept
dubious legal justifications for actions taken in bad
faith, in fraudem legis. Law cannot be a tool against
justice. It must serve justice and justice only. For those
who seek justice, law has to be a supportive force. It
applies specifically to such issues as compensation
for historical losses or modern investigations. The
latter includes the investigation of flight disasters,
such as the full clarification of the causes of the crash
of the Polish airplane in Smolensk, in which the late
President of Poland, Mr. Lech Kaczyr'lski, his wife and
all members of the Polish delegation perished. We are
morally and legally responsible to react and restore
trust in international law.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I call on the Vice-President of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea.

