The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

Ijoin others in welcoming Special Representative
Tanin back to the Security Council in his new
capacity. I look forward to working with him. I also
want to welcome Deputy Prime Minister Dacic' and
Ambassador Citaku to the Council, and I thank them
for their statements.

I would like to begin by welcoming the dignified
response shown by Kosovo after its bid tojoin UNESCO
fell short. Kosovo's integration into international
organizations is positive for Kosovo and for the
region, and we will continue to support it despite the
setback. We appreciate Kosovo's strong commitment
to protecting Serbian cultural and religious heritage,
irrespective of the UNESCO result. The withdrawal of
the controversial draft law on cultural heritage was an
important signal of that.

But like others here today we understand the
concerns set out in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/833) about attacks against minorities
and religious heritage. Most of these incidents are
not ethnically motivated - they are criminal in
nature - but we still encourage Kosovo to do more to
promote social cohesion and integration. That means
reaching out to minority communities. It means more
mayors and police commissioners condemning attacks
and working together. We applaud the efforts of those
who have already done so, including in Mitrovica.

We recognize that such steps require political
leadership and courage. We have seen signs of such
political will since August, most notably in the
adoption of the constitutional amendments and laws
for the specialist court. We are pleased that Kosovo has
begun negotiations with the Netherlands and we look
forward to continued progress. Political leadership has
also been shown by Serbia. We welcome the invitation
for Kosovo's Commission on Missing Persons to
attend the excavations in Jelovica, Serbia. It is an
encouraging sign of better cooperation in identifying
missing persons. Sadly, more progress must be made in
identifying missing persons in Kosovo, and we urge all
those with information to come forward.

We have also seen political leadership in the
four positive agreements reached in the dialogue in
August. The dialogue remains the most effective way
to normalize relations. It is vital to the future prosperity
and stability of the Western Balkans and to the well-
being of Kosovo's people. We encourage both sides to
continue to show leadership and to take the difficult
political decisions needed to ensure the success of the
dialogue. Both sides need to deliver the benefit of the
dialogue for all their citizens. That means implementing
the agreements, changing legislation where necessary,
and remaining genuinely committed to the process.

We are therefore concerned that the Kosovo
opposition is using violence to block the work of the
Assembly and, worse yet, that individual members of
the Government have been assaulted. We object to the
blocking of democratic processes and the opposition's
use of violence for political ends. Reports of injuries
yesterday should be of concern to us all. The Kosovo
Assembly needs to be allowed to hold a free and open
debate on all issues affecting the country, including the
pressing need to improve the rule of law.

Let me close by thanking the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the representatives of
Serbia and Kosovo for a meeting that has been relatively
constructive in tone so far. The United Kingdom's long-
standing view that we should reduce the frequency of
such meetings continues. Though challenges remain,
the reality on the ground does not warrant such Council
attention. We are now in the third year of the dialogue
facilitated by the European Union between Serbia and
Kosovo. The European Union and Kosovo have now
signed a Stabilization and Association Agreement,
which we warmly welcome and it is time to conclude
that it is Europe, and not the Council, that will bring
momentum and further progress.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Mr. Ivica Dacic' has asked for the floor to make a
further statement. I give him the floor.

