Mr. Pedersen: 1. In one month, on 30 October, I
intend to convene 150 Syrian men and women for the
launch of a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned, credible, balanced
and inclusive Constitutional Committee facilitated by
the United Nations in Geneva. I believe that this should
be a sign of hope for the long-suffering Syrian people.
It comes after the agreement of the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic and the Syrian Negotiation
Commission to a package deal of the nominees to the
Committee and a Terms of Reference and Core Rules of
Procedure to guide its work.

We should stop for a minute and take stock of the
significance of this agreement. This is indeed the first
concrete political agreement between the Government
and the opposition to begin to implement a key aspect of
resolution 2254 (2015) and to set a schedule and process
for a new constitution. It implies a clear acceptance of
the other as an interlocutor. It commits their nominees
to sit together in face-to-face dialogue and negotiation,
while at the same time opening space for civil society at
the table. It is also a shared promise to the Syrian people
to try to agree, under the auspices ofthe United Nations,
on new constitutional arrangements for Syria - a new
social contract to help repair a broken country. This can
be a door-opener to a wider political process that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.

Seizing this opportunity will not be easy. Syria
remains in the gravest crisis, with violence and terrorism
continuing, five international armies operating on
its territory, appalling suffering and abuses, a deeply
divided society and a sense of despair among its people
inside and outside the country. Trust and confidence
are almost non-existent. The Constitutional Committee
will really matter if it becomes a step along the difficult
path out of this conflict and to a new Syria, and if its
launch and work are accompanied by other steps to
build trust and confidence among Syrians and between
Syria and the international community.

The Secretary-General formally announced the
agreement on 23 September. Allow me to join the
Secretary-General in welcoming the progress made by
the Government and the opposition. Iparticularly thank
Syrian Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
Al-Moualem, and Syrian Negotiation Commission
leader Al-Hariri for their engagement with me in a
sustained dialogue to help bring this about.

Like the Secretary-General, I am grateful to the
wide range of Syrian women and men f including
the Women's Advisory Board, participants in the Civil
Society Support Room and Syrians from all parts of
the country - who have offered their counsel and
insight. Ijoin the Secretary-General in expressing my
particular appreciation to the Governments of Russia,
Turkey and Iran for their support in the conclusion of
the agreement. I also join the Secretary-General in
expressing my thanks for the support of the members of
the Council, including all five permanent members, and
my appreciation to the Small Group for their support.

The Secretary-General transmitted the agreed
Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure of
the Constitutional Committee via you, Mr. President,
to the Security Council; all members now have it in
document S/2019/775. The agreement is framed by
key principles that must underpin any process and
any settlement. These include respect for the Charter
of the United Nations; Security Council resolutions;
Syria's sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial
integrity; and the Syrian-led and owned nature of
the process. The principles also include the objective
of United Nations-supervised elections envisaged in
resolution 2254 (2015), based on a new constitution.
They also recognize the need for a broader political
process to implement resolution 2254 (2015).

The Constitutional Committee has a clear mandate.
It shall, within the context of the United Nations-
facilitated Geneva process, prepare and draft for popular
approval a constitutional reform as a contribution to the
political settlement in Syria and the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015). The constitutional reform shall,
inter alia, embody in the constitution and constitutional
practices of the country the letter and spirit of the 12
living intra-Syrian essential principles that emerged
in the Geneva process and were affirmed in Sochi.
The Committee may review the 2012 Constitution,
including in the context of other Syrian constitutional
experiences and amend the current constitution or draft
a new one.

The constitutional reform adopted by the
Constitutional Committee must be popularly approved
and transposed into the national legal order by a
means that will need to be agreed. There is a clear,
balanced and, I believe, workable structure. There will
be two equal co-chairs from the Government and the
opposition who will proceed in consensus and exert
the prerogatives necessary to ensure the Committee's
smooth functioning. There is small body of 45 - 15
Government nominees, 15 opposition nominees and 15
from civil society - to prepare and draft proposals.
And there is a large body of 150 - 50 Government
nominees, 50 opposition nominees and 50 from civil
society - to discuss and adopt proposals.

The agreement promotes consensus within the
Committee where possible, but also specifies a
decision-making threshold of 75 per cent. All main
components need to be on board for proposals to move
forward. No one bloc can dictate the outcomes, and
the incentives exist to reach out to the middle ground
and across the divide. The parties have agreed and
committed to working expeditiously and continuously
to produce results and continued progress, without
foreign interference or external deadlines, and also
without preconditions or insisting on agreement on one
point before discussions can begin on another.

The parties have welcomed and embodied in the
agreement the facilitation role of the United Nations,
including using good offices and reporting to the
Council on progress. Both parties have told me that they
have confidence in the United Nations and want to work
with us in a sustained and constructive manner. We will
do everything we can to meet their expectations.

The names of the 150 members will be released by
the United Nations once all nominees have formally
confirmed their participation, but let me say a few words
about them. Beyond the Government and opposition
nominees, the middle third comprises 50 civil society
actors. They hail from different religious, ethnic and
geographical backgrounds, hold a range of political
leanings, and include respected experts. Some live in
Syria; others are based outside the country. Facilitating
agreement on this list has been the most complex part
of the deal. Ensuring sufficient credibility, balance and
inclusiveness in a manner that keeps all on board has
been a key priority for us. The result is, of course, a
negotiated compromise, and like all compromises, no
one is completely satisfied.

We are proud that nearly half the civil society
list are women, and that we have around 30 per cent
women in the overall 150. Any viable, sustainable
peace process needs to have women of all political
persuasions at the table, since they represent over half
its population and since, throughout the course of the
conflict, they have taken on an ever more prominent
role in their communities.

We have worked hard to secure guarantees - and
here I quote from the agreement - that

"members of the Constitutional Committee and their
relatives or political and civil society organizations
and entities of which they are part are not subject
to threat or harassment or actions against person
or property directly related to their work in the
Constitutional Committee and to addressing and
resolving any incidents and concerns should they
arise" (S/2019/775, annex, para. 19).

These guarantees have been solemnly given and must
be respected.

Hundreds, if not thousands, of Syrian experts and
activists, men and women, on all sides, have done
outstanding work throughout the years of this conflict,
developing ideas and proposals as a basis for lasting
peace. In so doing, they helped create a public space
for democratic and civic debates. We have actively
supported and facilitated this process. Not all of them
could be on the Committee, but I am confident that
they will continue to make their voices heard and I am
equally confident that Committee members understand
their responsibilities towards all Syrians and their
obligation to listen to and take on board the ideas of
others. I will continue to consult Widely and closely
among Syrian civil society, including through the Civil
Society Support Room and with the Syrian Women's
Advisory Board, and with all components of Syrian
society, including in the north-east of the country.

Let me, above all, stress the following: the future
Constitution of Syria belongs to the Syrian people
and to them alone. This effort is about meeting the
aspirations of the Syrian people. The United Nations
will jealously guard the Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
nature of the process. Syrians, not outsiders, will draft
the Constitution, and the Syrian people must popularly
approve it. We will be there to facilitate the process in a
manner that ensures its continuing credibility, balance
and inclusiveness, and to help when needed.

Let me assure the Security Council and all the Syrian
people that I am fully aware that the Constitutional
Committee obviously cannot resolve the conflict alone.
We must look squarely at the facts and address the
conflict and the crisis more comprehensively, in line, of
course, with resolution 2254 (2015) .

A humanitarian crisis continues, in Idlib in
particular, and in many other parts of Syria. Idlib is
calmer today than it was last month, but violence
continues, and there is an ever-present threat of
Idlib or other parts of Syria being engulfed in all-
out conflict. Meanwhile, terrorist groups, listed
by the Security Council, continue to metastasize,
touching all Syrian communities. A solution that
does not endanger civilians is essential - a solution
to Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other extremist groups
in Idlib, and to a resurgent Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant elsewhere. Violent confrontations between
international players remain frequent, within Syria
and across its international borders. The spectre of a
broader regional conflagration still looms over the
country. The country's sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence are not being respected.

De-escalation steps towards a nationwide ceasefire
are absolutely essential because the violence and
killing must stop, because there is no military solution
and because resolution 2254 (2015) tells us so. A
ceasefire - with a shared international understanding
of how to combat terrorism in a manner that protects
civilians and upholds international law - is vital in its
own right and would help animate the political process.

Tens of thousands remain detained, abducted
or missing, their families suffering from untold pain
and daily challenges. I appeal for action on detainees,
abductees and the missing, particularly the release of
women and children. This action would be a vital step.
Now is the time. Now is the time for action on this issue.
Millions remain displaced, inside and outside Syria,
many mired in hopelessness and fear. Meaningful steps
will be required to create an environment for refugees
and internally displaced persons to return in a safe,
voluntary and dignified manner. Millions continue to
live in poverty, facing widespread commodity shortages
and an economy that lies in tatters. Lawlessness and
fragmentation abound, weakening the social fabric
and prospects to build the rule of law and a culture of
respect for human rights. This too must be our concern.

That is why, as we look towards the first meeting
of the Committee, I urge all stakeholders - the Syrian
parties and their backers - to think more broadly, more
inclusively and with the ultimate objective of a country
at peace. I appeal for them to seize upon the momentum
that the Committee offers and take concrete actions to
build trust and confidence.

Language matters too. I hope that the Syrian parties
and the international community can find the right
words to clearly signal their good intentions - to each
other and to the Syrian people - to open a new chapter
and create new and better realities on the ground.

Ultimately, I hope that we can begin to build a
positive dynamic step by step by the Syrian parties, as
well as by the international parties. We need to build
the kind of safe, calm and neutral environment that
could make Syrians feel that the political process can
restore their country and respond to their aspirations.

That requires genuine international dialogue and
cooperation in support of the Geneva process. Any
concrete steps should be reciprocal, building trust among
Syrians as well as between Syria and the international
community. I know that it will not be easy but I sense
among my key partners an honest understanding that it
is necessary. I will keep working to that end.

Ultimately, the Syrian people must be able to

participate in free and fair elections under United
Nations supervision, in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
in which all Syrians, including those in the diaspora,
are eligible to participate. Elections, held to the highest
international standards, take a long time to prepare.
That is why I have already begun to think about how
the United Nations could plan for that task, of course in
dialogue with the Syrian parties.

Let me conclude with a simple request to the
Council. I have greatly appreciated the excellent
dialogue that I have had with members of the Council,
and I will need their support in the difficult work ahead.
I appeal to the Council to unite behind a revitalized
effort by the United Nations with the parties so as to
move the Geneva political process forward.

I believe that this moment is an opportunity for the
Council to publicly support the process that it mandated
in resolution 2254 (2015). The road ahead will be long
and difficult but if the Council can unite, and remain
united, behind the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
process that the United Nations will seek to facilitate,
I believe that we can begin to make a real difference to
the people of Syria, the region and international peace
and security.

