Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I am

pleased to congratulate you once again, Sir, and to

thank your delegation for its initiative in bringing to

the Security Council issues, such as the theme of
today's discussion, which are of interest to all of us.

In many forums, Uruguay has stated its concern
at the lack of concrete progress in the field of
disarmament and non-proliferation. The present
context of multilateral negotiations on disarmament
and non-proliferation is not at all encouraging. The
Conference on Disarmament has not been able to adopt
an agenda enabling it to resume its substantive work.
The 2006 Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action on Small
Arms achieved no concrete outcome, and the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty continues to
await entry into force 10 years after it opened for
signature.

Next year, preparatory activities for a new stage
in the review of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) will begin. As has been the
tradition in recent review conferences, we do not
envisage significant progress on the substantive issues
on the agenda, because the nuclear disarmament
process has been nearly paralyzed since the Treaty was
extended indefinitely in 1995.

In that context, Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) is a notable element in the fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; in our
View, it clearly points the way towards strengthening
the system developed by the United Nations -
especially since 1991 - to combat international
terrorism.

A few days ago we marked a major anniversary
of the Treaty of Tlatelolco and of the system that sees
to the nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America and
the Caribbean. It has now been 40 years since the
Treaty was signed, establishing the first of the nuclear-
weapon-free zones that have been created around the
world through the Treaties of Raratonga, Pelindaba and
Bangkok and through the Antarctic Treaty System.

Uruguay has always been at the forefront in the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones. That is
why we firmly support instruments that, like resolution
1540 (2004), promote fundamental aspects of
collective security and make major contributions to
combating international terrorism.

We should also hail two other outstanding
instruments in the normative sphere related to the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, in
particular nuclear weapons: the Charter and the Statute
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). By
means of the verification system established through
the signature of safeguards agreements and additional
protocols, it is possible in most cases to detect possible
discrepancies in the movement of materials that could
be diverted for military or criminal purposes. The
IAEA also plays an important role in early warning of
suspicious operations related to the illicit trade in
nuclear or radioactive materials. It does this by means
of a database that systematically logs illicit trafficking
or other unauthorized activity with respect to such
materials. The IAEA has developed excellent
programmes as the technical body that the Security
Council needs for reporting and advice; its importance
has grown over the past few years.

Another source of technical expertise is the
Provisional Technical Secretariat of the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban
Treaty Organization. Uruguay urges the prompt entry
into force of the Treaty machinery and, in the
meantime, a strengthening of the activities of the
Preparatory Commission, including two elements vital
for cooperation in a world free of nuclear testing and
clandestine nuclear activities: the International
Monitoring System and the system of on-site
inspections. Both of these are of the greatest
importance, which is why, as signatory States decide to
join the system and enable it to enter into force, they
should continue to provide the greatest possible
support to those activities.

Resolution 1540 (2004) has been a catalyst for
activities to control the existence and the illicit trade in
weapons of mass destruction, their delivery systems
and precursor substances that could be used to produce
them. The 1540 Committee has done outstanding work.
It has operated with great efficiency and transparency
in the various areas within its mandate, making
possible an easy dialogue between national authorities
and members of the Council and establishing clear
rules making for smooth international cooperation both
with the Committee and among States. The machinery
established in fulfilment of its mandate has enabled it
to consider many national reports and has spurred the
creation of internal coordination bodies to adapt
national control procedures, as required for full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Uruguay has already submitted two reports to the
1540 Committee and has completed the form that
systematically brings together the various elements on
which periodic information is required.

Although reporting systems are common to all
the sanctions committees - in particular, those aimed
principally at combating international terrorism in all
its forms - the procedures of the 1540 Committee
have been clear and easy to implement, certainly as far
as the Uruguayan authorities are concerned. In that
context, I wish to report that our national authorities
for monitoring nuclear and radioactive materials and
chemical weapons, as well as our health authorities at
the highest level, are in a position to implement the
provisions of the resolution, although they may request
technical assistance from the relevant international
cooperation systems, as required.

Uruguay welcomes the seminars held in various
regional contexts to promote the implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004). We participated
actively in the seminars that took place at Buenos Aires
in 2005 and at Lima in 2006. It is our understanding
that such activities, including the launching of a
legislative database on States' implementation of the
provisions of the resolution, can improve the system,
which would help strengthen that system and make
possible the full implementation of the Council
mandate.

But for this to take place in a natural way, greater
participation by Member States is needed. That means
the sustained development of cooperation activities and
constant efforts to engage those States that, owing to
their national positions, are not part of the system and
to persuade them to join.

