Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): It is my honour and
duty, on behalf of the African Group, to contribute to
this debate on management of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

The African Group associates itself with the
statements of the Group of 77 and the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Let me begin by joining those who have spoken
before me in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the responsibility of directing the work
of the Security Council for the month of February.

I would also like to thank Mr. Mark Malloch
Brown for his very helpful briefing this morning.

The United Nations is at the height of a process
of historic reforms, and I assure all members of the
Security Council that the African Group has been and
will continue to be totally committed to pursuing the
objectives of the reforms to their desired conclusions.
In that regard, the Group appreciates any effort
designed and appropriately channelled to make the
Organization more efficient and capable of delivering
its objectives. It is with that view that the African
Group is resolved to support measures aimed at
correcting weaknesses in the management of
peacekeeping operations, particularly in procurement,
that have absolutely no place in the United Nations.
The African Group is aware that peacekeeping is so
central to the work of the United Nations that any
mismanagement of its process can damage the image of
the Organization, and we cannot afford that.

The Group, however, holds the view that a debate
on this subject matter falls within the domain of the
responsibility of the General Assembly, which,
according to the Charter, is the deliberative, policy-
making and representative organ of the United Nations.
In fact, the General Assembly is actively seized of this
subject and is expecting reports on the matter from the
Secretary-General. The African Group therefore views
this debate as an encroachment on the authority of the
General Assembly, particularly at a time when efforts
are being made to strengthen and revitalize the
Assembly.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's report,
which I am sure will recommend strategies for tackling
the problem of transparency and accountability in the
procurement system of peacekeeping operations.

