Mr. Nsanze (Burundi)(interpretation from French): I
can assure the Security Council in advance that I will not
tax its patience or abuse its generosity, but when a
delegation requests to speak, it is because it knows better
than anyone what the problem is.

The Security Council's fervent attachment to saving
Burundi calls for its people and its Government to pay a
stirring tribute to the Council. Nevertheless, the stakes for
Burundi are immeasurably immense. For these fundamental
reasons, it is incumbent on my delegation to work closely
and at all levels with the honourable members of this
learned body. The efforts made by the Security Council in
favour of Burundi are edifying.

On behalf of my Government, it is my duty to convey
to the honourable President of the Security Council and to
all the eminent members of this body the gratitude they
deserve for the continuous concern they have displayed
for three years now for the cause of my beloved country.
Special recognition is deserved by Ambassador Juan
Somavia and his delegation, as the architects of the main
foundation of the resolution just adopted. All his
colleagues representing the Non-Aligned Movement in the
Security Council have distinguished themselves by their
sense of responsibility and by their openness to
concessions, and thanks to their openness to compromise,
a reasonable outcome has been achieved.
The clearly realistic position of the European Union
and 14 other European countries, as reflected in the
statement made by the representative of Ireland is deeply
appreciated by my country and my Government.

The new regime not only is receptive to the very
well-founded appeals of the Security Council, but it is
prepared to initiate a set of measures aimed at
implementing the provisions of this resolution which are
compatible - and I emphasize compatible - with the
sacred and supreme interests of Burundi as a nation and
in keeping with the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
Charter and the United Nations Charter. Those measures
include, in particular, the initiation of a democratic
process adapted to national needs and talks with all
groups that agree to participate in the patriotic task
required to save the people of Burundi from another
genocide and to ensure the safety not of just one ethnic
group but of the nation of Burundi as a whole. Our
colleague, Ambassador Ladsous just referred to multi-
ethnicity. In fact, that concept has been artificially created
by mediocre politicians because the very high degree of
human integration achieved by the nation of Burundi has
been shattered by the work of politicians who, instead of
using their personal and professional skills for political
objectives, use ethnicity as a way to attain selfish goals.

Finally, the Burundi Government will apply itself
and commit itself to a relentless fight against the armed
bands and militias of all stripes, to put an end to the cycle
of violence and scorched- earth politics, whoever the
perpetrators might be. This is a necessary condition for
the new regime to eradicate all the causes of the national
tragedy. This Herculean task cannot be accomplished
quickly.

In this context, the current authorities in Burundi are
counting on the patience and indulgence of the Security
Council, as this gigantic enterprise will no doubt be
marked by a series of obstacles. The arbitrary economic

 

sanctions imposed on Burundi are an enormous stumbling-
block in the way of the general national stabilization
programme of the Government. Indeed, geographically
land-locked, diplomatically encircled and economically
strangled, Burundi finds it impossible to meet fully and
quickly all the conditions imposed by the resolution.

This colossal stumbling-block placed in front of the
new regime leads me to point out the major defects of the
resolution. The first is the absence of express condemnation
of the economic blockade decreed against Burundi. The
second is the at least temporary refusal to establish an ad
hoc commission to be dispatched to the Great Lakes region
to gather objective and legitimate facts

related to all the problems of the region. The last is the
sword of Damocles in the form of threats against
erroneous targets, especially the threat of an arms
embargo: one cannot penalize the new regime, much less
the people of Burundi, for crimes perpetrated by outlaws.

What emerges from this state of affairs is that the
Security Council resolution may, from the moment of its
adoption, be destined to be hamstrung because of these
serious factors. We are counting on the assistance of the
Security Council to bypass or remove the stumbling-
blocks I have enumerated.

