Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga
for his excellent briefing, and Mr. Bedializoun Moussa
Nebie and Brigadier General Herminio Teodoro Maio
for the quality of theirs.

My delegation welcomes the progress made in
restoring State authority throughout the country, in
particular through the deployment of the majority of
the prefectural corps, of judges and of over 50 per
cent of civil servants, as well as the improvement
in the provision of basic social services. However,
the security and humanitarian situation remains
worrisome, despite commendable efforts by the
Government and the international community. The
resurgence of inflammatory rhetoric, the persistence
of intercommunal conflicts and attacks by armed
groups against the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and humanitarian workers
remain of concern. Cote d'Ivoire condemns those acts
and, in its capacity as Chair ofthe Sanctions Committee
concerning the Central African Republic, recalls the
relevant provisions of resolution 2399 (2018), which
set out as criteria for the designation of sanctions the
incitement to hatred and violence as well as attacks
against civilian populations, MINUSCA soldiers
and humanitarian personnel. My country calls on the
stakeholders to strictly respect the relevant provisions
of resolution 2399 (2018) and to engage in the search for
a peaceful solution to the crisis, within the framework
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic.

It is essential that national ownership and
inclusiveness in the political process be emphasized,
which is why, while welcoming local peace and
reconciliation initiatives, my delegation also advocates
for robust involvement by civil society organizations,
ethnic and religious communities, women and young
people in the ongoing political dialogue.

Cote d'Ivoire supports the efforts of the Central
African Government and commends the leadership
of President Touadera, who favours dialogue and
consultation both within the Central African Republic
and with neighbouring States, in order to create
the conditions for national reconciliation and a real
commitment by the parties concerned to lasting peace
in the country. In that regard, my country notes with
satisfaction the Government's efforts to revive the
joint bilateral commissions with Chad, Cameroon and
the Sudan, with a view to addressing cross-border
security challenges.

Pooling efforts in the face of the challenges of
insecurity and instability is crucial. My delegation
therefore welcomes the joint operations by MINUSCA
and the Central African Armed Forces, which, according
to the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/611), have
significantly reduced the number of attacks against
civilians and clashes between armed groups in
several regions. In that regard, my country supports
the request addressed to the Security Council by the
Secretary-General on 15 May 2018 (S/2018/463), with
a view to generating enhanced support for MINUSCA
for the gradual and controlled redeployment of the
Central African Armed Forces trained or certified
by the European Union Training Mission in the
Central African Republic (EUTM). Cote d'Ivoire also
encourages the donor community to support the efforts
of the Government of the Central African Republic
within the framework of the joint five-year concept for
the immediate and long-term deployment of the defence
and internal security forces, adopted in 2018 with the
support of MINUSCA and in coordination with EUTM.

My delegation would like to stress the importance
of accountability in the search for lasting solutions to
the Central African crisis, which is having a negative
impact on the entire subregion. It therefore welcomes
the Government's efforts aimed at operationalizing
the truth, justice, reparations and reconciliation
commission. It also welcomes the adoption, on 29 May,
of the law enabling the Special Criminal Court to begin
its work and investigations into war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in the Central African
Republic since 2003.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire would like to reiterate
its support for MINUSCA. We remain convinced that
ownership of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation by the Central African stakeholders,
with the support of the international community, is the
appropriate and sustainable way out of the crisis.

