Lieutenant General Afzal: My name is Sikander
Afzal and I am the Force Commander of the United
Nation Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). It is an honour for
me to be allowed to say a few words about the Mission
in Liberia.

Liberia is emerging from the devastation caused
by 14 years of civil war. Its Government is taking the
right steps to improve infrastructure, governance and
the well-being of its people with the help of the world
community, donor nations and the United Nations.
However, it still has a long way to go.

From a regional perspective, there is no direct
threat to Liberia from any of its neighbours, but the
volatility of the region, coupled with the tribal, ethnic
and demographic links among regional countries means
that a serious event in any one country is likely to spill
over into another. Although Liberia is generally calm
and peaceful, unemployment, poverty and weak
infrastructure are hampering development. Let me
highlight some of the most serious security challenges
to Liberia.

The greatest challenge facing the Government of
Liberia is that of law and order and dealing with
criminality. Linked to this is the problem of maintaining
internal security. The root of the problem is the
population's lack of confidence in the police and
judicial systems. The police lack the ability to respond
to crime effectively, although the situation is improving.
At the same time, the judicial system does not have the
capacity to deal with the increasing caseload. The lack
of confidence often results in vigilante mob justice
requiring the intervention of UNMIL.
3
Land disputes are a common occurrence in
Liberia as a legacy of the war. Many displaced people
have settled in areas belonging to other people, and the
laws relating to property rights, boundaries and natural
resources are not clear. When tribal and ethnic factors
are added in, disagreements can quickly turn violent.

UNMIL military has successfully completed
stage three of its drawdown. Its military strength is
now 8,102, down from 14,000 personnel, representing
43 different troop-contributing countries, as mandated
by the Security Council in its resolution 1885 (2009) of
September 2009. UNMIL remains headquartered in
Monrovia. The operating forces are deployed in two
sectors, with three infantry battalions each, a force
reserve of a battalion, six engineer companies and three
field hospitals.

The drawdown has meant that remaining units
have had to extend their areas of responsibility with no
additional resources. As a consequence, it has become
difficult to maintain a presence in all districts, and
UNMIL has increased the number of extended long-
distance patrols by air and by road. In addition, our
reaction time in dealing with unforeseen situations has
increased. Therefore, the battalion-sized quick reaction
force is now based in Monrovia and at two forward
operating bases adjacent to main communication routes
to the Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire borders. In the absence
of engineering capacity within the country, it is the
force engineers who keep the roads open all year round
and thus ensure that logistics reach not only the United
Nations camps, but also the local populace.

Some of the lessons learned in the past year have
led to making the crisis management mechanisms
within UNMIL more effective. Joint exercises of
UNMIL military and UNMIL police personnel have
increased. There is a need to train and equip the United
Nations military force to respond to civil disorder by
establishing within the military contingents company-
sized units capable of conducting riot control. Steps
have been taken to improve joint military-police
cooperation, in the shape of table-top exercises and
rehearsals on the ground. On the crisis-management
side, a formal crisis-management team and a crisis-
management working group have been established -
chaired by the special Representative of the Secretary-
General - and the effectiveness of the Joint
Operations Centre has been improved.
Let me conclude by highlighting three major
challenges for UNMIL and its force in the near future.

First, the upcoming national elections at the end
of 2011 will be a prominent marker in measuring the
success of the UNMIL mission and in shaping the
Mission's withdrawal from Liberia. Support for the
elections is expected to place a huge burden on the
UNMIL force to deal with any volatile situations, as
well as on logistics capabilities, particularly in the light
of UNMIL's reduced numbers.

The second challenge is the budgetary constraints
as a consequence of drawdown and the funding
available for peacekeeping. While the force has been
reduced in numbers, its tasks remain the same. In order
to fulfil its mandate, it has to undertake more aerial and
ground patrolling, which implies more flying hours and
more consumption of fuel and wear and tear on
equipment. Thus, the tasks cannot be completed when
a reduced budget is allocated to the Mission.

The third challenge is the transition in security
tasks from UNMIL to the Government of Liberia. The
Mission's exit strategy envisages a final withdrawal
when Liberia has a self-sustainable security sector able
to perform independent of the UNMIL mission.
Transition planning has commenced for UNMIL's
handover of its currently mandated security sector
responsibilities to the appropriate national agencies,
following a very fruitful and productive workshop in
June.

Significant progress has been achieved. However,
slow progress in security sector reform, the absence of
police infrastructure, a limited national security
presence in outlying counties and weak capacity of the
criminal justice sector pose huge challenges to the
transition process. Considerable assistance from the
United Nations and bilateral partners is required to
ensure a smooth and seamless transition process.

In conclusion, I would like to submit that while at
present the situation is calm and stable, this is
primarily as a result of the deterrence of the UNMIL
force and the United Nations police. However, in case
a rapid withdrawal of the force is undertaken after the
elections without building the capacity of the country's
security sector, the potential for the country slipping
into internal strife cannot be ruled out. From a situation
of success we may have another Timor-Leste,
Democratic Republic of the Congo or Haiti on our
hands.
I humbly request the members of the Security
Council, donor countries and other players to invest
and focus all their resources on strengthening the
Liberian police and military and improving the
communication infrastructure in the country over the
next few years, so that UNMIL can leave as a success.

