Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
ofthe European Union (EU) and its member States. The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement. In view of the strict time limit on
statements, I will deliver a condensed version; the full
version will be available in the Chamber and on our
website.
We welcome the United Kingdom initiative in
holding this important debate and welcome the adoption
of resolution 2171 (2014) today. That initiative is also
significant in view of this year's commemoration of
the centenary of the First World War. In that context,
we greatly appreciate the Council's visit to Belgium
and the Netherlands earlier this month and thank
Council members involved for their collaboration. We
also like to thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings.

Conflict prevention inspired the construction of the
European Union and is a key objective of its external
action. Over recent years efforts have been made to
strengthen our commitment and engagement. We have
welcomed and actively supported the efforts of United
Nations and regional organizations to strengthen their
conflict prevention capacities, including on mediation
and early warning. We contribute with expertise as well
as political and financial support. At the same time,
we have been actively engaged in developing our own
conflict prevention support capacities.

Successful conflict resolution and peacebuilding
are crucial to conflict prevention, given the cyclical
nature of conflict and the high risk of recurrence. While
diplomatic attention is often focused on brokering
agreements that end hostilities, it is equally important
for the international community to stand behind peace
agreements after they have been concluded and even
more to support their actual implementation. The work
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund is also important in that respect
and needs to be further strengthened. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's initiative to review
the peacebuilding architecture of the United Nations.

We commend efforts in different parts ofthe United
Nations system to strengthen early-warning and conflict
prevention capacities and we also support the call in
resolution 2171 (2014) for strengthening the United
Nations system-wide approach to conflict prevention
and early warning. There are several elements we deem
to be of particular importance in that context.

First, the risk of atrocities needs specific attention,
as they can occur in situations where violent conflict
has not yet emerged or where it is part of a sudden
escalation of conflict. There are often important
advance signs when atrocities such as genocide are
becoming increasingly probable. The principle of the
responsibility to protect provides us, in that regard, with
various tools for a system-wide approach to atrocity
prevention, including early warning.
In that regard, the EU reiterates its appreciation
for the Secretary-General's Rights Up Front initiative
as an important element of the Organization's efforts.
In cases where atrocity crimes were committed,
accountability for those crimes is crucial in deterring
and preventing future atrocities. The EU is committed
to assisting States in strengthening their national
judicial systems. The EU is also a steadfast supporter
of the International Criminal Court, as it ensures
accountability where States are either unwilling or
unable to do so domestically.

Secondly, we highlight the importance of the nexus
between peace, security and development. Sustainable
development and poverty eradication require peace and
security, and vice versa. And neither can be achieved
without respect for human rights. That nexus is also a
key underlying principle in the application of an EU
comprehensive approach on conflict prevention.

Thirdly, conflict prevention requires an inclusive
approach, without which it cannot be effective. We need
to ensure the equal and full participation of women in
peace processes and conflict prevention strategies.
The full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions is crucial in that regard.

Finally, we welcome that the resolution clearly
emphasizes the interconnectedness between human
rights and peace and security. Building societies based
on the rule of law, democracy and good governance are
crucial aspects of conflict prevention. In that regard, we
also want to highlight the importance of education in
fostering a culture ofpeace and tolerance - a powerful
tool for preventing conflict.

It is our shared duty to turn resolution 2171 (2014)
and the commitments contained therein into reality.
That will require focused determination from all of
us. From our side we will continue to support steps to
further maximize the prospects of success in United
Nations preventive diplomacy efforts. The peoples of
the world expect no less.

