Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): It is a great pleasure to
welcome you to the Security Council, Madam, and
we should like to thank you for coming because, with
your being here, we find that we have the opportunity
to discuss the matter of peacebuilding and the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which otherwise
has been pending for a longer time than many of us
would care to remember. I think that it is a good omen
to see you here.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
statement.

I would like to commend the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda for ably guiding the work
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and specifically for presenting the report
on the fifth session ofthe PBC (S/2012/70). I also thank
my friend the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
whose is currently Chair of the PBC.

The 2011 session was the first one after the
completion of review process in 2010. The process
helped realign focus along three key concepts of
peacebuilding. First, it created a strict prioritization
of targeted areas from among the areas of security
sector reform, local capacity-building and economic
revitalization. Secondly, it sharpened the emphasis on
development aspect ofpeacebuilding. Thirdly, it refined
the peacekeeping-peacebuilding nexus. From this, the
conclusion was also drawn that it was imperative to
craft and implement peacebuilding strategies according
to national priorities and policies, with complete local
ownership.
Before I discuss the 2011 report, I should like to
say that I find in this three-point focus some disturbing
omissions. I find that perhaps we have not focused on
these issues as we ought to have. I believe that, at this
institution, we must seek a more integrated role for the
Commission in order to make it effective.

We note that the 2011 report of the PBC points
to progress on implementing the 2010 review. Some
aspects of the report have a reference value, such as
a record of work and meetings and country-specific
configurations. The value of such reports can be
enhanced through an analytical explanation - if
available - of the decision-making process. Such an
analysis must dovetail into enhancing our collective
understanding of the various facets of peacebuilding.

Work in the country-specific configurations of
the PBC is an important element of the peacebuilding
narrative. Our shared understanding of the challenges
and complexities of peacebuilding endeavours will
improve as respective configurations take forward their
work.

I would not be out of place in mentioning here
that, when I was looking at the various zones of
conflict that are now endowed with some sort of United
Nations-inspired peace, I found the number to be far
in excess of the countries that are to be reflected here
today in speech and/or in the report.

Achievements of the older configurations, such
as those for Burundi and Sierra Leone, as well as the
challenges faced by them, will offer a useful body
of knowledge for application to the emerging new
configurations, such as those for Liberia and Guinea. It
is important that the work of country configurations is
congruent with overall peacebuilding objectives and is
carried out under full national ownership. In our recent
travels to these areas, we heard the oft-repeated remark
of not being included in this process, instead being
reported upon. That is a difference that we in this body
must understand. Therefore, regular interaction among
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations, the
Security Council and the Organizational Committee
of PBC are critical to ensuring transparency and
accountability.

The countries that decide or agree to be placed
on the PBC's agenda themselves have a special
responsibility to put the concept of their own ownership
into practice. Often, they tend to be in great awe of the
United Nations and do not do so. I think that it is time
for them to lead and guide the discussion from the front,
and to frankly present and explain their priorities and
expectations to the Commission for it to consider. It is
only through their active engagement that we can drive
this process forward. In turn, international partners
must demonstrate political will and flexibility to
respond effectively to nationally owned peacebuilding
priorities.

In the general discourse on United Nations conflict
management, "peacekeepers are early peacebuilders"
is an oft-encountered adage. However, the linkage
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding needs to
be put in the proper perspective. Peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are specialized activities, albeit with
a common objective. They should not be subjected to
competition for resources. Despite the very generous
contribution of some members here and from the
General Assembly, the record thus far shows that
the funds are by no means commensurate with the
peacebuilding process. Without that, they will not
really move forward with the three objectives outlined
earlier. Given that integrated mandates are increasingly
becoming the norm, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
tasks should be articulated clearly and adequately
resourced from onset ofa mission.

Clear articulation of peacebuilding tasks in a
mission's mandate necessitates closer interaction
between the PBC and the Security Council. Regrettably,
that has not happened as it should have. It has been
inadequate in whatever has happened so far. The Council
must utilize the PBC's advice in framing peacebuilding
mandates. The PBC's interaction with principal organs
of the United Nations and the international financial
institutions will be important as well to moving matters
forward.

The success ofUnited Nations peacebuilding hinges
on adequate financial resources. The Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) has thus far had a catalytic role in harnessing
other sources of funding - without adequate success,
however. But it is an essential component of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. However, given the
magnitude of the challenges, the PBF alone cannot, and
was not supposed to, meet the rising overall demands
for peacebuilding. Avenues of resource mobilization
should therefore be more vigorously explored. I would
like to recall that the establishment of the peacebuilding
architecture in 2005 was a direct recognition of the
interlinkage between peace and development. Unless
that aspect is given due attention, success will continue
to elude us in achieving and building durable peace
internationally.

Besides financing, peacebuilding initiatives
require necessary human resources. In that context, the
Secretary-General's initiative on civilian capacity must
be called extremely important for identifying expertise
that could be tailored to particular needs. We hope that
the ongoing follow-up on the civilian capacity process
will lead to more efficiency in the field, as well as at
Headquarters, where it is missing. Intergovernmental
input in the process will grant it the legitimacy it seeks.

The Peacebuilding Commission, with its unique
composition and specific mandate, is an important tool
for post-conflict stability. We must consider ways and
means of better realizing the contribution that its unique
composition can make to the collective objective. We
hope that the working of the PBC will improve in leaps
and bounds as the global narrative on peacebuilding
further evolves and as our collective response becomes
more focused and, hopefully, more results-oriented.

