Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): At the outset, Sir, I would like to congratulate
you on your assumption of this month's presidency of the
Security Council. I am convinced, given your rich
experience and wisdom, that you will guide the Council's
work to success. I also wish to take this opportunity to
thank all members for their assistance and cooperation
during my presidency last month.

The Security Council will be adopting today a draft
resolution on security assurances for non-nuclear-weapon
States. This is the result of the joint efforts of all
countries. It will contribute to the maintenance of world
peace, security and stability, and will facilitate the
realization of the complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of nuclear weapons. The Chinese delegation
welcomes this development. However, we are of the view
that the draft resolution soon to be adopted is only one
step towards the conclusion of a legally binding
international instrument providing assurances for non-
nuclear-weapon States and nuclear-weapon-free zones
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. We
still have a lot to do for the conclusion of such an
international instrument. China is ready to join the rest of
the international community in a continued effort to that
end.

I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate the
position of the Chinese Government on security
assurances for non-nuclear-weapon States.

First, complete and thorough destruction of nuclear
weapons to usher in a nuclear-weapon-free world is the
fundamental guarantee for ridding all countries of the
threat of nuclear war. China has always stood for the
complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear
weapons and has proposed that a convention on the
complete prohibition of such weapons be concluded in the
same way as the Conventions banning chemical and
biological weapons.

Secondly, it is the due right of non-nuclear-weapon
States to acquire security assurances to free themselves
from any nuclear attack or nuclear threat. Pending the
complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear
weapons, all nuclear-weapon States should undertake not
to use or threaten to use such weapons against non-
nuclear-weapon States, which is a practical and feasible
measure to ensure the security of non-nuclear-weapon

 

States. If all nuclear-weapon States could take a concerted
position and take concerted action in this regard, it would
enhance the security of the vast numbers of non-nuclear-
weapon States and contribute to world peace and security
as well as to the prevention of nuclear-weapon proliferation.
The Chinese Government has long unilaterally undertaken
not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-
nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-weapon-free zones at any
time or under any circumstances. We call upon all the other
nuclear-weapon States to undertake the same commitment
and to make unremitting efforts for the conclusion of an
international convention to this effect.

T hirdly, an unconditional commitment by all nuclear-
weapon States not to be the first to use nuclear weapons is
one of the effective measures to avoid nuclear war and
reduce the nuclear threat. Since the very first day that
China possessed nuclear weapons, the Chinese Government
has unilaterally undertaken not to be the first to use such
weapons at any time or under any circumstances. We call
upon the countries concerned, acting in conformity with the
trend of the times, to discard the theory of nuclear
deterrence, to undertake not to be the first to use nuclear
weapons and to start negotiations for the conclusion of an
international convention to this effect.

Fourthly, China fully understands and supports the
reasonable demand of the vast numbers of non-nuclear-
weapon States for security assurances. On 5 April 1995 the
Chinese Government made a solemn statement on security
assurances for non-nuclear-weapon States, which reaffirmed
China's unconditional commitment not to be the first to use
nuclear weapons and not to use or threaten to use nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-
weapon-free zones. A commitment was also made in the
statement on positive security assurances that China, as a
permanent member of the Security Council, undertakes to
take action within the Council in order that the Council
should take appropriate measures to provide, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, necessary assistance
to any non-nuclear-weapon State that comes under attack
with nuclear weapons, and to impose strict and effective
sanctions on the attacking State. However, this commitment
does not in any way compromise the position of the
Chinese Government on no first use and no use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States
or nuclear-weapon-free zones. Still less is it to be construed
as endorsing the use of nuclear weapons.

