Mr. Oshima (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for your initiative to have this debate with the
participation of Prime Minister Ramos-Horta. I take
this opportunity to express our high respect to Prime
Minister Ramos-Horta for his untiring efforts to
address many difficult issues facing his country,
including particularly for national reconciliation.

I wish also to commend Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Atul Khare and his team for their
dedication and excellent professional work on the
ground.

This debate provides a welcome opportunity for
us Member States to express our continued support for
peace, stability and development in Timor-Leste, as the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) is to expire at the end of this
month. Timor-Leste will hold important national
elections later this year - the second elections since
its independence. At such a critical juncture, it is clear
that the country needs strong continued support from
the international community, of which UNMIT
constitutes the main, indispensable component. Japan
therefore supports and expects that the Security
Council will take a decision to extend the mandate of
UNMIT for 12 months.

The Government and people of Timor-Leste took
a significant step forward at the end of last year when

their legislature adopted the election law. In
accordance with that law, the presidential election is
now set for April. We hope that it will be followed by
national elections, with the date to be decided by
consensus among the parties concerned.

For the successful conduct of the upcoming
elections in a free and fair atmosphere, maintaining
security and public order in the capital and throughout
the country is of the utmost importance. The UNMIT
police component and the international security forces
must ensure such an environment in the country. In that
context, we are particularly appreciative of Australia's
and New Zealand's continuing contribution to the
international security forces and to security sector
reform in Timor-Leste. I am pleased to mention here
that Japan dispatched police personnel to UNMIT this
month.

We welcome the signing of the memorandum of
understanding between Timor-Leste, the United
Nations and Australia, as well as the technical
arrangement agreed between the United Nations and
the international security forces. Those two agreements
complete the security arrangements between the
Secretary-General and the international security forces
called for in Security Council resolution 1704 (2006).
They form the basis for closer cooperation between
Timor-Leste, the United Nations and Australia in
preparing for the elections.

We take note of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2007/50), which points to the possibility of a
gradual drawdown of some 600 police force
contingents following an assessment of the situation
after the upcoming elections. Bearing that in mind, we
support his recommendation that UNMIT be reinforced
with a formed police unit to ensure the success of the
elections.

Another point to be emphasized is the need for
close cooperation and the forging of a partnership
among the political leaders of the country if peace and
stability in Timor-Leste are to sustain themselves.
From that point of view, we regard it as a welcome,
positive step that the Government of Timor-Leste and
UNMIT last month held the first meeting of the
Committee on High-level Coordination provided for in
resolution 1704 (2006) in order to ensure effective
mutual cooperation.

Japan has been a consistent and strong supporter
of Timor-Leste in recent years, in particular since that
country's independence. Last year, we were privileged
to lead this forum to adopt the resolution to establish
UNMIT. We intend to continue our active participation
as a member of the core group on Timor-Leste.

Before concluding, I would like reiterate Japan's
continued commitment to support all efforts towards
sustainable peace and development beyond the
peacekeeping stage. The successful conduct of the
upcoming elections will be an important milestone in
Timor-Leste's endeavours in the area of peacebuilding.
To that end, I am pleased to announce that my
Government will be organizing a peacebuilding
seminar on Timor-Leste in Tokyo this March, as a case
study in the context of the future work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We hope that exercise will
contribute to enriching our discussion and
accumulating good practices on peacebuilding.

