The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules ofprocedure, I
invite the representatives of Australia, Brazil, Canada,
Cuba, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Maldives, Norway, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in
this meeting.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 24 July 2012 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, which will
be issued as document S/20l2/574 and which reads as
follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting of the
Security Council which will be held on Wednesday,
25 July 2012, on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in
the meeting in accordance with the rules of procedure
and the previous practice in this regard.

It is so decided.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, to
participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I give the floor to Mr. Serry.

