Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The President of the French Republic, Mr. Jacques Chirac,
and the French Minister for Foreign Affairs yesterday
expressed France's views at the Paris Peace Conference,
during the signing of the Peace Agreement. I should like to
quote the conclusion drawn by the President of the French
Republic:

"All the peoples of the former Yugoslavia have their
place in the European family. France, since the time
of General de Gaulle, has always rejected the barriers
erected in the heart of our continent. Today we offer
to the peoples of the former Yugoslavia a promise of
peace. But true peace remains to be built in people's
hearts and minds, and with it democracy, human
freedom and the reconciliation of peoples".

It was in this spirit that France sought the immediate
initiation of a process of bringing stability and good-
neighbourliness to south-eastern Europe. In the wake of the
results already recorded at the London Conference, that
process represents one of the achievements of the Paris
Conference. It will be developed in Bonn, at the Petersberg
conference. But we welcome the substantial progress
already achieved towards mutual recognition among the
States of the former Yugoslavia, and in particular the
agreement reached in Paris between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This
progress strengthens the Peace Agreement and the prospects
of a lasting reconciliation in the region.

Our duty today, and that of this Council, is to look
ahead to the future and assume our responsibilities by
giving, as soon as possible, full effect to all the provisions
of the Peace Agreement.

In my country's view, the Security Council must take
on three tasks. It must finalize the necessary arrangements
to implement the civilian and military aspects, which are
inextricably linked in the Peace Agreement.

It must also maintain the United Nations presence
wherever it is indispensable. The United Nations played a
fundamental role in the former Yugoslavia during the
harshest years of the conflict. Quite rightly, the Secretary-
General of the Organization recalled this fact yesterday in

 

Paris. The United Nations has made peace possible, and
its role will continue to be irreplaceable.

Finally, the authority of the Security Council must
be affirmed. It is the Council, and the Council alone, that
under the Charter can give legitimacy to the military
means that will be used. Only the Council can - and it
must - ensure the overall coherence of the operation by
regularly assessing both the civilian and military aspects
of its implementation.

The resolution we have just adopted meets these
objectives. It authorizes the establishment and deployment
of a multinational Implementation Force for the Peace
Agreement, endowed with a specific mandate and
necessary and adequate means. France will play a key
role in this effort on the ground in Sarajevo and
throughout southern Bosnia, in Mostar and Gorazde. It
will continue to act as it has done, in tribute to its soldiers
who have fallen under the flag of the United Nations, in
whose memory my German colleague so movingly spoke.

As regards the International Tribunal, the resolution
in paragraph 5 recognizes the role that IFOR may play to
ensure proper cooperation with this body. The resolution
enables the Atlantic Council to specify the modalities for
the intervention of the Force for this purpose.

The resolution simultaneously establishes an
important civilian apparatus whose role will be crucial for
the success of the Peace Agreement. The resolution
establishes the major role to be played by the High
Representative and endorses the designation of Mr. Carl
Bildt. His task is fundamental. In the framework defined
by the resolution, the High Representative is, indeed, not
only required to monitor the implementation of the peace
plan and to report to the Security Council, but also has
general responsibility for guidance and coordination in all
civilian matters related to the Agreement's
implementation. France is gratified that Mr. Carl Bildt,
whom it had proposed last June as mediator on behalf of
the European Union, has accepted this weighty and grave
responsibility. It should like to assure him of its full
support.

The resolution defines the role which remains for the
United Nations on the ground: a civilian mission, civilian
police, indispensable tasks inter alia in Sarajevo. In all
these areas, as in that of humanitarian issues, assistance
to refugees and displaced persons and human rights
monitoring, the experience accumulated by the United
Nations and the devotion of its staff is irreplaceable. The

 

coordination of all United Nations activities under the
authority of the Secretary-General will contribute to their
effectiveness. In the immediate future, these tasks will be
performed in Bosnia and Herzegovina by staff already
present on the ground in the former Yugoslavia. France
expects, as our colleague from the United Kingdom just
underscored, that the arrangements for the civilian mission
and the police force intended by the resolution will be
determined as early as next week.

Lastly, the resolution is the expression of the authority
of the Security Council. The resolution that has been
adopted determines the imminent deployment of the
multinational force. Reports on the activity of this Force
will be regularly submitted to the Security Council. It will
thus be able to follow the conduct of the operation. Lastly,
it is important for the Security Council to take a further
decision on the mandate which it has today delivered and
to decide whether the extension of that mandate is
necessary. The High Representative for his part will also
report regularly on overall progress and implementation of
the peace plan.

On the eve of this new era - the new era that Mrs.
Albright has welcomed - France's hope is that the next
few months will finally bring peace, security and dignity to
all the inhabitants of a devastated Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which should nevertheless remain united, multicultural and
democratic, as an example of the victory of our values -
the values of concord and peace over hatred and war. With
that hope our thoughts go out to all those who have
suffered and to all those who have given their lives in the
last four years to achieve peace. Our thoughts accompany
all those who will henceforth make peace a reality.

