Mr. Badr (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Contrary to our
usual rule, I will deliver my statement in English, owing
to the technical nature of the topic under discussion
and also so that we can be sure, in view of its vital
importance, that our message is accurately conveyed.

(spoke in English)

Egypt's commitment to the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime is unwavering. For
decades, nuclear disarmament has been a top priority
of our foreign policy, and it continues to be a significant
one for the members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. Our interest is founded in our long-standing
belief that nuclear weapons present a grave threat to
international peace and security and that collective
global action is needed to eliminate them.

It is in that context that I wish to express our
discontent and dissatisfaction with today's draft
resolution (8/2016/800) on the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). It is seriously flawed and
does not deserve the Security Council's attention. Its
contribution to the nuclear disarmament regime is
minimal and ineffective. Rather than strengthening that
regime, the draft resolution squanders an opportunity
to emphasize how urgent it is that we advance nuclear
disarmament. We regret that it was introduced without
incorporating several essential amendments suggested
by my delegation. I would like to address six specific
concerns that we have about the draft resolution.

The first is the fact that the Security Council is not
the appropriate forum for addressing the CTBT in the
way the draft resolution attempts to do. Developments
and progress related to the Treaty are regularly examined
by the Preparatory Commission and the Provisional
Technical Secretariat. The Council's intrusion into
the dynamics and technicalities of the CTBT creates
unnecessary duality and generates an atmosphere that
is not conducive to inclusive deliberations. All States
parties and signatories to the CTBT should be fully
engaged in any discussion of relevance both to it and
to its technical bodies and verification regime. Such
discussion should not be limited to members of the
Security Council.

Secondly, the draft resolution fails to highlight
the centrality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. Despite a modest
reference to it in the preamble to the draft resolution,
the NPT is completely overlooked in its operative
paragraphs, despite being the cornerstone of the global
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime. It is
surprising that, while the draft resolution encourages
promotion of the CTBT's universality, it makes no
reference whatever to the importance of achieving
universality for the NPT. What is the reason for the
eagerness about the former and complete silence about
the latter? We call on all NPT member States to promote
the universality of the NPT, promptly and actively.
As the key foundation of the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime, the NPT deserves
greater prominence.

Thirdly, it is unusual, if not remarkable, that a draft
resolution dealing with the CTBT fails to adequately
address the urgency of concrete steps towards achieving
nuclear disarmament. While nuclear testing should
certainly be ceased in its entirety, as the Treaty clearly
advocates, the international community has a much
more pressing obligation and responsibility to advance
nuclear disarmament. If the Council is genuinely
concerned about the perils of nuclear weapons and
their potential use or testing, it would only be logically
coherent to treat the cause and not just the symptom.
By exclusively addressing nuclear testing in this draft
resolution, the Council bypasses the central point that
the continued possession of nuclear weapons in itself,
and the constant prolongation by those that possess
them to engage in meaningful disarmament, is what
challenges, if not threatens, global stability.

This draft resolution, inappropriately, makes no
reference to the obligation stipulated in article VI of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
that calls on nuclear-weapon States to achieve nuclear
disarmament. It turns a blind eye to the outcome
documents of the NPT Review Conferences of 1995,
2000 and 2010, including the 13 practical steps. In fact,
the draft resolution does not adequately respond to the
CTBT's own preambular section, which stressed the

"need for continued systematic and progressive
efforts to reduce nuclear weapons globally, with the
ultimate goal of eliminating those weapons, and of
general and complete disarmament under strict and
effective international control".

Nuclear disarmament therefore should have been
the priority in this draft resolution. It should have
expressed its unequivocal rejection of the modernization
of stockpiles of nuclear weapons by nuclear-weapon
States and the role they devote to nuclear weapons in
their strategic doctrines. Let me take this opportunity,
therefore, to categorically reject the notion put forth
by some States that nuclear stockpile maintenance
is consistent with NPT objectives. It is not. The
maintenance and modernization of nuclear weapons
runs contrary to the legal obligation and spirit of the
NPT, which explicitly calls for effective measures
relating to nuclear disarmament and the cessation of
the nuclear arms race. The total elimination of nuclear
weapons is the only guarantee against the use or threat
of use of these weapons.
Consequently, the fact that nuclear disarmament is
practically absent from this draft resolution severely
undermines its credibility and erodes its effectiveness.
It sends the wrong message to the international
community, that the Security Council is selective,
biased and engaged in a cherry-picking approach
when it comes to the global nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. The message this
draft resolution sends is: Testing no, possession and
modernization of stockpiles yes.

Fourthly, this draft resolution inequitably and
unreasonably puts those that possess nuclear weapons
with those that do not on an equal footing. It calls on
States to refrain from conducting any nuclear-weapon
test explosions and urges all States that have either
not signed or not ratified the CTBT, particularly the
eight remaining annex 2 States, to do so without delay.
The draft resolution ought to have placed special
responsibility on nuclear-weapon States and States
non-party to the NPT. To equate States that are party to
the NPT with those that are not, while simultaneously
calling on both categories of States to refrain from
nuclear testing, is an unconvincing argument.
Rationally, the onus rests chiefly on those States that
actually possess the capability to conduct nuclear tests.

Fifthly, the draft resolution's intrusive nature in the
work of the Preparatory Commission and the Provisional
Technical Secretariat is counterproductive. The
Secretariat is, and should remain, a State-driven body
that should solely determine its direction and preserve
its prerogative to take decisions independently, without
external interference. The Security Council should not
be in a position to meddle in the work of the Secretariat
and intrude in the practice of reporting its conduct. It
is up to the Preparatory Commission to decide what is
conducive and favourable to its work, in accordance
with the Organization's priorities and aspirations of its
member States. The draft resolution sets an unwelcome

precedent and may be perceived as an encroachment
by the Security Council on the independent standing of
international organizations and treaty bodies, dictating
certain procedures and measures to be undertaken,
despite not being endorsed by the collective will of its
member States.

Sixthly, progress pertaining to the verification
regime of the CTBT falls within the prerogative
of the Preparatory Commission. According to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization,
85 per cent of the verification regime has been
successfully provisionally set up. Progress in all three
pillars of the regime * namely, the International
Monitoring System, the International Data Center and
on-site inspection - is noted. The provisional nature
of that regime should be maintained, in accordance
with the Treaty provisions, and the official operational
status launched upon the Treaty's entry into force.

The draft resolution also reflects a puzzling
dilemma. While some States express enthusiasm
here in the Council about the urgency of completing
the verification regime, they contradictorily do not
shoulder their responsibilities by ratifying the CTBT,
and their legislative branches repeatedly refuse to ratify
the Treaty, thereby precluding the possibility that the
verification regime would come to fruition. We hope
that there is some explanation for this dichotomous
behaviour and contradictory message.

Egypt was among the first countries that negotiated
and signed the CTBT. We fully support the purpose
and objectives of the Treaty. We seek a world free of
nuclear weapons, including nuclear testing. We swiftly
and unequivocally condemn those that conduct nuclear
tests. And we remain committed to the universality of
the NPT and the establishment of a zone free of nuclear
weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East. Egypt has been, and will continue to be,
a staunch advocate of a robust nuclear non-proliferation
regime that is geared towards the total elimination of
nuclear weapons.

