Mr. Usman (Pakistan): Millions of Afghans
continue to suffer from prolonged conflict in their
country. Instability caused by the vicious cycle of
foreign military intervention and civil war has engulfed
the whole region and impeded peace, development
and progress.

Unfortunately, over the past year, we have not seen
any sign of reduction in violence in Afghanistan. If
anything, it has intensified. Thousands of Afghans have
lost their lives owing to insurgent attacks, large-scale
terrorist bombings and intensified air campaigns.
We share the Secretary-General's concern about the
worsening impact of the conflict on the population, as
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
continues to record a high number of civilian deaths.

While the international community is committed
to bringing the conflict in Afghanistan to a negotiated
end, we finally see efforts to actually achieve this goal.
The hope for a negotiated settlement was kindled by the
observance ofa ceasefire by all parties earlier this year.
This was welcomed by the Afghans themselves, as well
as their regional and international partners. This could
prove to be a watershed moment in the long history of
violence in the country.

The ceasefire achieved what military surges of
the past could not - peace, albeit transitory. What
Afghanistan now needs is for all parties to the conflict
to commence negotiations for a sustainable solution.
In this regard, we welcome the announcement of a
negotiating team by President Ashraf Ghani, as well
as direct negotiations between the United States
and the Taliban. These meetings, and the recently
held Moscow-format dialogue, represent promising
openings. Pakistan also welcomes the most recent
round of talks between the United States Special Envoy
and the Taliban in Abu Dhabi earlier today. We hope
that the dialogue leads to a sustainable peace process in
which all parties show flexibility to make progress on a
negotiated settlement of the war in Afghanistan.

Other than the people of Afghanistan, Pakistan
has the most to gain from the restoration of peace
and stability in our neighbouring country. The
Government of Pakistan, led by Prime Minister Imran
Khan, is committed to extending all possible support
to facilitate an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process. Pakistan envisages a future of close economic
cooperation in our region, helping Kabul realize its
ambition of becoming a regional hub for trade and
energy. To this end, during the second round of the
trilateral dialogue among the Foreign Ministers of
Pakistan, China and Afghanistan last weekend, our
countries agreed to support reconciliation, development
and connectivity, security and counter-terrorism as the
three areas of trilateral cooperation.

At the bilateral level, to support Afghanistan's
economy and development, my country has taken
tangible steps over the years. Pakistan and Afghanistan
are working to improve bilateral relations through the
recently agreed Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for
Peace and Solidarity. Pakistan continues to facilitate
transit of Afghan goods without any quantitative
restrictions. Pakistan is the largest market for Afghan
products, accounting for over 60 per cent of its total
exports. The waiver of regulatory duties last year
resulted in a 29 per cent increase in Afghanistan's
overall exports to Pakistan. We have actively supported
the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas
pipeline and the Central Asia South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade Project, which will not only
address energy needs of the region but also generate
significant economic activity in Afghanistan.

Over 50,000 Afghans have studied in Pakistani
educational institutions and are now working in
Afghanistan's public and private sectors, fulfilling
their own dreams and the needs of their country. We
have announced 4,000 fresh scholarships for Afghan
students in Pakistani universities and professional
colleges. We have hosted over 3 million Afghan refugees
and are not shying away from what we consider to be
our responsibility until their safe, orderly and voluntary
return to their homeland.

Peace in Afghanistan is difficult but achievable.
It is up to the Afghan parties to acknowledge that
unconditional dialogue is the only path to peace. There
is no alternative. They are the ones that need to make
the tough but necessary compromises to get there.

