President Nguyen Minh Triet: Viet Nam
welcomes the initiative taken by President Barack
Obama of the United States, President of the Security
Council for September 2009, to convene this Security
Council summit on nuclear non-proliferation and
nuclear disarmament.

The twentieth century saw the birth of nuclear
weapons and their deadly devastation. That century
also witnessed an all round nuclear arms race that not
only increased tension in international life and wasted
resources that could have otherwise been used for
development, but also posed to the entire world an
unprecedented danger of extermination.

It was also the twentieth century that witnessed a
world movement with broad participation by
Governments, organizations and individuals
demanding the elimination of nuclear weapons and
opposing nuclear war for the preservation of peace.
Invented by man, right since their birth nuclear
weapons have always been a threat to mankind itself,
and hence strongly rejected.

Yet there still exists a nuclear stockpile capable
of destroying the entire world many times over. The
situation of proliferation of nuclear weapons is
undergoing new and complex developments. The risk
of nuclear weapons falling into the hands of terrorist
groups is increasing. Over the past decade, the world's
military spending has increased by 45 per cent, while
expenditures for nuclear armament have been many
times greater than those for Millennium Development
Goals, which were set to prevent and mitigate, inter
alia, hunger, the degradation of the environment,
adverse climate change and pandemics affecting the
lives of billions of human beings.

Viet Nam supports all initiatives and proposals of
international community to genuine disarmament,
including those contained in the position paper of the
Non-Aligned Movement circulated for this summit and
the five-point proposal of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon. I would like to take this opportunity to
emphasize the following points.
First, the prevention of nuclear war and nuclear
disarmament leading to the total elimination of nuclear
weapons continue to be the earnest aspiration and
urgent demand of mankind. Nuclear-weapon States,
military alliances and those countries with major
military capabilities bear primary responsibilities. Viet
Nam shares the international community's desire for

bilateral, multilateral and unilateral plans for early and
substantial reductions of nuclear stockpiles and for the
assurance of security for non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use and threat of use of nuclear weapons.
We call for an early commencement of negotiations on
an international nuclear disarmament agreement in
which those countries having largest nuclear arsenals
must take a leading role in nuclear disarmament,
because that is an urgent task to ensure world peace.

Secondly, the effectiveness of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, including
strengthening the authority of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, must be enhanced. This Agency is
mandated to prevent the risk of proliferation of nuclear
weapons and to ensure nuclear safety and security, as
well as impartiality and equality among all States, in
accordance with international law. The agreements on
nuclear-weapon-free zones reflect the desire of States
for, and their right to, the reduction of the risk of
nuclear war, and they contribute to the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. On this
occasion, Viet Nam calls for States to support the
Protocol to the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-
Weapon-Free Zone, which entered into force in 1997.

Thirdly, the promotion of the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes should constitute a solid
pillar of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. In this
connection, Viet Nam proposes that an international
conference on the use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes be convened for an exchange on issues such
as international coordination, measures to support the
development of policies, science, technology and
regulations aimed at nuclear safety and security.

It is the consistent policy of Viet Nam to oppose
war and promote disarmament for the protection of
peace. This policy reflects the earnest desire of the
Vietnamese people, who have always harboured peace
but have suffered great losses from wars, and who
therefore desire peace not only for themselves but also
for mankind. Viet Nam is party to all international
treaties prohibiting weapons of mass destruction and is
highly appreciated for its serious implementation of its
commitments, including those under Security Council
resolutions.

Humankind, which invented nuclear weapons,
must bear the responsibility for eliminating them so
that we can live in a peaceful world. Viet Nam pledges
to contribute its utmost to our common efforts to
achieve this noble objective.

