Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to begin by
thanking Nigeria for its initiative in convening this
timely debate and the Secretary-General for his useful
introductory remarks. I would also like to thank today's
briefers, General Toure, from the Economic
Community of Western African States (ECOWAS), and
Mrs. Adenike, from the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
Their valuable presentations offer us a perspective
from the areas affected by the phenomenon of piracy.
The views and information shared are crucial for a
clearer understanding of the dimensions of the
problem, as well as of what we can do collectively to
address it.

Portugal fully shares the concerns expressed here
by the briefers and those contained in the concept notes
circulated by the Nigerian Presidency (S/2011/644).
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is not a new phenomenon;
however, in recent years it has grown more frequent,
more sophisticated in its techniques and more violent.
Its effects are felt far beyond the mere realm of
security, because it disrupts trade and economic
activity that are vital for coastal States. Most
importantly, piracy affects countries with very different
levels of institutional capacity to address the problem
and cannot be solved by isolated measures on the part
of individual States.

As we have previously remarked when discussing
the threat of organized crime in West Africa, of which
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is clearly another
ramification, success in tackling the problem in one
country can easily create additional pressure on that
country's neighbours. We are therefore glad to see that
there is a growing consensus on the need for a region-
wide strategy to fight piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
based first and foremost on the efforts of regional
bodies.
Let me add a few thoughts on the role of the
international community, and of the United Nations in
particular, in contributing to regional efforts. First, it is
very positive that the main regional organizations -
not only ECOWAS and the Economic Community of
Central African States, but also the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and the Maritime Organization of West
and Central Africa - are paying attention to
addressing the problem of piracy. To be effective, those
distinct efforts must be coordinated, respecting each
organization's particular area of competence. The
United Nations can play a central role in ensuring the
coherence and overall coordination of those initiatives,
particularly considering that these organizations have
different sets of members, and none of them covers all
the countries potentially affected by this threat.

We should also try to make good use of existing
mechanisms. For example, the ECOWAS regional
action plan for organized crime is a reference
framework for initiatives in this area and should be
enlarged to cover the threat of piracy as well. The West
Africa Coast Initiative, which encourages the pooling
of national knowledge and resources, could also add
the issue of piracy to its areas of activity. The same
applies to the original programmes for West Africa of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). The best practices of individual countries
and bilateral assistance programmes already in place
should be shared with regional partners.

The role of the international community in
encouraging and supporting region-led efforts is
instrumental; hence the relevance of this meeting
today, which we once again thank Nigeria for its
initiative in convening. In this context, I would also
like to underline the contribution and efforts of the
European Union in this particular field. Portugal also
attaches due importance to this issue in the framework
of its strong bilateral relations with many countries of
that region, particularly those in the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.

The international community should also
reinforce regional initiatives and capacities by
contributing to a better understanding of the
phenomenon. As the concept note recognizes, many
piracy incidents go unreported. We have very little
information about the link between acts of piracy and
organized crime onshore. We are therefore very
supportive of the idea of a United Nations assessment
mission, with the participation of UNODC and the
International Maritime Organization, to those countries
in the region most affected by piracy, in order to give
us a clearer picture. We also expect the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa, in their future reports to the
Council, to give more extensive coverage to the
problem of piracy and their involvement with national
and regional authorities in combating it.

As we have learned from the situation in the
Indian Ocean, piracy is a complex phenomenon that
requires our regular and close attention. Encouraging
better capacities, knowledge and coordination among
the actors in the fight against piracy will result in a
decisive contribution by the Security Council to
regional stability and development.

