Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
comprehensive presentation of the twenty-fourth report
on the activities of her Office on the situation in Darfur,
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 1593
(2005). We believe that such transparent and frank
reports give added value to the consideration of issues
falling within the purview of the Security Council.

Uruguay sees this as a timely opportunity to reiterate
its full support for the role of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) as an institution created to strengthen the
rule of law at the international level by bringing to
justice those responsible for the most serious violations
of the rights common to all humankind. In this vein,
we call once again on States Members of the United
Nations that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute
to join it, which will contribute to its universalization
and thus help to fight impunity and defend victims of
heinous crimes, which pose a serious threat to peace
and security for all humankind.

We deplore the fact that the situation around this
issue has remained practically unchanged since June,
when we last considered it (see S/PV.7710). Having
heard the briefing of the Prosecutor a few minutes
ago, we wish to express our dismay at the lack of
cooperation of the parties to the ICC and the failure to
observe and implement the Rome Statute. Uruguay, as
a State party to the Statute, is concerned at all cases of
lack of cooperation with the ICC. Here we would recall
resolution 1593 (2005), adopted by the Council, which
in its paragraph 2 states that the Government of Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur must
cooperate fully with the Court and the Prosecutor, and
also urges all States and regional and other competent
international organizations to cooperate fully.

There is a shared responsibility between States that
do not cooperate and the Council, which does not act
to support and enforce compliance with its resolution
1593 (2005), in violation of the provisions of article 87
of the Rome Statute.

Uruguay is prepared to work to ensure that the
Council plays a more active role in considering cases
of lack of cooperation with the ICC and that arrest
warrants are complied with, which is an indispensable
condition for the Court to be able to fulfil its mandate.
We are grateful for and deem valuable the proposals
made by New Zealand that would enable concrete
action on the part of the Security Council in this regard.

I wish to encourage and congratulate the Office
of the Prosecutor for its work in investigating the
crimes committed in Darfur, which without a doubt
promotes the strengthening of the rule of law and the
establishment of a minimal basis for the international
community to reject impunity in cases of flagrant
violations of human rights.

