Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to thank the various
briefers. I would especially like to welcome the presence
of Minister Barry, whose country holds the presidency
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).

In a context of extreme fragility, the initiative of the
G-5 countries to join forces for peace and development
in the Sahel deserves our support. Belgium shares
and supports the objective of strengthening cross-
border security cooperation through the creation of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, and more broadly that of
strengthening the security sector of the five member
States. For several years, my country has been involved
in such efforts. For instance, Belgium supports the
Nigerian army and provides technical advisers to the
European Union (EU) Training Mission in Mali and
the EU capacity-building mission Sahel Mali. In that
same spirit, Belgium supports the objectives of the
partnership for security and stability in the Sahel.

Belgium welcomes two recent positive
developments: the relaunch of operations of the Joint
Force and the support for the Joint Force from the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We strongly encourage
the G-5 Sahel to maintain its operations over the long
term and gradually to increase its ambition as the
national defence and security forces grow stronger.
With regard to MINUSMA's logistical support, I recall
that Belgium committed €1 million in 2018 to meet
that objective.

Certainly, some equipment promised to the Force
has not yet been delivered, which has had an impact on
operational planning. However, there is no shortage of
work in progress, and some progress is possible without
additional resources. The functioning of the permanent
secretariat, the development of the police component,
the establishment of the headquarters, the drafting of an
updated concept of operations and the establishment of
an international coordination mechanism are examples
of areas where the G-5 Sahel can broadly pursue its
operationalization from this point forward. Moreover, I
call on all G-5 States to cooperate fully with the Office
ofthe High Commissioner for Human Rights in the full
and speedy implementation of the human rights and
international humanitarian law compliance framework.

Let me conclude on a very important point.
Belgium deplores the worrisome developments in
the security and humanitarian situation in part of the
Sahel. Unfortunately, there have been countless attacks
on uniformed personnel, as well as civilian massacres.
However, as in any crisis, the solution is above all
political, and there are many measures that can be taken.
We must of course provide a firm security response by
dismantling terrorist networks, draining their sources
of funding and thwarting their deadly narrative. But
it is also necessary to meet people's aspirations in
terms of development, the delivery of basic services,
anti-corruption andjustice, to ensure respect for human
rights, combat all forms of the stigmatization of certain
ethnic groups or communities and also fight impunity.
It is therefore truly a global effort of governance and
prevention that must be carried out in those territories
so that the people can lead a normal, peaceful and
dignified life.

