Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): Yesterdayl
said that history will record this moment (see S/PV.8225)
as one when we as the Security Council either lived up
to our responsibilities or showed our complete failure
to protect the Syrian people. Today we have our answer.
The votes have been cast. The record will show that
today some countries decided to stand up for truth,
accountability and justice for the Syrian people.

Most countries saw the horror that took place in
Douma last weekend at the hands of the Al-Assad
regime and realize that today was a time for action.
Month after month, the Al-Assad regime, with the full
support of Russia and Iran, has strung the Security
Council along. They ignored our calls for a ceasefire,
for political dialogue and for deliveries of humanitarian
aid. They ignored our calls to stop using chemical
weapons - weapons that are universally banned from
war. And then, last weekend, the Al-Assad regime
forced a moment of reckoning on all of us by gassing
people in Douma.

The United States and the countries that joined us
today could not allow that attack to go unanswered. The
record will not be kind to one permanent member of
the Council. Unfortunately, Russia has again chosen
the Al-Assad regime over the unity of the Security
Council. We have said before that Russia will stop at
nothing to shield the Al-Assad regime, and now we
have our answer. Russia has trashed the credibility of
the Council. It is not interested in unity or compromise.
Whenever we propose anything meaningful to Russia,
Russia vetoes it. It is a travesty. It has now officially
vetoed draft resolutions that would hold Al-Assad
accountable for these barbaric chemical attacks
six times.

Things did not have to turn out this way. For
weeks, the United States has led transparent, good-
faith negotiations with all Security Council members
to establish an attribution mechanism for chemical
weapons in Syria. We started from the simple premise
that every Council member would want to know
who was responsible for using those barbaric and
illegal weapons. We did everything to accommodate
Russia's views. Russia surprised us with a proposed
draft resolution (S/2018/175), calling all of us into the
Security Council Chamber and handing out the draft
text on the spot. After hearing widespread concerns
about its draft resolution, Russia moved ahead anyway,
accommodating no one's views. We could have done
the same, but instead we tried to take as much as we
could from Russia's draft text, while maintaining an
impartial and independent process. We negotiated in
good faith.

Many aspects of our draft resolutions were similar.
Russia said that the investigators should have safe
access to the places where chemical weapons were used.
We agreed. Russia said that it wanted an impartial,
independent and professional investigation. We agreed.
Russia said that the investigators should be recruited
on as wide a geographical basis as possible. We agreed.
Russia said that it wanted reports on the activities of
non-State actors involving chemical weapons. Although
that sounded to us like an attempt to distract from
the Al-Assad regime, we included Russia's request.
We even gave our mechanism the name that Russia
wanted - the United Nations independent mechanism
of investigation.

There were really only two key differences between
our draft resolution and that of Russia, but those
differences speak volumes. First, Russia wanted to
give itself the opportunity to approve the investigators
who were chosen for the task. Secondly, Russia wanted
the Security Council to assess the findings of any
investigation before any report was released. Does
any of that sound independent or impartial? Russia's
proposal was not about an independent and impartial
investigation at all. It was all about protecting the
Al-Assad regime.

This is a sad day. The United States takes no
pleasure in seeing Russia exercise its sixth veto on the
issue of chemical weapons in Syria. Only last week,
we had hoped that the one-year anniversary of the
Khan Shaykun attack might be the start of a renewed
partnership to combat chemical weapons. However,
those deadly weapons have been used on Syrian
families again. When the people of Douma, along with
the rest of the international community, looked to the
Council to act, one country stood in the way. History
will record that. History will record that, on this day,
Russia chose to protect a monster over the lives of the
Syrian people.

