Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): At
the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for having
invited a large number of States Members of the United
Nations to discuss such a grave and pressing subject
here in the Council.

In the Middle East region, terrorism today exists
in the form of a quasi-State. Basically, terrorism has
become yet another type of weapon of mass destruction:
the destruction of people, the world cultural heritage
and the future of entire regions. Terrorists have killed
tens of thousands of Muslims, Christians and Yazidis
and representatives of other ethnic and denominational
groups.

As paradoxical as it may seem, the threat of
the use of conventional types of weapons of mass
destruction is the greatest specifically in the Middle
East region. The lack of progress on such issues as the
ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, the creation in the Middle East of a zone free
of nuclear weapons and other types of weapons of mass
destruction, and the failure this year in terms of the
work of the Review Conference of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons - these are all
striking evidence of backward movement in terms of
working out a comprehensive dialogue on the issue of
ensuring international security not only in the Middle
East region and North Africa, but also worldwide.

Let us be frank. Today the real reasons for the
emergence of the crisis in the region are being replaced,
and this objectively impedes the quest for a long-term
solution. Some problems are being artificially brought
to the fore, and others are being skillfully hushed
up. As a result, what is being formed as a multilevel
parallel reality, and the primary victim of this parallel
reality is the truth. The artificial, coercive imposition
of certain views on other peoples and the discreditation
of legitimately elected Governments, as well as support
for terrorist groups, are the reasons that have led to
the worsening of the already difficult situation in the
region.

We are certain that for certain concepts, it is
unacceptable and criminal to use nuanced tones; in
this case, black is black. Terrorism mercilessly destroys
the integrity of the international security system.
Support for certain terrorist organizations in the fight
against others may lead only to negative consequences.
Similarly, the fragmenting of counterterrorism efforts
in terms of coalitions that are pursuing their own
political aims and the involvement of non-State entities
will inevitably lead to a worsening of the terrorist
threat and the threat of extremism. In that regard, we
see that the only viable option is to take action based
on Security Council decisions. For its part, Belarus has
consistently worked to strengthen international peace
and security, particularly in our region.

We recognize the primary coordinating role of
the United Nations in combating terrorism, and we
attach particular importance to the development
and strengthening of international cooperation in
that area. Belarus' participation in key universal
international treaties in the fight against terrorism
within the United Nations framework and its full
implementation of the obligations under the provisions
therein and the provisions of the relevant Security
Council resolutions have created a solid foundation
for further comprehensive counter-terrorism efforts.
Our country is an active party to regional counter-
terrorism agreements, programmes and other efforts
carried out in the framework of the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS), the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

In the light of the ongoing and growing intensity
of terrorist activities, we would like to draw attention
to resolution 1540 (2004), which deals with countering
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and preventing their falling into the hands of
terrorist organizations. In our view, that resolution has
a direct bearing on the theme of today's open debate.

One cannot forget about such forms of terrorism
as cyberterrorism, given the global information and
communications interdependence, which could well
lead to terrorists gaining access to weapons of mass
destruction. That would then be a disaster of truly
global proportions.
In January 2013, Belarus, together with the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, the
CIS Executive Committee and the OSCE secretariat,
held a workshop for CIS member States to exchange
experience on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). We plan to continue holding such events on that
subject in Minsk.

In conclusion, we believe that we need to note the
following. Belarus calls on everyone not to forget that we
are States Members of the United Nations -I emphasize
the words, "United Nations". With regard to the issue of
maintaining international peace and security, there are
no idle observers in the fight to counter terrorism, nor
can there be any. The contribution of each State to that
crucial effort is of exceptional importance.

Finally, given the most recent events, we welcome
the involvement of new States in actively countering
terrorism, particularly in those cases when such
involvement takes place at the request of legitimately
elected Governments.

