Mr. Mutaboba: On 1 January 2010, the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau transitioned into the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
It is a great privilege for me to present to the Council
the first report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the Integrated Mission (S/2010/106).

UNIOGBIS is in its third month of operations.
The Secretary-General's report before the Council
outlines the progress made in the establishment of
UNIOGBIS and the remaining challenges to peace,
stability and development in Guinea-Bissau. Allow me
therefore to take this opportunity to update members of
the Council on developments in the country since the
report was prepared and, in conclusion, to make three
general observations.

In terms of the latest developments on the
political front, on ll February President Sanha
appointed former President Yala and the leader of the
opposition party, Partido para a Renovacao Social
10-26013
(PRS), to the State Council, which was a positive step
that will contribute to the much-needed collaboration
and inclusion among the main political parties. The
National Assembly, at the request of the opposition
PRS party, set up two parliamentary commissions on
the revision of the Constitution and local legislation.
Finally, the technical committee established by the
National Assembly to organize a national dialogue
process has begun its work.

On regional cooperation, the Ministers of
Defence of Guinea-Bissau and Senegal met in Dakar
on 12 February. They agreed to review and update the
bilateral security and defence cooperation agreement
signed in 1975. With regard to tensions over border
markers in October 2009, both sides agreed that the
joint commission set up to manage border issues would
meet in this month of March.

With respect to the commission of inquiry, in
February the Judiciary Police submitted to the Office
of the Prosecutor General two reports on the
assassinations of President Vieira and the Chief of
General Staff in March last year. Both reports have
been referred to magistrates in the Prosecutor's Office
for further investigation.

In terms of socio-economic developments, State
schools were disrupted by a wave of strikes by the two
teaching unions at the end of February over the alleged
failure of the Government to keep its side of an
agreement signed with the unions over pay and
conditions of service in December 2009.

Finally, on the Integrated Peacebuilding Office,
as a follow-up to the joint strategic planning retreat
held between UNIOGBIS and the United Nations
country team in early February, the United Nations
system is finalizing a joint framework for peace and
development in Guinea-Bissau. This joint framework
will contain specific benchmarks to measure progress
in peace consolidation in Guinea-Bissau.

I would like now to turn to more general
observations.

First, the year 2010 could be a turning point for
Guinea-Bissau. The country is enjoying a relatively
stable political environment and growing international
attention. This unprecedented window of opportunity
for Guinea-Bissau should not be missed. There is a lot
to be done, and the Government has continued to make
progress in re-engaging the country's international
10-26013

partners and pursuing its reform agenda. They are
doing well, but they could do better. The pace of fiscal
reform has improved and there has been progress in
preparation for public administration reform.
Furthermore, the Government is up to date with current
salaries for the first time since 2004. It has also
increased revenue collection and improved fiscal
management. Guinea-Bissau is getting closer to the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative
completion point, which would result in debt relief of
$700 million some time in November. That is slightly
more than half of the country's total debt burden.

In short, with an overall African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde majority in
the National Assembly, governance improvements and
the prospect of debt relief, the conditions are in place
for political stability and tangible improvements in the
lives of the people of Guinea-Bissau in the short to
medium term.

Secondly, security sector reform remains at the
centre of the country's stabilization and development
agenda. In the past few months, the Government, with
the support of its international partners, has made some
progress. The legal framework for security sector
reform is now before the National Assembly, as are the
plans for the defence sector pension scheme. The
Security Council has given UNIOGBIS the mandate of
coordinating international efforts in security sector
reform. I am happy to report that the majority of the
United Nations security sector reform team is now in
place and that the recruitment of the remaining
personnel will most likely be finalized by the end of
March.

In addition to implementing its overall
coordination mandate, UNIOGBIS will also take a lead
role in providing support to national authorities in the
reform of internal security institutions, focusing on the
police, and we have in fact already started this.
UNIOGBIS is committed to collaborating closely with
the country's international partners in a flexible
manner to ensure that our collective contributions are
responsive to the needs of Guinea-Bissau. The mission
will also assist national authorities and international
partners in developing integrated strategies to
implement holistic security sector reform programmes
and mobilize resources. In this regard, I hope that the
Peacebuilding Commission, under the able leadership
of Ambassador Maria Luiza Viotti, Chair of the
Commission's Guinea-Bissau configuration, will also
3
support resource mobilization efforts and strategic
coherence for security sector reform efforts.

Thirdly, as Council members know, Guinea-
Bissau's journey towards peace, democracy and
prosperity is taking place in a very difficult regional
environment. The political and security situation in
West Africa remains highly precarious, and we see
worrying signs of military coups, of ethnic and
interreligious conflicts and of political intolerance. We
also see increasing threats from international crime,
illicit drug trafficking, smuggling, the unfair
exploitation of natural resources and illegal fishing
taking hold in West Africa. Given the interdependence
of most countries in the subregion, this could further
threaten Guinea-Bissau's stability at a time when we
think it is on the right track. On the other hand, a
successful and peaceful Guinea-Bissau could have a
positive influence on developments in the region.

Peace consolidation in Guinea-Bissau continues
to require collective and timely action. In this regard, I
would welcome continued support from the Security
Council in ensuring the constructive and coordinated
engagement of all stakeholders. I thank you, Sir, and
the members of the Council for your consideration.

