Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking the
Peruvian delegation for having convened this meeting,
and the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Djinnit, for his informative briefing. We also thank
the Permanent Representative of the Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Bale', for the illuminating information he
has just provided us.

I would like to take this opportunity to extend our
condolences to the Catholic Church in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the assassination of a priest
last Sunday, killed by unidentified armed elements
after holding mass.

The Great Lakes region is of strategic importance
for the African continent, and the stability of the region
is linked to the stability of the entire continent. It is
essential that the countries in the region, which share
many common interests and challenges, are able to find
common language to try to address their problems. In
order to do so, they must use the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, signed on 24 February
2013 in Addis Ababa, which continues to be a very
useful instrument.

In order to stabilize the Great Lakes region, we
must create a favourable environment and promote the
economic development of the region. In an environment
of peace and security, its great potential and natural
resources would allow the flourishing of that important
region, since peace would make it unnecessary to spend
the immense amounts of money wasted today on armed
conflicts that are bleeding them dry. The international
community must help those countries by assisting in
the development of key economic sectors.

For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, it is
important that countries of the region develop policies
that promote confidence, encourage neighbourly
relations and help resolve differences through direct,
frank and inclusive dialogue. They must also respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the other countries in the region. We hope that the
international community will act based on respect for
the sovereignty and views of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and help the country implement political
agreements, advance security sector reform, strengthen
governance in certain areas of the country, promote
national reconciliation and work to achieve peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region.

Neighbouring countries, regional organizations
and subregional organizations have an important role
to play alongside the international community. Leaders
of neighbouring countries, the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
the East African Community are uniquely positioned
to resolve the question of Burundi, the question of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other issues.

We take this opportunity to express the
appreciation of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea to
His Excellency President Denis Sassou Nguesso of
the Congolese Republic both as President of the Great
Lakes Conference and of the Follow-up Mechanism of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, and
to President Joao Lourenco of Angola for their efforts
to resolve the problems that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes region are facing.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is key to the comprehensive stabilization of the
region. The international community must support the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in that process. The
country will be going through a decisive stage when it
holds elections in December, which we hope will lead
to the beginning of a new stage for the future of the
Congolese people. The post-electoral process of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is as important as the
current situation. That is why possible outcomes must
be closely reviewed. The stability of the country is key
to the entire region. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must complete its delicate task and collaborate
closely with the Government. All stakeholders in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should pool their
efforts and try to find solutions to their differences,
while prioritizing the interests of all Congolese.

We are pleased to note that the situation in Burundi
has stabilized and that the members of the Council
have been able to agree on a statement with regard to
the country. We hope that Burundians will be able to
resolve their problems internally through negotiations.

In conclusion, I would like to call on the United
Nations to continue to play a leading role and to
coordinate all efforts and mechanisms for the
stabilization and development of that important region.
Equatorial Guinea is prepared to make its modest
contribution to that process.

