Mr. Lopes Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): Allow me first of all to thank you,
Mr. President, for the words of welcome which you kindly
addressed to me and to my delegation.

The consolidation of peace as envisaged and
conceptualized by the Secretary-General in his Agenda for
Peace requires national reconciliation, among other things,
for the socio-economic reconstruction of a country within
the framework of peace-keeping operations. However, an
indisputable prerequisite for any national reconciliation that
is to be genuine and lasting, is the freedom of movement
for individuals. The existence of anti-personnel mines in a
country forms an obstacle to such movement of
populations.

The problem of land-mines throughout the world has
been further exacerbated during the past year. Continuing
disturbances throughout the world and the outbreak of new
conflicts have contributed to the proliferation of mines, with
all the attendant long-term socio-economic consequences for
civilian populations.

At this very moment, as I am speaking to the Council,
a mine has perhaps just exploded in one of the more than
60 countries afflicted by this thing man has invented to
achieve power and supremacy. It is a bitter heritage and
painful memory of the recent past whose consequences
continue to haunt the daily lives of millions of human
beings.

Yes, somewhere in Afghanistan, in Angola, in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, or in Cambodia, Croatia, El
Salvador, Mozambique and Yemen - the list is
unfortunately too long to mention all the countries - a
child on the way to school has just, unfortunately, placed
his small foot on a mine which, upon exploding, has
transformed him into a human wreck. Another explosion
has brutally taken the life of a mother seeking water or
wood at a nearby river. Mines are exploding every day in
many countries of the world, causing irreparable damage
to the flesh of their hapless victims and stirring in our
hearts a sadness, indeed, a boundless remorse.

In view of the seriousness of this scourge, the
Security Council - thanks, Mr. President, to your
initiative - is today focusing, as it should, on a serious
problem, a genuine threat, by debating urgent and
effective measures to take against a formidable enemy:
the 118 million active mines scattered throughout more
than 60 countries. What a tragedy!

The role of the United Nations, whose mission of
peace today requires its full meaning through consensus
on this priority issue, can only be effective and bear fruit
if it is accompanied by the commitment to actively
participate in the effort of national reconstruction. Peace,
to blossom and become firmly rooted, must emerge from
an improvement in the living conditions of the
populations concerned.

This, fortunately, is something we have understood,
as Members of the United Nations. And this concept,
backed by our unanimous adherence, is taking the most
diverse forms, manifesting itself everywhere in concrete
and admirable ways, even in the most remote comers of
the globe.

Demining operations today represent a formidable
challenge for the United Nations soldiers of peace, true
heroes deserving of the solemn tribute we pay them here
for their courage and their spirit of sacrifice and
selflessness.

Yes, alas, there are also victims among the Blue
Helmets: more than 200 wounded and 60 dead - too
many victims, in truth, for mines are everywhere along
roads, in villages, on bridges, on riverbanks, even in
schools and hospitals.
 

What a tragedy, what a mad will of man to wish to
destroy everything to ensure his supremacy. Mines remain
active for decades and pose a lasting danger to the
populations of the regions where they have been laid. There
can be no more normal life for villagers once a mine has
exploded nearby. Fear takes root in the cornfields and rice
paddies. Parents are reluctant to send their children to
school. The future is thus taken hostage.

The Republic of Guinea-Bissau considers that the use
of all types of mines should be prohibited, banned. Their
production and export should be forbidden. In addition,
existing stocks should be destroyed. Moreover, even
military experts consider the strategic military usefulness of
mines to be more dubious than ever. We are dealing with
a weapon that kills or leaves its victims mutilated for life,
with no possibility of continuing to live normally. The
innocent victims are innumerable and, unfortunately,
include many children: there are too many amputated,
blinded children, pointlessly martyred, nameless and unsung
victims of futile and unending wars.

This shows how useful, important and timely our
debate today is. The international community must be able
to provide the legal instruments for a total ban on mines
and the destruction of mines. Important steps have already
been taken in this direction, and negotiation to this end
must be pursued.

The success of the peace mission of the United
Nations is at stake. Success will be incomplete if the effort
for national reconstruction in the countries concerned does
not enjoy the continued support of the international
community, which must endow the United Nations, and in
particular the soldiers of peace who are acting on behalf of
all of us, with the essential tools to carry out their noble
mission.

We must do everything in our power to put an end to
this tragedy, for it constitutes a permanent threat to the
lives and physical integrity of individuals. Objectives such
as a total ban on anti-personnel mines, a complete ban on
exports of these wretched devices and effective demining
must be essential elements of the new joint action of the
United Nations. Furthermore, we encourage the
international community to undertake immediately to seek
solutions to problems caused by anti-personnel land-mines,
with a view to eliminating them for ever and putting an end
to this global calamity that kills or permanently mutilates
hundreds of victims each week in many countries of the
world.

We hope that the International Meeting on Mine
Clearance, convened by the General Assembly - and
held in Geneva from 5-7 July last year - will stir a
greater awareness of the various aspects of this problem
and will move the international community to greater
cooperation and stronger political and financial support
for United Nations activities in this area.

