Mr. Gumbi (South Africa): South Africa too
would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
your sterling stewardship of the Council for the month
of July. Your diplomatic skills and tenacity have had a
positive impact on the work of the Council.

The suffering that children experience in
situations of armed conflict is unspeakable. Children
who are increasingly drawn into combat as child
soldiers are exposed at tender and sensitive ages to the
gruesome and unbearable side-effects of war. Their
fundamental human rights are violated; they are
orphaned, maimed or uprooted from their families. Girl
children in particular are raped and sexually abused.
Ultimately, these children are left emotionally scarred
and traumatized. This in turn compounds and
complicates the task of working with children in post-
conflict situations. It is therefore imperative that the
need for special attention to protect children in United
Nations peacekeeping operations be recognized by this
body and that adequate training be provided on the
special needs and rights of children in armed conflicts.
That is of the utmost importance if we are to protect
our children now and for generations to come.

It was such circumstances that compelled the
Non-Aligned Movement, at its thirteenth ministerial
conference in April 2000, to warmly welcome the
convening of a special session of the General Assembly
in 2001 to review and assess global issues affecting
children, following the 1990 World Summit for
Children. At this conference the ministers of the Non-
Aligned Movement also expressed their deep concern
about the conditions that children face on account of
poverty and under-development, such as their use in
armed conflict, including as child mercenaries.

At the multilateral forums, South Africa strongly
supported the "straight 18" position regarding the age
limit for both voluntary and compulsory recruitment set
by the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. We believe that this Protocol is an
important step in the right direction and goes a long
way in setting legal norms to address the plight of
children in armed conflict situations. It is therefore
important to strengthen international cooperation to
ensure the implementation of the Protocol and the
rehabilitation and social integration of children who are
victims of armed conflict.

Furthermore, South Africa supports the
provisions of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and the International Labour Organization
Convention. These instruments deserve our full support
because they offer internationally recognized recourse
to ensure the protection of children in armed conflict.

At the national level, soon after the transition to
democracy in 1994 the Government of South Africa
took the first steps to address the demobilization,
reintegration and re-socialization of children. Different
institutions, including the National Youth Commission
and the National Programme of Action for Children,
were created. Former South African President, Mr.
Nelson Mandela, established a children's fund bearing
his name, to which he contributes a large portion of his
own financial earnings.

On 16 July 1995 South Africa ratified the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. To ensure the
Convention's implementation, the South African
Government announced on 7 June 1999 its decision to
amend the South African national defence policy to
raise the age of enlistment into the armed forces from
17 to 18 years. In the past, a person of 17 could be
recruited into the South African Defence Force,
although he had to be 18 to be permitted to participate
in armed conflict. This has now been amended to 18
years for recruitment as well as for active combat.

South Africa's policy now conforms with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) African Charter
on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, which we
signed on 10 October 1997 and ratified in January
2000. The African Charter defines a child as a person
below the age of 18, and stipulates that States parties
should refrain from recruiting any child into the armed
forces and that no child shall take a direct part in
hostilities.

All these measures are South Africa's response to
the appeals for worldwide protection of children from
warfare. Sadly, national initiatives alone cannot solve
the problem; hence the need for enhanced international
cooperation in dealing with the predicament of children
in armed conflict situations. The United Nations
system, especially key agencies such as the Security
Council, in partnership with the United Nations
Children's Fund, is critical in helping Governments to
address and alleviate this problem.
It is for this reason that my delegation welcomes
the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict, as well as the convening
of this debate in the Council Chamber. In the same
vein, South Africa applauded the adoption of resolution
1261 (1999). In adopting this resolution, the Council
took the decision to protect children exposed to war
and recognized that armed conflict has long-term
consequences for peace, security and development.

In conclusion, I would like to remind this body of
the ground-breaking report (A/51/306) of Ms. Graca
Machel to the United Nations General Assembly on the
impact of armed conflict on children. In this
connection, Ms. Machel stated:

"All of us find it hard to believe that at the end of
the twentieth century children are targets,
children are expendable children are refugees,
and even perpetrators in one conflict after
another, on virtually every continent".

As we are entering a new millennium, the
recruitment and use of child soldiers should be
eliminated, since it constitutes not only an affront to
human values, but also a fundamental impediment to
socio-economic development. Our children have a high
stake and a right to live in peace and stability.

