Mr. Osei (Ghana): Ghana, like other Member States,
considers this open meeting opportune, coming as it does
on the eve of the millennium, and commends the Council
for this initiative. It is also opportune because it enables
the Council to assess the depth of the perception of many
African States about selectivity by the Council in the
execution of its cardinal mandate of maintaining
international peace and security. Naturally, we welcome
the considerable attention that the United Nations is now
devoting to Africa, particularly the growing level of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU).

The Secretary-General's introductory statement has
set the tone for this ongoing interaction, and other key
issues have also been amply stated by the members of the
Council and other speakers. However, I wish to revisit the
following points.

The first point is on the need for regular
consultations. I would like to suggest that within the
framework of consultations between the Secretaries-
General of the United Nations and the OAU, the Council
may consider quarterly review meetings between the
members of the Council and the Permanent Observer
Mission of the OAU that could focus on pertinent issues
of the continent with the objective of reaching
understanding on mechanisms, not only for tackling those
problems but, indeed, for appropriate follow-up action.

Secondly, on conflict management, we believe that
the role of regional groups in the containment and
resolution of conflicts cannot be underestimated. Efforts
by African subregional groups such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) to
resolve civil strife on the continent have been constrained
by the lack of moral and logistical support from the
international community, especially the Security Council.
As we all know, peacekeeping activities by regional
groups in Africa have indeed had a very terrible effect on
the meagre resources and economies of the countries that
have provided such formed units. My own country's
active participation in subregional peacekeeping has been
based on the principles of good-neighbourliness and
containment.

 

If I may dare suggest an aside, I suspect that the
principle of containment may have its source in an old
Ghanaian adage that says that if your neighbour's beard is
on fire the sensible thing to do is to douse it with water,
lest sparks from the fire threaten your own.

The provision of resources by the United Nations
within the mandate of the Council would indeed strengthen
the resolve and capacity of peacekeeping forces. Thus, the
consideration of such conflicts by the Council should also
move in parallel to preparations by regional forces to
intervene and prevent the escalation of conflicts pending
their management and resolution. The representatives of
contributing countries may then be invited by the Council
to discuss details of the operation and determine the
appropriate level of support for the ongoing peacekeeping
operation. In this regard, I believe that Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as other speakers have
emphasized, offer a test of the Council's commitment to
dealing with peacekeeping and peacemaking in Africa, with
the deployment not only of a formed unit but also with
civilian police participation.

Conflict prevention has also been recognized as being
less costly in terms of human and material resources than
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction. Since
Africa has wholly embraced democracy and good
governance, the Council should come out strongly against
attempts by any groups or individuals which are aimed at
destabilizing democratically elected Governments. A most
effective measure would be the strong imposition of
sanctions on such groups, and, if possible, their supporters,
where they can be identified. This should be scrupulously
monitored, with the aim of penalizing countries that flout
the Council's decisions. In this regard, we commend
Ambassador Fowler's initiatives on Angola.

The last area of concern I would like to touch on is
the proliferation of conventional weapons, notably small
and light arms, since they are tools for violence and conflict
in Africa. It has already been noted by a member of the
Council this morning that African countries do not sell
arms; neither do they buy diamonds. The Council must be
seen to be actively engaged in securing international
cooperation and coordination in the struggle against the
accumulation, proliferation and widespread use of small
arms. Support for regional and subregional efforts is
therefore critical and deserving of the Council's attention.

Finally, Mr. President, let me commend the able
manner in which you have conducted our proceedings so
far.

