Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I wish you every
success. I would also like to congratulate the delegation
of the Russian Federation on its successful presidency
last month.

Belgium supports the Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020 initiative. We welcome the African Union's
commitment to putting young people at the centre of
that initiative.

The African continent is the only one where the
youth population continues to grow from year to
year. By 2050, the continent is expected to double its
population, from 1 billion today to nearly 2.4 billion.
At that time, half of its inhabitants will be under 25
years of age. That prospect provides tremendous
opportunities for innovation and creativity. But such
a demographic shift, if not supported, also carries the
risk of new difficulties for the continent.

Political, social and economic exclusion is a risk
factor. It can fuel joint mistrust of the national and
international political institutions that are meant to
serve and protect young people. It is therefore vital to
invest in education and in creating a climate conducive
to the participation and inclusion of young adults in
peace processes, including mediation processes. Equal
access to inclusive and quality education and the
opportunity for decent work are crucial elements in
achieving that climate.
For those reasons, one ofthe priorities of Belgium's
cooperation with Africa is the socioeconomic
integration of young people, as for example in
Uganda, where we support the implementation of the
Skilling Uganda plan; in Morocco, where we promote
youth entrepreneurship; and in Burkina Faso, where
Belgium supports the development of young people's
digital skills.

Resolution 2419 (2018) calls for greater inclusion
of youth in peace processes. That text is particularly
relevant in the African context today. We must recognize
young people as actors in their own right. To do that, we
must change our norms, practices and attitudes.

As Ms. Hafsa Ahmed said, young people are not
just the leaders of tomorrow, they are often already
leaders today. I would like to thank our briefers this
morning for their interventions and their testimonies.

In addition, young people are often the majority
in armed groups in Africa. The consideration of
those young people should be central to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform processes, as well as community violence
reduction programmes and actions to prevent
violent extremism.

I would like to conclude by welcoming the
initiatives undertaken by the African Union (AU)
for the greater involvement of young people and by
commending the work of its Special Envoy on Youth,
Ms. Aya Chebbi. Partnerships are also a vehicle for
new ideas and innovative initiatives. Belgium supports
civil society initiatives and cooperation platforms, such
as the AU-European Union Youth Cooperation Hub,
which implements pilot projects, particularly in the
area of peace and security, between young people of
the African and the European continents.

