Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his
briefing. We welcome the presence in the Chamber of
Mr. Bedouma Alain Yoda, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso, to preside over our work
during this meeting. And we reaffirm our support for
his presidency's successful leadership of the Security
Council for December.

This is indeed a timely debate, given the
international dimension that drug trafficking and its
related crimes have taken on, not only in Africa but all
over the world. The so-called new threats to
international security are multidimensional, as the
global drug problem and transnational organized crime
show. Both of these problems deserve priority
treatment, given their implications for the security,
prosperity and development of our societies.
As Mr. Yoda indicated, this meeting will, without
a doubt, contribute to deeper reflection on this
problematic issue that disregards borders, weakens
States and affects conflicts in various regions of the
world. Drug trafficking must be addressed across the
board, in all its aspects, from promoting prevention and
treatment in countries with the highest levels of drug
consumption, to international cooperation aimed at
dismantling its increasingly sophisticated criminal
linkages with their immense capacity to corrupt and
their firepower, challenging security and undermining
the rule of law.

It is important to remember that the fight against
drug trafficking, besides its cost in human lives to our
societies, diverts significant resources to the detriment
of economic and social development, and we therefore
deem it appropriate that the Security Council focuses
its attention and promotes the adoption of effective
measures through the items on its agenda that foster
strategies aimed at preventing drug trafficking, in order
to protect States and international security.

The fight against this scourge requires a firm
political commitment on the international level, based
on the globally recognized principle of the shared
responsibility of States, with the aim of building
mutual trust and encouraging strategies to eradicate
this evil, while at the same time respecting in full the
sovereignty of States. The threat posed by criminal acts
related to drug trafficking demands effective
international cooperation based on integrated,
multidisciplinary and balanced strategies. This is
necessary in order to ensure that the actions geared to
reducing supply and demand are mutually reinforcing,
in order to seal off areas of impunity, dismantle
traffickers' operational structures and respond to the
increased speed with which this dangerous
phenomenon is progressing, undermining the socio-
economic and political stability of our societies as well
as their sustainable development.

Drug trafficking and its related crimes weaken
States that have emerged from conflict, as well as their
institutions. As a result, we must consider its regional
and global impact, as has been said previously. It is
clear that the power of the corruption and violence
generated by the criminal drug industry are a
destabilizing factor in such States. There is growing
concern about the growth in organized crime involved
in drug trafficking in a number of West African States,
which are being used as havens or transit points for
drugs that are produced in other parts of the world,
particularly Latin America, and are en route to Europe.

These illicit groups and activities also pose
threats to peacebuilding efforts in various States, as
stated clearly by the Economic Community of West

09-6381]
African States. The growing prominence of these
criminal and drug trafficking groups underscores the
need to strengthen the national capacity of States to
counteract these phenomena and to combat impunity
and illicit drug trafficking.

It is crucial that the institutions and authority of
the State be restored in countries that have emerged
from internal conflict and that are affected by drug
trafficking. Mexico is of the View that this illicit
activity poses a serious threat to the security of States,
and given that both the roots of this phenomenon and
the solution to it transcend borders, it is crucial that
international cooperation be promoted in order to
tackle this scourge.

The global drug problem was the subject of a
very detailed examination during the debates held this
year in Vienna in the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
in New York during the Third Committee's October
meetings on international drug control and in the
November plenary meeting of the General Assembly to
consider the results of the high-level segment of the
most recent session of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs (see A/64/PV.38).

Mexico participated actively in those events, as
its recognizes that the General Assembly provides the
ideal forum in which to highlight the importance, scope
and implications of renewed international cooperation
aimed at achieving tangible results against illicit drug
trafficking by promoting a comprehensive and
balanced strategy to curb this problem. This was
reflected in the omnibus draft resolution on
international cooperation against the world drug
problem, which was adopted by consensus and was
coordinated by my country.

We would like to highlight the fact that the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs has promoted
significant resolutions on the links between drug
trafficking and the illicit trafficking in arms, on
strengthening measures to combat money laundering
linked to drug trafficking and related crimes, and on
strengthening inter-regional cooperation between Latin
American and Caribbean States and West African
States.

The institutional response of the United Nations
is very important, but - let us be clear - it is not
enough, as drug trafficking is a increasingly complex
phenomenon of globalization that requires a
coordinated response and the unequivocal commitment
of the international community.

Mexico believes that the United Nations must
play a more active role in the debate on the fight
against drugs and transnational organized crime, not
only through its technical forums, but also by
promoting high-level political commitments to
combating this scourge. In 2010, we will celebrate the
tenth anniversary of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, which will
provide a timely opportunity to reflect on the future of
this regime.

We have a normative framework that has been in
place since the 19805. However, in spite of the
existence of these excellent norms, we have been
unable to put an end to illicit drug trafficking. The
international community thus faces the immense
challenge of guaranteeing the implementation of the
conventions and agreements in this field.

The complexity of the issues associated with
illicit drug trafficking and their various political,
economic and social aspects highlight the need for
international cooperation in order to combat this global
threat. Therefore, it is particularly important that we
seek out ways in which the Security Council can
complement and contribute to the significant work
carried out by the General Assembly and other United
Nations entities, such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in Vienna, in order to define better
coordinated responses for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Finally, Mexico has taken the sovereign decision
to commit itself to striving tirelessly to combat drug
trafficking, exercising full State authority in protecting
our society while shouldering our responsibilities to
the international community and encouraging
international cooperation on this issue at the bilateral,
regional and multilateral levels.

