Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Let me first of all express my
appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this meeting. We
welcome once again Mr. Carl Bildt, the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Balkans, and thank him for
his succinct but wide-ranging briefing and candid analysis,
which I am sure have been extremely useful to Council
members. He has given the Council a lot of food for
thought.

For the purpose of today's discussion, my delegation
wishes to focus on only a few issues of importance to the
Council and to the international community in the
continuing efforts to achieve peace and stability in the
region, especially in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and also in
Kosovo.

First, among these immediate concerns is the return of
refugees and displaced persons. There have been concerted
efforts made by the United Nations system and the
international community as a whole to facilitate the return
of refugees and displaced persons, both in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Kosovo. In Kosovo, a very large
number of Kosovar Albanian refugees and displaced
persons have returned, but there is now the problem of an
outflow of other ethnic communities from the province,
especially of the Serbs. Meanwhile, the refugee problem
remains largely unresolved in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
even four years after the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement.

The refugee problem is, of course, at the heart of the
existing insecurity situation, which is due to the absence of
law and order or to their ineffectiveness, both in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Kosovo. In our view, the restoration
and maintenance of law and order are important not only
in themselves, but also in terms of encouraging the rapid
return of the refugees.

Secondly, there is a need for continued emphasis on
the reconciliation process. This should remain one of the
priorities, both for Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as for
Kosovo. It is only natural for the communities that have
been subjected to some of the worst crimes against
humanity committed since the end of the Second World
War to seek justice for their loved ones who have
perished. In this regard, it is important that justice be
done and be seen to be done. Hence, the special
importance that we attach to the work of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991 in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, which
the international community should strongly support.

Thirdly, there should be continued and unstinting
support from the international community for the
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Kosovo. We note that a lot of work has
been done in this area by the international community as
a whole and countries in the region. We note in particular
the specific plans outlined in the Stability Pact for South-
Eastern Europe for further efforts, ranging from economic
reconstruction and political reform to closer regional
integration. We commend these efforts and hope for their
success.

Finally, my delegation would like to underscore the
importance of the role of local leaders. We believe that
much of the success of the efforts of the international
community will depend on the cooperation and
constructive attitude of the local leaders.

