Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): First of all, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. I seize this opportunity to wish you success as
President of the Security Council for the current month.

Allow me also to express my solidarity with the
intervention just made by the representative of Sierra
Leone.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. Slovakia, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Poland
associate themselves with this statement.

As stated immediately after the crisis began, the
European Union strongly condemns the attacks and actions
taken by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) in Sierra
Leone in direct violation of the Lome Peace Agreement and
is highly concerned by the reports of continuing
inadmissible military movements by the RUF.

We firmly condemn the reported killing of personnel
of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and continue to be deeply disturbed by the totally
unacceptable detention of hundreds of its military and
civilian personnel. The European Union deplores the fact
that the ongoing crisis brought more suffering to the
already beleaguered civilian population. The European
Union believes that all those responsible for these actions
should be made accountable.

The European Union calls on the Revolutionary United
Front, and in particular Foday Sankoh, who as its leader
has major responsibilities in the ongoing deplorable crisis,
to cease immediately all attacks, to release all detainees
safely and unconditionally and to recommit themselves to
the full implementation of the Lome Peace Agreement.

The European Union welcomes the Secretary-
General's mission to Sierra Leone, headed by Under-
Secretary-General Bernard Miyet, to assess the situation
in the field. It fully appreciates and supports the efforts
being undertaken by the United Nations to solve the
current crisis.

The European Union believes that UNAMSIL is
facing a serious emergency and strongly encourages all
States in a position to do so to assist and provide the
means deemed necessary for the accomplishment of its
mandate. The European Union notes that UNAMSIL has
authority, under Chapter VII of the Charter, to use force
to ensure the security and freedom of movement of its
personnel and to protect civilians, where possible.

In this context, the European Union pays tribute to
all troop contributors and welcomes and supports efforts
already made to speed up the deployment of the
remaining three battalions from India, Jordan and
Bangladesh, which will join the UNAMSIL peacekeeping
contingent. We welcome the efforts made by those
countries offering logistical assistance to this operation.
The European Union stresses that one of its member
States, the United Kingdom, as recognized by previous
speakers, has made an important military contribution,
particularly at Lungi Airport.

The United Nations is again facing a major
challenge in Africa and should not fail. Firm and
sustained action by UNAMSIL and the international
community as a whole is needed to bring the peace
process back on track.

The European Union reiterates that the active
engagement of regional leaders is especially critical to
bring this crisis to an end and restore stability in Sierra
Leone. In this regard we welcomed the summit of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
heads of States in Abuja on 9 May, which reaffirmed
total ECOWAS support to restore peace in Sierra Leone.

Finally, let me echo the words of the Secretary-
General here tonight. In this crisis, let us back words with
deeds, and mandates with resources needed to make them
work.

 

