Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We are pleased to participate in this
important debate. I would like to thank President
Cavaco Silva of Portugal for being here this morning. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Assistant
Secretary-General of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Director from the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. In addition
we would like to make the following points in our
national capacity.

Guatemala, like other troop-contributing
countries, struggles with the dilemma of limiting our
presence in a country to keeping the peace, without
exposing our troops to offensive actions that place
them in harm's way, while at the same time supporting
humanitarian efforts to protect the civilian population
as part of a broader mandate to restore stability and
normality in the daily lives of inhabitants.

From a wider standpoint, we welcome the
continued willingness of the Council to address the
needs of civilians with regard to their protection in
armed conflict. It is crucial to redouble our efforts to
overcome the five core challenges identified by the
Secretary-General in 2009. The fact is that, despite the
numerous reports, resolutions, wealth of experience
and lessons learned accumulated in the past decade,
civilians still account for the vast majority of
casualties, and the risks they bear have only
intensified. Moreover, it is the most vulnerable
civilians - children and women - who are the most
exposed to risks.

There is much more to say on this theme, but
today we would like to focus on the challenges to
implementation in the field and on the lessons learned.

We encourage more progress with regard to the
conceptual and operational aspects of the protection of
civilians in the framework of peacekeeping operations.
We also acknowledge that much progress has been
made in achieving greater consistency in the
implementation of mandates, in the identification of
problems and existing limitations and in seeking
solutions.

The allocation of sufficient resources for
protection activities and initiatives is crucial, and
enhances the capacity of peacekeeping operations to
protect civilians. Similarly, support should also be
given to self-protection initiatives by civilian
populations, which not only involve the main
stakeholders but also solidify the foundations for their
long-term recovery and development. Their

participation is crucial in helping to salvage what
remains of their communities by promoting the
reconstruction of the social fabric and by supporting
the reintegration of displaced persons. That also
includes strengthening the leadership role that women
take on during reconciliation processes. Women are
agents of change in cases such as that of Guatemala,
where they are able to create spaces for conflict
prevention, mediation and resolution, as well as for
peacebuilding.

We are concerned about the asymmetric nature of
existing conflicts, in which there is a steady rise in
breaches of international law and non-observance of
the principles of distinction and proportionality by the
parties to armed conflicts. That situation is exacerbated
by the proliferation and fragmentation of non-State
armed groups that resort to strategies that flagrantly
contravene international law, as well as by the new
technology to which such groups have ready access,
including long-range artillery and missiles, which leads
to wider conflict zones and exposes civilians to even
more attacks. It is therefore important to recognize that
conventional measures are not sufficient to address
core challenges and emerging dangers.

I would like to raise one additional point that has
natural links to the protection of civilians and that
cannot be left out of today's debate. Our delegation is
among those that consider paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) to be one of the singular
achievements of that meeting. We believe that the
evolution in the doctrine of international humanitarian
law in recent years was a major advance. The primary
responsibility to protect civilians falls on States but
they, in turn, are obligated to seek international
assistance when they are unable to provide it. In other
words, sovereignty equals responsibility and
responsibility equals accountability.

In the coming years, both the Security Council
and the General Assembly will have a prominent role
to play in making this concept operational, which
provides an opportunity to continue to improve the
assistance architecture of the United Nations. Together,
we must ensure that populations at risk have access at
all times to the best possible protection, that
perpetrators of abuses face the consequences of their
actions, and that the enhancement, monitoring and
strengthening of capabilities have tangible results. The
Council and the entire international community will be
judged according to their capacity to protect the most
vulnerable.

