I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador Philippe Kridelka and Mr. Olof Skoog for their briefings. My delegation has taken note of the conclusions and recommendations contained in the tenth report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1177) on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and calls upon Member States and all stakeholders to comply with the obligations to which they have freely subscribed. I wish to reaffirm the Niger's commitment to the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), which endorses the JCPOA on Iran's nuclear programme. It is undeniable that, as an expression of the will of the international community and with the support of the Security Council, the JCPOA is an essential instrument in the fight against nuclear proliferation. It must therefore be preserved. That is why we urge all parties to the agreement to adhere to the strict application of its provisions, with regard to both obligations and rights, and to make use of its dispute settlement mechanism should difficulties arise in the implementation of its provisions. For my country, the Niger, the press release issued by the International Atomic Energy Agency on 26 August, indicating that the Islamic Republic of Iran had granted it access to two sites to which it had requested access and was facilitating verification activities aimed at resolving problems relating to the application of safeguards, seems to be a step forward as the international community needs to lay the foundations for a new relationship, based on mutual trust and respect, with the Islamic Republic of Iran. In that regard, we call on Iran to reverse all activities undertaken recently that could contravene the provisions of the JCPOA, which must be pursued in good faith by all parties. My delegation echoes the Secretary-General's call, on humanitarian grounds, to alleviate all unilateral economic measures that could prevent Iran from mobilizing the means to fight the coronavirus disease pandemic. It is therefore urgent to take into account the current situation in the Persian Gulf region. If adequate measures are not envisaged, it could compound today's difficulties and could have unforeseeable consequences with incalculable implications for international peace and security.
