Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for having
organized this very timely debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, Mr. Smail
Chergui, for their briefings and for their personal
commitment to fostering strong relations between their
two organizations, which is a top priority for France.
I would also like to warmly welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Senegal, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye. I
would like to highlight three points.

First of all, France warmly welcomes the firm
commitment of African countries and organizations
to the peace and security of the continent. That
commitment is evident in the participation of African
States in peacekeeping operations, in which they have
been among the top contributors of both military and
police personnel. Indeed, some African States have
taken the decision to increase their participation, and
France welcomes their initiative.

The African commitment to peace and security on
the continent is also reflected in the operations under
the auspices of the African Union. That is definitely
the case for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Multinational Joint Task Force
fighting Boko Haram today, but we have also seen,
in past years, the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali and the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic. In
the Gulf of Guinea, the countries of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States have joined
forces to combat the resurgence of maritime piracy. For
the continent as a whole, the operationalization of the
African Standby Force is a positive development that
provides significant opportunities.

Today it is the countries of the Group of Five (G-5)
for the Sahel that are showing their willingness to be
fully engaged in the fight against terrorist groups that
destabilize the region. That strong commitment is to be
welcomed and encouraged, and is the goal of resolution
2359 (2017), adopted by the Council on 21 June.

Secondly, against that backdrop of progress, France
fully supports the African continent's commitment to
peace and security. The Ten-Year Capacity Building
Programme for the African Union reflects Africa's
commitment, which France fully supports.

At the bilateral level, France is one of the leading
partners of African countries on issues of peace and
security. In that connection, France has contributed to
the training of more than 25,000 African soldiers per
year, officers and soldiers, in 11 African countries.
Those courses cover more than 57 different themes,
including peacekeeping, management training,
logistics, demining and maritime security. They are
priority courses offered through a network of 14
national schools with a regional focus, but also in
officer schools in France.

France also collaborates at the operational level
with a view to implementing partnership agreements.
France thereby supports our African partners in
peace operations and contributes to such operations
by providing training, but also by equipping African
contingents and supporting their operational
deployment. In the Sahel, French forces of Operation
Barkhane are fighting alongside the African and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali forces for the stability
of the region. In the Gulf of Guinea, in the framework
of Operation Corymbe, France supports the maritime
security efforts of the countries of the region.

Those efforts are intended to be carried out in
synergy with those being deployed by international
organizations, in particular the European Union.
In Mali, the Niger, the Central African Republic
and Somalia, the European Union is committed to
strengthening African peace and security capacities
through its European Union Military Training Mission
in the Central African Republic and European Union
Capacity Building Mission in Mali operations. The
European Union is also a major contributor to the
financing of African operations, such as AMISOM,
the Multinational Joint Task Force for the fight against
Boko Haram, and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

That support also includes promoting an integrated
approach to the stabilization and fostering sustainable
peace. In that connection, on 13 July, France, Germany
and the European Union launched the Alliance for
the Sahel, which promotes an integrated approach
to the region - focusing initially on security and
stabilization and then on medium- and long-term
development. Drawing on that experience, France calls
on the international community to maintain and bolster
its support for the continent.

Thirdly, the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union - which France firmly
believes must be strengthened - is now more than ever
a way to ensure African capacity-building in the area of
peace and security. Over the past few months, there has
been growing momentum in pursuit of enhancing the
existing cooperation between the two organizations.
In that respect, I welcome the Secretary-General's
personal commitment to that process, particularly
through the partnership framework that he signed with
the African Union in April.

That momentum is necessary in a context where
African peace operations can have real comparative
advantages over those of the United Nations when they
contribute to the goals of the Charter of the United
Nations and build on its provisions. The reports of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/454) and the Chairperson
of the Commission of the African Union submitted in
accordance with resolution 2320 (2016) have provided
useful information on the progress that has been made
and the objectives still to be achieved. Their proposals
on mechanisms for deploying and financing African
peace operations deserve close, constructive and
collective examination from the perspective of current
reciprocal commitments. In that context, we welcome
the African Union's commitments, both with regard to
covering 25 per cent of the cost of its operations and
related aspects, such as their planning and conduct,
and with regard to training and supervision, including
through mechanisms for accountability and respect for
human rights on the part of the forces concerned. A
strengthened, dynamic dialogue will enable us to make
structural improvements to our common response
efforts. Next September's consultations in Addis
Ababa between the Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union will be an
important phase in that regard.

The development of African peace capacities is a
crucial factor for peace and stability on the continent
and therefore a priority area for us. France will continue
to play its full part in the efforts for security in Africa
in a spirit of dynamic partnership.

