Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Russian delegation for initiating this
formal meeting of the Security Council on the subject of
international terrorism. This meeting is a reflection of the
Council's serious concern about the increasing acts of
terrorism around the world, which have claimed many
innocent lives and caused so much destruction to property.

Because of the complex nature of terrorism, there has
been no international consensus on a definitive definition of
the term "terrorism". However, semantics aside, there is no
disagreement on the pernicious effects of terrorism, which
causes death, injuries and destruction to innocent civilians
and their property. This must be condemned in the strongest
terms by the international community. Whatever the
motivations of these terrorists, their actions cannot be
justified or rationalized away and must be resisted with the
determined and collective will of all civilized societies. This
meeting of the Council is a manifestation of this
determination and will.

Terrorism should be dealt with by the international
community with the severity it deserves. But it should also
be dealt with in a fair and objective manner. In this regard,
it is unfortunate that terrorism is sometimes associated or
identified with a particular group or groups of people. We
do not believe this stereotyping of terrorism is a
constructive way of creating a real understanding of the
subject and of combating the menace. Indeed, it creates an
opposite effect - a misunderstanding among peoples -
and hampers cooperation among nations in dealing with
the problem. The media, including the influential
entertainment media, have a particular role and
responsibility in this regard.

Terrorism must be recognized for what it is:
deliberate acts of violence with the intent to hurt, kill or
destroy innocent civilians, without scruples or mercy, for
purposes of coercion and intimidation, and serving the
particular objectives of the terrorists. These actions may
have been motivated or inspired by "higher principles",
but their commission in a cruel, ruthless manner against
innocent, defenceless civilians robs these acts of any
redeeming quality and must therefore be strongly
condemned. These acts have nothing to do with, nor do
they reflect, value systems of a particular group or groups
of people. They are acts of terrorism, pure and simple.
They could be committed by any other groups in the
misguided belief that terror is a justifiable instrument of
political action.

Terrorism is usually transboundary in character, and
therefore international. It poses a serious and complex
security challenge to the international community because
of its ability to create fear and intimidation, striking with
impunity wherever and whenever it chooses. To such
terrorists the entire world is a theatre of operation.
Malaysia condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and makes no excuses for them, whatever
the motivations of its perpetrators, when innocent civilians
are deliberately targeted as victims. That these acts may
be of a political character does not make them less
reprehensible.

While Malaysia is against terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, my delegation would like to recall the
Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary
of the United Nations, whose operative paragraph 1
reaffirmed

"the right of self-determination of all peoples,
taking into account the particular situation of
peoples under colonial or other forms of alien
domination or foreign occupation, and
[recognized] the right of peoples to take
legitimate action in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations to realize their
inalienable right of self-determination".

Therefore, it is pertinent that in defining the term
"terrorism", it must be differentiated from the legitimate

 

struggle of peoples under colonial or alien domination and
foreign occupation for self-determination and national
liberation, a process that many of the Member States of this
Organization have gone through themselves. However, this
does not justify the use of terrorist methods by any group.

Malaysia also fully endorses the position of the Non-
Aligned Movement, enunciated in the Durban Declaration,
that there is a need for international cooperation to combat
terrorism, and that this cooperation should be conducted in
conformity with the principles of the United Nations
Charter, international law and the relevant international
conventions. An important aspect of these international
principles and norms, of course, would be respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, which is the
very foundation of the United Nations. It is important that
all actions taken to prevent and suppress terrorism should
be predicated on the strict observance of these principles
and norms and are themselves lawful in nature. This is
imperative if the authorities of State security do not wish to
descend to the level of the terrorists themselves, for whom
the ends justify the means.

In this regard, I am grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Slovenia for having raised, inter alia, the
notion of proportionate response, which, in our view, is an
important concept to be borne in mind as Governments
grapple with the terrorist menace.

Malaysia strongly believes in the need for
internationally coordinated efforts, including strong
enforcement measures to combat the menace of terrorism.
We are gratified that there is increasing international
cooperation and coordination on this issue, and we welcome
the fact that many Member States have taken robust and
necessary measures to combat this scourge. For its part,
Malaysia has taken similar measures and has ratified a
number of international legal instruments relating to
terrorism. We are in the process of doing the same in
respect of the remaining instruments so that we can play
our full part in the global campaign against the menace.

My delegation supports the draft resolution before us.
We firmly believe that the Security Council should make its
definitive pronouncement on the issue of terrorism, which
affects international peace and security, and we commend
the work in this regard and which is currently being
discussed in the General Assembly.

