Mr. Konuzin (spoke in Russian): We are grateful
to Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and the Deputy
High Commissioner for Human Rights for the detailed
briefings they have given us on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The agreement between the parties to the conflict
and the establishment of the transitional Government
give us hope that this will help lead to a settlement in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to the
establishment of Government control throughout the
territory of the country, and to recovery for a country
that has suffered so greatly.

The information provided on the human rights
situation in the Congo is extremely disturbing. We
cannot read the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights about the events in
Drodro and the report of the special investigation team
on the events of Mambasa without feeling outrage.
These documents are comparable to accounts of the
most tragic events during the time of the Second World
War.

Today it has become quite clear that acts of
inhuman cruelty in Rwanda, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Sierra Leone and Liberia are a new
challenge to peace and security in Africa. Mass human
rights violations, violations of the norms of
international humanitarian law and inhumanity have all
become a constant and terrible feature of inter-African
conflict.

In early June, a Security Council mission visited
a number of States in Central Africa. We visited Bunia,
where we had a meeting with representatives of
international humanitarian organizations. Those
people - who are so truly committed, who are living
in the most dreadful conditions of civil war in the
Congo - said to us that they are able to operate only
within a radius of 200 metres. Every day they are
working to try to save people who are very close to that
invisible line dividing life from death. They asked us
what we could do to put an end to the carnage and to
ensure that crimes against humanity do not go
unpunished. We promised them that we would raise
this matter wherever we could. We did raise it in
Central Africa, and it was brought up constantly in the
very recent Security Council mission to West African
countries.

I would ask those who can do so to tell to the
humanitarian workers in the Congo and in other
African countries that we have stood by our promise to
raise this matter. But this in itself is not very much.
What is needed is action. We were disturbed that the
response to our appeal was less than what we might
have expected. We kept raising the matter of child
combatants. We raised this issue with heads of State,
members of Governments, leaders of armed groups and
factions. They all told us that they had absolutely
nothing to do with it. But nobody seemed particularly
willing to investigate and to try to put an end to the
phenomenon. At times, there was the impression that
we were talking about something that was not
particularly crucial, something almost immaterial. But,
there are child soldiers. We saw them. I myself saw 10-
year old boys with automatic guns in Bunia. Somebody
gave those boys guns. Somebody is commanding the
child soldiers.

In our opinion, we need concrete, coordinated
action in the subregion, on the ground. A major role
can be played by regional organizations: the African
Union, the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), ECOWAS and the Economic and Monetary
Community of Central Africa (CEMAC). It is
extremely important that the Africans themselves
become truly aware of the critical importance of this
problem and really try to eliminate it.

I would like to ask a question: what can be done
by African organizations to ensure the implementation
of international conventions and of their own
instruments on preventing mass human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law during the current conflicts in Africa? How can the
international community help them to do this?

