Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
briefing on this important subject, and I would like to begin
by commending Under-Secretary-General Vieira de Mello
for his comprehensive, informative and sober briefing on
the problems.

Most of the conflicts we are witnessing today in
various parts of the world involve internal struggles among
rival factions. Sadly, many of these conflicts involve gross
Violations of human rights, resulting in complex
humanitarian emergencies. Many conflicts are exacerbated
by policies of ethnic expulsion, exclusion or annihilation.

Civilians, including women, children and the elderly,
are increasingly becoming deliberate targets. Nine out of 10
casualties in these conflicts are non-combatants.
International humanitarian personnel sent to provide
assistance are no longer simply caught in the cross-fire; all
too often, they are targeted by participants in the fighting.

During the Security Council's discussion of
post-conflict peace-building on 29 December 1998, Council
President Buallay affirmed the Security Council's belief
that the quest for peace in Africa required
"a comprehensive, concerted and determined approach,
encompassing the eradication of poverty, the
promotion of democracy, sustainable development and
respect for human rights, as well as conflict
prevention and resolution, including peacekeeping, and
humanitarian assistance." (S/PV.396I, p. 2)

That comprehensive, coordinated approach should not
be limited to conflicts in Africa. The Council cannot ignore
the linkages inherent in today's complex humanitarian
emergencies. The Council should be kept regularly
informed of the humanitarian aspects of potential or actual
conflicts so that it has a comprehensive picture of the
problem and can determine the proper steps to take.

The Council should review ways to strengthen the
linkage between humanitarian action and the early
commencement of post-conflict integration, rehabilitation
and peace-building. In addition, the Council should lend
support to initiatives aimed at strengthening local and
national capacities for confronting humanitarian and human
rights crises.

Under-Secretary-General Vieira de Mello spoke today
of the need to coordinate humanitarian action with peace
and security concerns. We agree that such coordination
efforts should be focused on ensuring humanitarian access
to populations in need, guaranteeing the safety and
security of international humanitarian personnel and
improving the transition from international peacekeeping
to international peace-building.

In terms of ensuring humanitarian access to
populations suffering the impact of ongoing conflicts, it
is our view that the Security Council may wish to
consider developing a range of options to maintain law
and order and to create a secure environment for civilians,
including humanitarian workers, endangered by conflict.

With regard to the protection of international aid
workers, the United States welcomes the entry in effect
last week of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel. The United States is
pursuing ratification of that Convention, and we remain
interested in exploring an optional protocol to the
Convention to broaden its coverage to non-United Nations
humanitarian workers.

Where violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights pose a threat to international peace and
security, the Security Council should consider addressing
those situations with due regard to the roles and
responsibilities of other organizations of the United
Nations system.
The United States believes the Security Council
should review ways to ensure a smooth transition from
international peacekeeping to post-conflict peace-building.
We believe it would be desirable for the Secretary-
General to make recommendations to appropriate United
Nations agencies to assist in peace-building efforts as
peacekeeping operations are drawn down. We stress the
importance of a division of labour between peacekeeping
activities and longer-term peace-building programmes.
There is a need for closer cooperation and dialogue
between the Security Council and various bodies within
the United Nations system responsible for those
programmes.

It is critical that mechanisms exist on the ground to
provide for effective coordination between political and
military components of United Nations operations, as well
as with human rights and humanitarian components. The
United States welcomes the establishment by the
Secretary-General of the Executive Committee on Peace
and Security and the Executive Committee on
Humanitarian Affairs to better define the relationship
between the Special Representatives of the Secretary-

 

General, humanitarian coordinators and other components
of United Nations missions. The United States also would
like to reiterate its support for the work of the Emergency
Relief Coordinator and the members of the United Nations
Inter-Agency Standing Committee.

We support more frequent Council briefings by Under-
Secretary-General Vieira de Mello and other members of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. The Council must consider
humanitarian and human rights needs as part of an overall
strategy to restore peace and security to an area in crisis.

Before concluding, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Vieira de Mello once again for his
briefing and raise one specific issue which I hope he might
address prior to the conclusion of today's meeting. Given
the ongoing conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which has had such a widespread negative impact
upon the civilian population in the country, we would
welcome Mr. Vieira de Mello's comments and observations
concerning the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic and the possible role which the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs might play there.

