Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
presidency of the Council during the month of August.
I wish you and your delegation every success.

I would also like to start by welcoming the efforts
of the delegation of Malaysia to address the question of
children in armed conflict in the Security Council, as
well as the efforts deployed by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and Armed Conflict and by
UNICEF. I also welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General at our meeting today.

This month we are observing the twentieth
anniversary of the Graca Machel report (see A/51/306),
which initially prompted the Security Council to
set up the institutional and legal framework to
address the issue of children and armed conflict in
the Council and to provide them with the necessary
means of protection. The international community
succeeded in implementing the recommendations of
the report on child soldiers by entering into talks with
the Governments and non-governmental actors with
a View to releasing child soldiers and stressing the
need to include in most peace conventions provisions
for the reintegration of those children and for their
necessary care and protection, as well as the urgency
of the entry into force of the 2002 Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.

Despite all these achievements, we have
still not managed to fulfil most of the report's
recommendations. The international community must
review the recommendations, in particular those
relating to displaced and refugee children. Given the
shortage of financial resources available to carry out
the recommendations relating to the host States in
particular, much remains to be done with regard to
sexual exploitation and gender violence cases, as well
as the effects of sanctions regimes, health, nutrition,
psychological rehabilitation and education.

The responsibility for protecting civilians, in
particular children, rests first and foremost with States.
At the same time, Egypt emphasizes its full commitment
to the development of the children and armed conflict
issue in the Security Council, including improving the
institutional and legal framework aimed at providing
the necessary protection for children living in hotbeds
of tension and conflict.

During our presidency of the Council in May,
in cooperation with the delegations of Japan, New
Zealand, Uruguay and Spain, we managed to ensure
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) on
medical care in armed conflict with the sponsorship
of a large number of non-Council members. As
mentioned by Mr. Anthony Lake in his statement, that
resolution relates directly to the protection of children
in danger. Despite the effectiveness and efficiency
of the mechanisms set up by the United Nations to
monitor the violations against children in zones of
conflict, children continue to be subjected to the most
horrendous violations. In this connection, we wish to
emphasize the following points.

First, the limitation of human and material
resources represents a serious problem faced by
States during and after conflicts. The Office of the
Special Representative also suffers from a shortage
of resources. My delegation would like to underscore
that this hinders the reintegration of children released
by armed groups. Secondly, limiting the mission of
the established mechanisms to information-gathering
on the violations committed in hotbeds of tension and
conflict, the numbers of victims and the perpetrators
of those crimes and listing them in the annexes of the
reports makes those reports a mere means ofmonitoring
and fails to provide the necessary practical and realistic
means of protection for children - a task with which
they are mandated. Thirdly and lastly, it is important
to verify the sources of information contained in the
reports and not to restrict them to one party to the
conflict alone. We must avoid double standards and
contradictions between the body of the report and its
annexes in some cases.

