Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would
like to commend your delegation, Sir, for taking
the initiative of convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians and medical care in armed
conflict, and for submitting a concept note (S/2017/365, annex) on the topic.

We also take note of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/414) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and its recommendations.
Despite the important preventive and protection
efforts that have been undertaken at the national and
international levels, numerous challenges remain and
civilians continue to suffer in situations of armed
conflict. Azerbaijan strongly condemns all attacks
against civilians, including attacks against the wounded
and sick, medical and humanitarian personnel, hospitals,
other medical facilities and humanitarian convoys.
Efforts to prevent and resolve conflict and strengthen
respect for international law have acquired importance
today. As a matter of priority, special attention should
be given to the implementation of resolutions adopted
by the principal organs of the United Nations, in
particular those relating to the peaceful settlement of
disputes and conflict prevention and resolution.

Furthermore, the increasing brutality of armed
conflicts and the changing nature of warfare have
given rise to the need for greater measures for
protection, including with regard to the humanitarian
and medical mission. A critical element in that context
is accountability for enhancing compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Resolute and targeted measures are required to that
end. Such measures must be free of selectivity and
politically motivated approaches, however difficult
or even unrealistic that may seem. Impunity for the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community contributes to instability and prevents the
development of lasting solutions and the achievement
of sustainable peace.

When national authorities fail to take the necessary
steps to ensure accountability, the international
community, particularly the Security Council, should
play a more proactive role so as to ensure an appropriate
response, including through support for national
prosecutions, the establishment of ad hoc tribunals,
hybrid mechanisms, international commissions of
inquiry and fact-finding missions. It is important
that peace efforts never encourage, accept or tolerate
situations achieved through the unlawful use of force
and other egregious violations of international law,
such as war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide
and ethnic cleansing.

Special attention must be given to the protection
of civilians forced to leave their homes as a result
of armed conflict. Azerbaijan supports continuing
efforts to raise awareness of the problem of internal
displacement and the right of return at the national
and international levels. In that regard, we welcome
the call of the Secretary-General on Member States
to intensify efforts to tackle the root causes of forced
displacement by preventing and resolving conflicts and
strengthening respect for international law, including
in protracted conflict.

My country's familiarity with the suffering of
civilians in armed conflict is not based on hearsay. The
continuing aggression of Armenia against my country
has led to the temporary occupation of a significant
part of Azerbaijan's territory, including the Nagorno
Karabakh region, the seven adjacent districts and
some exclaves. The war has claimed the lives of tens of
thousands of people and ruined cities and livelihoods
in my country. Serious violations of international
humanitarian law amounting to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and acts of genocide were committed
by the Armenian side in the course of the aggression.
Such violations include, inter alia, deliberate attacks
against hospitals, schools, places of worship and
other civilian objects, the killing of civilians, the
taking and holding of hostages, the mistreatment and
summary execution of prisoners of war and hostages,
sexual violence, the extensive destruction of inhabited
areas and public and private property, pillaging and
forced displacement.

The impunity still enjoyed by the perpetrators of
the crimes committed in the course of the Armenian
aggression not only impedes progress in achieving
long-awaited peace and reconciliation between the
two countries, but also aggravates the already difficult
situation in the peace process. Moreover, despite the
formal ceasefire, deliberate attacks against Azerbaijani
civilians and civilian objects have become more frequent
and more violent in recent times. Azerbaijan will spare
no effort towards ending the unlawful occupation of
its territories, achieving the political settlement of the
conflict and ensuring peace and justice in the region.

In conclusion, we believe that it is essential that the
Security Council consistently maintain its focus on the
protection of civilians and systematically reiterate its
demand that all parties to armed conflict comply fully
with their obligations under international law.

The meeting rose at 5.25 pm.
