Mr. Ni'ifiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
It is a pleasure to see you, Mr. President, presiding
over the work of the Council for the month of May.

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts is
an issue of indisputable significance. At this meeting,
we would have preferred to have had this year's report
of the Secretary-General on the topic, which,
unfortunately, has still not been issued. The last report
(S/2010/579) has shortcomings that were pointed out at
the time by many countries, including the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. On this occasion, however, we
will have to restrict ourselves to making slightly more
general remarks.

Despite the effort made, there are still many
aspects to be clarified with regard to the protection of
civilians, such as, inter alia, who decides when there is
a need to protect; who decides that a State is not
protecting its population, and on what basis; who
determines the action to be taken, and under what
criteria; what are the limits for the duration; and how
to prevent the issue being used for the purposes of
intervention and interference.

The position of my delegation on the issue under
consideration is well known. As pointed out by
Comrade Fidel Castro, the historical position of the
Cuban revolution, which always opposed actions that
threatened the lives of civilians, is also known. The
obligation and responsibility of States to promote and
to protect all rights of their population are beyond
doubt.

Cuba denounces measures that violate the
sovereignty of States, the Charter of the United Nations
and international law being taken under the cloak of
humanitarian protection. We oppose the death of
innocent people, whatever the circumstance and place,
as we categorically condemn aggression under
whatever garb its hides.

Despite all the efforts made by the United
Nations, including the sincere and selfless effort of
many members of this Security Council, a great
number of civilians continue to suffer throughout the
world. The steps taken to date have not produced the
desired results or allowed the addressing, as a whole,
of all the implications of attacks on civilians and their
consequences for international peace and security,
including their humanitarian consequences.

The fact is simply that some have tried to ignore
that respect for the sovereignty of States is the
cornerstone of international relations and that it can in
no way be disregarded or undermined. If the United
Nations has not been able to fully play its role in
assisting and protecting the millions of people in need
around the world, especially in underdeveloped
countries, it is because of the lack of political will in
the Organization, as demonstrated by those who have
imposed an unjust and inequitable international
economic order.

If the Organization has often not been able to act
as it should in many situations, it is because of the
selectivity and double standards to which it has been
subjected and because the resources for development
needed by most of its Members are increasingly
limited, despite the fact that underdevelopment
problems are among the root causes of many conflicts,
as stated in the Council in February (see S/PV.6479). It
is because of the distortions in the work of some of its
organs, in particular the Security Council, to the
detriment to the General Assembly.

We must recognize that no legal provisions exist
by which to justify the legal nature of an intervention
on the basis of humanitarian reasons or pretexts. The
Security Council would have to undergo profound
reforms, including in its membership and working
methods, to ensure that any civilian protection actions
taken would be non-abusive and non-selective.

The necessary consent of a State for any measure
proposed in relation to its civilian population is an
inviolable principle that must be fully respected.
Otherwise, as has often been the case, we would run
the risk of engaging in actual military interventions in
internal conflicts and in regrettable civil wars, with the
supposed consent of the United Nations. In that regard,
it is essential that the role of approved peacekeeping
missions in protecting civilians be duly clarified from
the beginning.

Lastly, it is imperative to permanently stamp out
as well the dual morality and double standards
exemplified by some Governments with regard to the
protection of civilians. A mission as noble and
commendable as that of protecting civilians cannot be
invoked as a pretext for achieving spurious political
and economic objectives, as has been the case with the
implementation of resolution 1973 (2011), which was
imposed on the Security Council on 17 March and
which provides a clear example of this. Nothing in the
resolution authorizes, under the pretext of humanitarian
actions or protecting civilians, the bombing of cities or
populated areas resulting in the death of more innocent
civilians, the destruction of schools, homes and
hospitals and further suffering of the civilian
population.

How can indiscriminate bombing, the use of
sophisticated weapons and aircraft and the death of
innocent people, including children, under the pretext
of protecting other equally innocent civilians, be
justified? The United Nations has made no statements
whatsoever regarding the protection of the civilian
victims of NATO's aggression against a sovereign
country. The silence of the Organization in the face of
the murder of innocent people, including women and
children, perpetrated by the foreign troops attacking
that country, is outrageous.

How can we understand the inaction and
dysfunction of the Security Council in the face of the
death of innocent Palestinian civilians, who themselves
have even fallen victim to the excessive and
indiscriminate use of force?

