Mr. Tileuberdi (Kazakhstan): We highly appreciate
the comprehensive update by Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Jan Kubis. Kazakhstan values
highly the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq aimed at promoting political dialogue
and reconciliation. We also appreciate the efforts of
the entire United Nations system aimed at providing
critical services to the population of Iraq.

We welcome the initiative of the State of Kuwait
aimed at providing financial assistance for the post-
war regional reconstruction in Iraq. In this context,
Kazakhstan welcomed the holding in Kuwait of the
International Conference for the Reconstruction of
Iraq following its liberation from the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) from 12 to 14 February.
The international community's generous financial
pledges and contributions at that conference, designed
to rebuild Iraq, gives us hope for a better future for the
Iraqi people, who survived terrible adversity during the
recent war.

We support the decision of the Iraqi Government
to hold national and provincial council elections on
12 May, which will help democracy, State-building
processes, consolidation of the Constitution and the
introduction of reforms by fully including all ethnic
and religious groups, especially those in the northern
regions of the country. Indeed, reducing violence in the
liberated territories is very significant politically. At
the same time, we call for the participation of all Iraqi
citizens in determining the future of their country,
particularly in the forthcoming parliamentary electoral
campaign and the elections that will follow.

Kazakhstan welcomes the inter-Iraqi agreements to
extend the ceasefire regime until the parties agree on
the joint management of disputed territories, including
border points. We trust that the Government and the
local authorities located in the northern part of the
country will conduct a constructive dialogue that rejects
military action. We stand for more meetings, such as the
one held on 20 January between Haider Al Abadi, Prime
Minister of Iraq, and Nechirvan Barzani, head of the
Regional Government of Iraqi Kurdistan. We consider
very useful and timely the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General's meetings in January and February
with political leaders in Baghdad and Erbil in order to
bring the positions of the parties closer.

We are heartened to learn that civilian returns
to Iraq's newly accessible areas continue to increase
since the conclusion of major counter-ISIL military
operations late last year. We are pleased that Mosul, Tal
Afar, Al-Hawija, Akashat, Al-Qaim and Rawah were
liberated from the Islamic State, while western Anbar
province will come completely under Government
control. These trends indicate the need for the counter-
terrorism mechanisms in Iraq to be enhanced and for
security measures at the borders to be strengthened. We
consider it expedient that, under the leadership of an ad
hoc committee headed by the Prime Minister of Iraq,
the transfer of all weapons arsenals of various small
tribes and other armed groups operating internally
in the country be organized. Accordingly, it is
necessary to disband all armed groups so as to prevent
further internal political conflicts and favour a move
towards stability.

Lastly, we must unhesitatingly endorse and mobilize
support for Special Representative's commitment to
engaging with all sectors and communities of Iraqi
society in order to advance inclusive political dialogue
even further. Finally, we also need to improve the
delivery of public services, laying the foundations for
Statehood, peace, progress and national development in
a post-1S1L Iraq.

