Mr. llkin (Turkey): Turkey is deeply concerned
by the proliferation of acts of piracy and armed robbery
at sea off the coast of Somalia, which have recently
spread to a much larger area.

So far, two Turkish commercial vessels have been
hijacked and both are still being held hostage by the
pirates. We are worried about the safety and well-being
of the crew of these ships, as well as those of all other
hijacked vessels. We condemn all these barbaric acts,
which pose a serious threat not only to international
maritime safety, but also to the prompt, safe and
effective delivery of humanitarian aid to Somalia.

We are aware that we may not be able to totally
eradicate piracy until and unless the prevailing
conditions in Somalia improve drastically, yet we
cannot remain idle until that is achieved. We have to
suppress piracy and armed robbery as much as we can
to create a synergy among all countries and regional
and international actors concerned and by addressing
all dimensions of the problem, including the legal
dimension.

Turkey closely follows and supports all initiatives
to this end. Turkey has allocated a frigate to the
standing NATO maritime group and it has also been
invited to force-generation consultations for the
European Union Operation, Atalanta.

Turkey fully recognizes the need for robust
international cooperation, and we are pleased to see
that the Council is actively seized of the matter. In this
regard, the adoption of resolutions 1846 (2008) and
1856 (2008) reflect the determination of the United
Nations and the Security Council to take the lead on
this critical issue. These two resolutions, along with
previous ones, will help clear up the ambiguities
around the interdiction and prosecution of pirates and
the related legal and procedural challenges that
undermine international efforts to suppress piracy.
They provide clear guidelines to be followed.

Today's resolution encourages, inter alia, all
States and regional organizations fighting piracy off
the coast of Somalia to establish an international

cooperation mechanism to act as a common point of
contact between States and regional and international
organizations on all aspects of combating piracy. We
believe that the United Nations itself should assume
overall responsibility for guiding and coordinating all
these operations. In this framework, we welcome the
announcement by the Secretary-General on the
appointment of a focal point as an initial step.

Acts of piracy and armed robbery in the waters
off the coast of Somalia further aggravate the situation
in that country, which continues to constitute a threat to
international peace and security in the region. A lasting
solution to the problem can be found only if anti-piracy
efforts are complemented by concrete policies and
measures that will contribute to the establishment of
law and order as well as sustained economic
development in Somalia. In that regard, we commend
the cooperative attitude displayed by the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia. Nevertheless, the
ongoing efforts at the national level should be
intensified.

Let me also add that, while taking the measures
necessary to combat piracy, we must also start thinking
about how the hostages currently held by pirates in
Somalia can be liberated. An effective remedy in this
regard would also help break the vicious cycle of
ransom payments and piracy.

In conclusion, I would like to say that, as an
elected Member State which is going to take its place
in the Security Council in two weeks' time, Turkey will
continue to closely follow and remain seized of the
matter.

