Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important meeting
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). This
meeting is of particular importance given the threat
represented by the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction, their components and delivery systems by
terrorist groups.

The worst violations of resolution 1540 (2004)
today are the insistence of certain countries and
certain intelligence services on supporting and training
terrorist groups, even going so far as to provide them
with toxic chemical weapons that are then used against
both the military and civilians. The representatives of
those same countries are seeking to deviate today's
meeting from its goals by raising topics that are not on
the agenda, in order to impede our efforts and prevent
the Security Council from holding a genuine, serious
debate on the implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004).

In that regard, we would like to recall that it is those
countries that opposed the draft resolution (S/2016/847)
submitted by Russia and China aimed at impeding the
acquisition of chemical weapons by terrorist groups in
Syria and Iraq. It is those same countries that opposed
the efforts and attempts to make the Middle East a
zone free of weapons of mass destruction; they did that
for the sole purpose of protecting Israel's chemical,
biological and nuclear arsenal.

The Israeli representative made a statement that
included a tangle of baseless accusations and lies. It
is almost comical, even pitiful, that the members of
the international community must sit in the Council
Chamber and listen to such allegations and lies
coming from a representative of an occupying Power
that continues to occupy Arab territories and support
terrorists groups, in particular the Al-Nusra Front,
in the area of separation. That country has a nuclear,
biological and chemical weapons arsenal, with the
consent and protection of Western countries that are
permanent members of the Council.

The support that Israel provides to terrorist groups
in Syria has been proved by the extensive evidence that
we have provided to the Council. For those who are still
doubtful, I encourage them to read the report published
by The Wall Street Journal on 19 June 2017, which is
punctuated by terrorist confessions.

My Government has for some time and in a
consistent manner warned of the danger of terrorist
groups acquiring weapons of mass destruction, in
particular Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida. To
date, we have sent more than 108 letters to the Council, to
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to the Joint Investigative Mechanism and to all
of the relevant committees and bodies of the Security
Council. Our letters include documented information
implicating countries that have provided such chemical
products as chlorine, mustard gas and sarin gas to
terrorist groups to be used against civilians.

I would also like to say that Turkish intelligence
service transferred sarin gas to terrorist groups in
Syria after the product arrived from Libya in 2013. The
regime of President Erdogan facilitates the transfer of
such substances to Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist groups in Syria, and that is a flagrant violation
of the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004).

My country is still waiting for the bodies and
special mechanisms of the United Nations to react to
that information and to treat it with the seriousness it
deserves. We are also waiting for that information to
be reflected in the reports on chemical weapons and
their use by terrorist groups. This is no longer a matter
of merely making a statement in international forums.
Such chemical weapons are in the hands of terrorists and
are being used in many regions of Syria, most recently
in Khan Shaykhun. The attacks were premeditated and
were driven by regional and international forces in
order to tarnish the image of Syria and to justify attacks
against the Syrian forces who are fighting terrorism.

The accusations and allegations that we have heard
over the past two days from Western representatives,
as well as from the persons representing those
countries today, all of those declarations are part of
the political blackmail war - the very low war 4 that
now systematically accompanies every success of
the Syrian army and its allies as they fight terrorism.
Those lies are also being systematically presented in
the negotiations among various Syrian parties, both
in Astana and Geneva, in order to impede the efforts
made by the Syrian Government to arrive at a political
solution without outside interference.

We have a consistent position of principle. We
condemn the use of chemical weapons and any and
all weapons of mass destruction. Their use is a crime
against humanity that is unacceptable, immoral
and unjustifiable, regardless of the surrounding
circumstances. On that basis, my country ratified the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, and we have implemented
all of our commitments. My country ended its
chemical-weapons programme in record time, which
is unprecedented in the history of the Organization.
That achievement was noted in the report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Mission for the Elimination of
the Chemical Weapons Programme of the Syrian Arab
Republic and was brought to the attention of the Council
in June 2014.

In conclusion, my country has always rejected
all allegations by certain Western Administrations
concerning the use of chemical and toxic weapons by
the Syrian armed forces. In line with our commitments,
we have fully cooperated within the framework of the
investigation carried out by international bodies since
2014. We have provided all the needed information in
order to facilitate the investigation and ensure that it is
credible and impartial. However, some Members of this
Organization will never tell the truth, for reasons that
are well known to Council members.

