The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom, and, in that capacity, fully associate my
delegation with the statement to be made by the
Ambassador of the Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union and the candidate countries.

As all speakers so far this morning have
underlined, the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) is as important today as when it
started. We have been reminded of numerous and
repeated examples of the scourge of terrorism in recent
weeks. Terrorism knows no boundaries and respects no
political point of view. Against that backdrop, the
persistent efforts of the CTC and of United Nations
Member States remain crucial, we are convinced.

My delegation is particularly grateful to
Ambassador Denisov for his work. Not all of it will be
apparent to colleagues or others in the Chamber; he has
done a great deal behind the scenes on behalf of the
Committee. Since this is quite likely to be the only
open meeting of the Council in which he speaks as
CTC Chairman, I should like to thank him very warmly
for his personal contribution and that of his delegation
to keeping the CTC working efficiently in a period of
change.

It is also good that we have with us Ambassador
Ruperez, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate. We very much welcome his
efforts and those of his team to prepare the work and
the functioning of the CTED, and, like others, we look
forward to seeing it up and running as soon as possible.

The CTC continues to work on two priority areas:
first, promoting ratification of the international
conventions and, secondly, encouraging and assisting
States with the domestic implementation of measures
to combat terrorism.

The measure of the success of the Committee is
not how many reports are written, or even whether they
are written. The measure of success is, of course,
effective steps taken on the ground that make it more
difficult for terrorists to operate. But the problem is
that, without reports from States, the Committee will
not know whether we all are taking the necessary steps
or not. So, recognizing the difficulties some States
have in producing reports, my delegation nevertheless
calls on all States that have missed a deadline for
replying to the Committee to reply quickly. I call on
them also to let the Committee know of any problems
they are facing in meeting those deadlines and any
problems they are facing in putting in place counter-
terrorism measures domestically.

The Committee, we know, is as keen as ever to
help all States tackle terrorism. If that includes
difficulties in reporting, I hope that the CTC can assist.

Its assistance will soon include visits by the
Committee to States to offer assistance and to assess
whether that assistance would be beneficial to support
implementation on the ground that meets the standards
that the United Nations has called for. We look forward
to the early start of such visits and hope that they will
both help States to overcome their difficulties in
implementing counter-terrorism measures and
contribute to ever-more-effective barriers to terrorist
activity.

On 8 October, the Council adopted resolution
1566 (2004). That important resolution, among other
points, makes clear the Council's wish that the CTED
should start work as soon as possible. It also asks the
CTC to prepare a set of best practices for States in a
particular area of concern - terrorist financing - and
we look forward to participating in that work.

Finally, I would like to say that we also support
the call in resolution 1566 (2004) for enhanced
cooperation between the three Security Council
Committees that are tackling terrorism: the CTC, the
Committee on Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions created
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1267 (1999)
and the Committee created pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). The quite separate, new Security Council
working group to be set up in accordance with
resolution 1566 (2004) will no doubt also want to
remain in close contact with the existing Committees
and to draw on their expertise.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I would like to explain that as another measure to
optimize the use of our time, in order to allow as many
delegations to take the floor as possible this morning, I
will not individually invite speakers to take seats at the
table and invite them to resume their seats on the side.
Rather, when a speaker is taking the floor, the
Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table, as they have already done.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Japan.

