Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Lacroix; Her Excellency Ms. Joanna
Wronecka; and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, for their valuable briefings. We pay
tribute to the commitment of each one of them to the
promotion of peace, justice and development in South
Sudan.

It has been little over three months since the parties
to the conflict in South Sudan signed the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. Since the signing, we have
been able to welcome some important developments. In
particular, we welcome the convening of pre-transitional
committees and mechanisms and the implementation of
confidence-building measures, such as joint field visits
and the release of some political prisoners. However, as
stated many times, the strength of a peace agreement
will be determined by its ability to deliver safety and
stability to the people of South Sudan. In that context,
we are concerned by the continuing ceasefire violations,
in particular around greater Baggari. In addition, the
recent attacks on civilians near Bentiu, where at least
125 women, including elderly and pregnant women and
minors, were raped within the space of one week, were
cowardly and horrendous.

These events represent a serious setback to the
peace process and demonstrate the ongoing need for
further progress on the following three points: first,
full implementation of the Peace Agreement; secondly,
accountability; and, thirdly, priority for the protection
of civilians by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS).

My first point is about the need for the full
implementation of the peace agreement. That is the
only sustainable way to protect the people of South
Sudan, but as deadlines are slipping by, continued
action is necessary to maintain the existing momentum.
We therefore call for an immediate stop to the ongoing
fighting, the finalization of negotiations for the
transitional security arrangements and a greater effort
to reach the 35-per cent quota for women's participation.
We also call on all sides to facilitate, and not frustrate,
humanitarian access and put an end to the bureaucratic
impediments that humanitarian actors currently face.

In addition, we look to the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to continue to
demonstrate leadership and unite the international
community in order to provide the necessary support
and pressure needed during the implementation process.
The United Nations, the African Union, the African
Union High-level Ad Hoc Committee for South Sudan
and the European Union have stated their commitment
to supporting the process, and we sincerely hope IGAD
will seize that opportunity.

My second point is about the need for accountability.
There is a clear need to show that there are consequences
for those who continue to attack civilians, commit sexual
violence or violate human rights. It is the responsibilities
of the parties, in particular the Government of South
Sudan, to show leadership on that issue. That includes
holding perpetrators accountable and making concrete
progress towards the implementation of all of the chapter
V provisions of the Peace Agreement. In particular,
the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing
and the Hybrid Court for South Sudan are essential to
guaranteeing justice and reconciliation. At the same
time, we all have a responsibility to do what we can to
deter such heinous crimes. We remind everyone that the
Council has decided on a specific designation criterion
for sexual Violence, and we reaffirm the readiness of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands to act on that criterion.

That brings me to my third point, concerning
the ongoing need for the protection of civilians by
UNMISS. The ongoing sexual violence is a painful
reminder that UNMISS remains the primary source
of protection for the people of South Sudan. It also
demonstrates the importance of a robust, nimble and
forward-leaning presence by UNMISS outside the
protection-of-civilians sites. Equally important is close
coordination on security issues among UNMISS and
humanitarian actors and local communities, especially
women. The Kingdom of the Netherlands invites the
Secretary-General to proactively and consistently share
with the Council the steps that the Mission continues
to take to implement and sustain the lessons on those
issues.

In conclusion, an even greater, sustained and united
effort by all of us is necessary, but in the end, only the
leaders of South Sudan determine whether there will
be sustainable peace in the country. They told us that
they are serious about peace, and now we ask them to
show us.

