Mr. Nsanze (Burundi) (interpretation from French):
A century will soon have passed since the opening of
relations between Burundi and Germany. To this day,
they have not been clouded in any way, and we are
gratified by that. Even if a Persian proverb states that
politeness benefits more the person who extends it than
the person who receives it, your exquisite courtesy and
your diplomatic professionalism warrant our admiration,
and we are delighted to see you presiding over this organ.

During the month of July, Ambassador Alain
Dejammet presided over the work of the Security
Council. Aware as I am of his great modesty, and as he
is not here now, I welcome the opportunity to commend
him and his delegation for the skilful and realistic way in
which they carried out their mandate, reflecting the very
intelligent policies of France.

After the new regime came to power, a summit held
at Arusha by the countries of the Great Lakes region
decreed general economic sanctions against Burundi. That
is the main reason for the request addressed to the
President of the Security Council on 25 August 1996 for
the convening of an urgent meeting of the Security
Council on this matter.

The delegation of Burundi, for the purposes of the
Security Council, must highlight the main factors
militating against this overall strangulation, to the
detriment of an innocent people. This statement will
address four factors: first, the national imperatives in
favour of a change in government; secondly, the haste to
use coercive measures; thirdly, the clear illegality and
immorality of the economic embargo; and, fourthly and

 
lastly, the devastating consequences for the people of
Burundi.

First I shall outline the particulars of national
imperatives favouring the changes that took place on
25 July 1996.

Over the last three years, a coalition of global
dimensions emerged with a view to averting a genocide in
Burundi similar to or on the pattern of the one that befell
Rwanda. In order to save Burundi from this disaster, the
Security Council made enormous efforts. The Secretary-
General envisaged various alternatives. The Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the European Union mobilized
great human, diplomatic and financial resources. Non-
governmental, intergovernmental and humanitarian
organizations made efforts and provided means, and the
international media kept world public opinion constantly
alert to the apocalyptic danger to the survival of the people
of Burundi. In spite of this worldwide crusade, the country
moved inexorably towards the feared apocalypse, and the
former regime proved powerless to save a nation in peril.
The daily massacres taking place under the very eyes of
that paralysed power were testimony of this.

If democracy can be understood as government for the
well-being of the people, the former system had failed
completely in its primary mission: to save the people from
extermination. This sad reality was often evoked in a series
of reports by the Secretary-General, including the most
recent, S/1996/660 of 15 August 1996, which deals mainly
with the state of affairs before the fateful date of
25 July 1996.

In the face of a tragedy as explosive as ours, there was
desperation in all quarters over the possibility of saving our
shipwrecked nation. The President having abdicated and his
Prime Minister having been forced to follow in his wake,
a headless State resulted. Here I refer again to page 4 of
the report of the Secretary-General of 15 August. The
emergence of the new regime responded to paramount
national imperatives. Should the new and august assembly
embrace the defenders of a regime that not only had failed
but was unable to save an entire people in the pit of hell
and implacably condemned to genocide?

A legitimate and an inevitable question arose: is it
reasonable and responsible to support a political system
when a population is being decimated day by day? Is that
system still a democracy? The Government before 25 July
1996 had not resulted from elections; it was merely the
outcome of the Convention on Governance concluded by 12

 
political parties; it was called upon to govern the State of
Burundi during a transitional period, since it was
impossible for the victorious party to govern alone
because of the genocide attributed to its members in
1993-1994, as can be seen from the report of the
International Commission of Inquiry.

Would it really have been politically wise to allow
Burundi to succumb to total and definitive implosion
under a democracy that had become but a shadow of its
former self, or was it imperative to throw a life-line to the
people of Burundi? The latter alternative proved necessary
in order to avoid genocide and to provide a powerful
springboard to a new democratic process. Would it really
have been sound to accommodate a Government doomed
to reign over the ruins or the ashes of a nation?

Secondly, there is the haste of coercive measures. At
the moment, the motives of our neighbouring countries
remain unknown and, at best, are open to interpretation.
However stealthily they are concealed, the measures taken
against Burundi have been dictated by unavowed
objectives. A minimum of realism and political wisdom
requires that we allow the new regime to succeed or fail
in its own development towards elective democracy, as
has been the case in countries of the region and
throughout the world. In the governmental programme,
President Pierre Buyoya has already solemnly and
explicitly committed the new regime to putting an end to
all forms of violence and criminality, working for peace
and lasting security, eradicating impunity, spawning a
new democratic process and confirming the mission
conferred upon Mwalimu Julius Nyerere in his mediation
aimed at bringing the different parties to the conflict
together at the negotiating table.

Towards that end, President Buyoya has personally
carried out two visits in three weeks to President Nyerere
in order to urge him to reactivate his mission. Along the
same lines, Burundi has proposed the convening and
holding of a regional summit devoted to the overall crisis.
It has begun talks even with the armed factions that are
determined to lay down their weapons and to divorce
themselves from Nazi ideologies of extermination and
genocide. In keeping with this new political and
democratic dynamic, consultations are already under way
with a view to the establishment of a transitional national
assembly. All the deputies of the former National
Assembly will be members, together with certain
representatives of civil society and of other socio-political
sectors, with a view to adapting the Parliament to national
realities. This new assembly will be convened in a regular

 
session in the month of October. In the same context, the
national debate that both Burundi and the Security Council
have fervently called for is scheduled for the month of
November. As for political parties, a new law and other
mechanisms will be specifically studied and decided upon
by that national assembly.

Given this impressive series of measures taken in
record time and aimed at preventing genocide and
strengthening the chances of genuine pluralistic democracy,
we can well wonder about the sense of these hasty coercive
measures. Undoubtedly, under the influence of the
economic blockade under way - which is already a
nightmare for the nation of Burundi - certain actors are
trying to level another mortal blow: a coup de grace
intended to deprive Burundi by an arms embargo, of the
shield normally provided by the national army, as though
the economic blockade were not overwhelming enough.
Such a development would place the population in the
hands of armed terrorists of all types, who, skilled in
lawlessness and in clandestine behaviour, would not submit
to any prohibition on weapons.

This measure would be a great boon for them, because
it would make it impossible for the Government to equip
itself for the benefit of all the people of Burundi. Burundi,
however, proposes that the Security Council consider a
more realistic, more constructive and more productive
alternative. From this perspective, a diplomatic dynamic
involving an ad hoc mission to the States of the Great
Lakes region, including Burundi, would make it possible for
the Security Council better to understand the ins and outs
of the overall problem. The facts having been provided by
the source itself, it would be infinitely easier for the
Security Council to provide solutions based on existing
realities.

There is a strange reasoning that upholds the economic
blockade as a way to force the political actors to negotiate.
This pretext cannot stand, since the new regime has, from
the very beginning, publicly asked that dialogue be
organized between all groups, including the armed factions,
as long as they renounce the repugnant practices of
violence, extermination and genocide.

In spite of the standstill, and even setbacks, in the
negotiations under the former Government, no embargo was
imposed on it. Is it therefore conceivable that the fact that
it was impossible to resolve the conflict under the former
Government is being blamed on a regime which is resolved
and able to remedy the failings of the former governmental
group?

 
Is it logically and politically justifiable that the new
regime be forced to atone for the sins committed by
political leaders deposed for having failed at their national
mandate? It is important for the Security Council to
consider whether the hasty economic sanctions are well
founded. Even if the actors involved in our region had
doubts as to the true intentions of the new Burundian
authorities, the negotiations required a minimum period of
time devoted to specifying negotiable points, to approving
an agenda, to determining practical modalities, to
identifying negotiators and to the forming of the
delegations of the various groups that are parties to the
conflict. The result is that the true motives that inspired
the initial and principal authors of this extreme
punishment against Burundi have nothing to do with the
well-being of Burundi's people. Onus probandi incumbit
actori: the burden of proof rests on he who makes a legal
or material allegation. In this case, the obligation to prove
that the regime currently in place is not really aiming for
a general improvement of the socio-political landscape
falls to the authors of the economic embargo against
Burundi.

Thirdly, as regards the clear illegality and immorality
of the economic blockade against Burundi, an utterly
specious interpretation tends to support the thesis
according to which each State is authorized to exercise
the discretionary right to decree measures such as those
that have now been decided upon against Burundi. Such
an idea confuses the ability to accept or refuse economic
relations between States with the right to inflict on third
States arbitrary coercive measures. International law
explicitly and strongly prohibits giving one State the right
to determine the life or death of another. According to
this thesis, no State is legally authorized to block or to
reroute cargo or merchandise from and/or to third States.
In application of this rule of international law, while they
are not obliged to do business or to communicate with
our country, Burundi's neighbours are in no way
authorized to confiscate or to intercept its merchandise
ordered by or destined for other countries. They do so at
the risk of committing interference in its internal affairs,
in flagrant violation of inter-State conventions and
treaties.

At this point, may I cite an article by a professor at
Brussels University that appeared in Libre Belgique today,
28 August. It states, "In fact, this measure is politically
laughable." This embargo is politically laughable,
according to Professor Eric David, a specialist in
international law at the Universite Libre of Brussels, since
it is being imposed on Burundi because Burundi has not

 
been democratic since three weeks ago. From a legal
standpoint, this embargo is a form of intervention in
Burundi's internal affairs, a type of intervention that has
been prohibited since the 1970s by the United Nations. The
Professor explains that the United Nations could transgress
this prohibition if the country targeted by intervention had
been officially classified as a threat to international peace
and security. Yet Burundi has not committed such a crime,
as I will prove in a moment by referring to the Charters of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and of the United
Nations.

As will be shown, the Charter of the United Nations
is gravely violated by the ordering of economic sanctions
against Burundi. Indeed, judging by their nature and their
excessive gravity, they are identical to those stipulated in
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. Under the terms
of Article 39 of the Charter, such sanctions can be imposed
on a Member State of the Organization only when such a
State has been guilty of a grave threat to the peace, a
breach of peace or an act of aggression. The breaking of
economic relations and the interruption of various forms of
communication by virtue of Article 41 of the Charter are in
no way justified in the case of our country, since it has not
attacked any other State or threatened the peace anywhere
in the region that has saddled it with sanctions.

Even supposing that a country deserved the economic
sanctions recommended in Article 41 of the Charter, their
imposition requires prior authorization by the Security
Council, under the terms of Article 53 of the Charter. I
quote:

"no enforcement action shall be taken under regional
arrangements or by regional agencies without the
authorization of the Security Council".

An exception is made in the case of a State that was an
enemy of the signatories of the Charter. But as Burundi was
not yet a sovereign State during the Second World War, it
was not an enemy to any signatory of the Charter.

Fourthly, as regards the pervasive disillusionment over
the well-foundedness of neighbourliness and natural
solidarity, under the pretext that these sanctions are decreed
by Africans, and thus by brothers and neighbours of
Burundi to boot, some States are tempted either to resign
themselves to a fait accompli or to take a wait-and-see
approach. Either position is a failure to live up to the
responsibilities devolved to the Security Council.

 

The omnipresent thesis that this economic blockade
is all the more outrageous, disturbing and unforgivable
because it comes from Africans, brothers and neighbours,
is eminently plausible. Such a vision is as sound as it is
rational, for these brothers and neighbours should have
been the first to show their eagerness to care for and their
solidarity with a full-fledged member of their regional
family - in short, to try to bind the wounds of Burundi
in such trying times. If the situation were reversed,
Burundi would find it eternally repugnant to take
advantage of the misfortunes and trials of a brotherly
African people, whether near or far, to declare economic
war.

There are many factors to support the thesis that the
economic embargo against Burundi can be described only
as economic aggression. A grave attack on peace, as
specified in Article 39 of the Charter, is in evidence. It is
up to the Security Council, if it is not to fail in its role, to
fully exercise the responsibility assigned to it under
Article 24, paragraph 1, of the Charter, that of the
"maintenance of international peace and security". By
virtue of legal logic, and under the terms of international
law, the measures contained in Article 41 of the Charter
should be reversed, because they are, on the contrary,
deserved by the countries having initiated the blockade
against a State that is innocent from every point of view,
according to the spirit and the letter of Article 39 of the
Charter.

The Convention on the Law of the Sea has also been
violated, since it stipulates the right of States to passage
through the territorial waters of coastal States. That same
Convention also stipulates, in part X, articles 124 through
132, the right of land-locked States to access to and from
the sea and freedom of transit.

Fifthly, and lastly, we have the cruel consequences
of the economic blockade on the entire people of Burundi.

Before the new regime came to power, many
political and humanitarian initiatives were being taken in
our region at the governmental level, as well as by
facilitators, in order to save the people of Burundi from
the disaster of genocide. Since the assumption of power
by a Government that is infinitely more able to work
towards saving the nation, and therefore to dispel the
sense of impending danger, those same actors in the
region have been joining together to decree collective
death for the Burundi people. How can we understand this
colossal and alarming paradox? Yesterday, the prevention
of genocide was the priority objective of those States and

 

other main actors. What we are talking about is the
difference between genocide by firearms and hand-to-hand
weapons and possible genocide by Draconian economic
sanctions.

If we underscore the cumulative factors and the
multiplication of effects, the Security Council and the
international community will be able to gauge the immense
gravity of the economic blockade.

Firstly, coffee is Burundi's main export product. The
great majority of farmers produce only coffee. The embargo
makes it impossible for them to distribute their only
income-generating product abroad. It is the rural farming
population that is affected, not the Government.

Secondly, there is the impending health crisis. A
statement was made by the national doctors' association the
day before yesterday to the effect that deadly illnesses are
imminent because it is impossible to obtain medical
supplies or instruments or to use operating rooms for the
seriously ill.

Thirdly, there is also a dangerous aggravation of an
economy already severely tried by a crisis that has persisted
for three years now.

Fourthly, we are faced with the disastrous
consequences for hundreds of thousands of displaced and
repatriated persons.

Finally, there exist the combined deadly effects of
being land-locked and having economic sanctions imposed
on the population.

In the face of this paralysing economic strangulation,
decreed unilaterally by our neighbours, which should be
cultivating natural human solidarity more than ever with a
Burundi immersed in a state of distress, we are once again
threatened with genocide, the causes of which everyone is
seeking to eradicate, but which could re-emerge owing to
those measures that run counter to legal and humanitarian
principles.

In this statement I have underscored the clear way in
which these economic sanctions violate the Charter of the
United Nations, the Charter of the Organization of African
Unity, the African Charter of Human Rights, the
Convention on the Law of the Sea and traditional
international law.

 

Even if all those treaties were non-existent, the
Security Council would have to establish ad hoc
mechanisms and solutions if it were not to be held
responsible before history for endorsing this Steamroller
that is in the process of crushing the people of Burundi.
Many of the States members of the Security Council have
distinguished themselves as champions of humanitarian
ideals. Would they be crowned with glory if they were to
endorse or allow the gratuitous immolation of the entire
people of Burundi?

The accession to power of the new regime through
special channels and because of national imperatives was
required because of the need for a historic act of
patriotism to save a people about to vanish into the
darkness. The path taken by Burundi in endorsing this
change of regime to lead the State is not a unique
exception to democracy. The democratic ideal has an
abundance of flaws, in form and substance in the world,
in Africa and in our region, in both practice and in
principle. None the less, out of total respect for the
democratic choices that have been made in other countries
and for the sacrosanct sovereignty of States, Burundi
strictly refrains from expressing any criticism of them
whatsoever.

By virtue of this code of conduct, which is inspired
specifically by democracy and by international law as
reflected in the Charter of the United Nations and that of
the Organization of African Unity, my country refrains
from interfering in the internal affairs of other
Governments and from taking upon itself the right to
threaten or to impose on them any type of sanctions on
any pretext or on the basis of some unsolicited and one-
sided quixotic spirit. At this stage the question arises as
to whether Burundi, either today or in the future, will be
able to reciprocate by taking coercive measures against
any of those States if certain democratic principles or
practices are dispensed with there.

In conclusion, in the name of certain noble doctrines
or ideals, some champions of this devastating embargo
against the people of Burundi have publicly and
energetically come out against similar measures adopted
or announced by Powers outside of Africa. Some Africans
that in the past have condemned the sponsors of economic
sanctions from the West are today the most zealous
advocates of the same evil that before they denounced.
Some Western States, if they join in decreeing this
crushing embargo, might even find themselves the target
of the anger of the champions of the embargo. One
adores the god that one immolated the day before.

 

One day in the courtyard of the Temple Jesus was
surrounded by an enormous crowd. The scribes and the
Pharisees, wanting to show their zeal for socio-religious
puritanism, brought before Jesus Christ a woman who had
been accused of adultery, claiming that such women in such
a situation should be stoned, according to the Law of
Moses. They wanted to set a trap for Jesus so that they
could then bring accusations against him on the basis of
this travesty. After deep reflection, and with his unfailing
honesty, he made the following clear-cut statement. "He
that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at
her." (The Holy Bible, Saint John the Apostle 8:7)

