The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.

Brother Carroll: The Holy See commends the
presidency of Malaysia for bringing this topic to
the attention of the Security Council and the entire
international community.

At the very outset, my delegation wishes to
reiterate the Holy See's constant and firm opposition to
the production and use of weapons of mass destruction.
Any act or weapon that aims indiscriminately to destroy
entire cities or extensive areas, together with their
inhabitants, is against all international humanitarian
law and merits unequivocal and unhesitating
condemnation.

While treaties and conventions have been
reached to ban chemical and biological weapons and
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, human
genius continues to invent new ways of annihilating
humankind. For instance, conventional weapons
are becoming increasingly less conventional as
technological advances elevate their power to destroy
to the level of weapons of mass destruction.

For that reason, the Holy See recommends that
discussions on weapons of mass destruction go beyond
the traditional categories of nuclear, chemical, biological
and radiological weapons to include devastatingly
powerful conventional weapons used to perpetrate
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Military
forces, rebels, terrorists and extremist groups use, with
greater frequency, ever-more powerful conventional
weapons, showing scant regard for civilian immunity,
discrimination or proportionality.

Indeed, humanitarian disasters that continue
to unfold in real time before our very own eyes
show us that schools, hospitals and other civilian
infrastructure are blown up by the incessant use of
powerful conventional weapons. The tens of millions
of refugees and displaced persons send an important
message in the Chamber today: We must flee or die
as our cities and communities are entirely devastated,
not by nuclear, chemical or biological weapons, but by
powerful conventional weapons. These tragedies call
for the international community to strictly implement
all legally binding treaties and instruments on the
prohibition and non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and urgently call us to review existing
classifications and definitions of what constitutes a
weapon of mass destruction.

In this very Chamber and in other forums, the
Holy See has repeatedly called on weapon-producing
nations of the world to severely limit and control the
manufacture and sale of weapons to unstable countries
and regions of the world, where the likelihood of their
illegal use and of falling into the hands of non-State
actors is real and present. The proliferation ofweapons,
regardless of whether they are conventional or of mass
destruction, simply aggravates situations of conflict
and results in huge human and material costs, thereby
profoundly undermining development and the search
for lasting peace. Indeed, non-proliferation, arms
control and disarmament underpin global security
and sustainable development. Without them, the
achievement of the much-vaunted 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development will be seriouslyjeopardized.

Double standards in the implementation of
treaties and conventions on the prohibition and the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction can
only encourage disregard for the very same treaties
and conventions on the part of those who are aggrieved
or discriminated against. The discrimination between
countries with and without weapons of mass destruction
cannot be a permanent situation. If it is unthinkable to
imagine a world where weapons of mass destruction
are available to all, it is reasonable to imagine, and to
work collectively for, a world where nobody has them
at all. The international community must therefore
appeal and act with one voice to ban all weapons of
mass destruction. This objective requires the continued
advocacy and cooperation of all, because much remains
to be done.

There is no doubt that every step towards banning
weapons of mass destruction is a giant step towards
achieving the goal of a better world.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.


