Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I regret having to speak again before the
Council at this late hour. However, with his last
statement, the Israeli representative left me with no
choice other than to reply. I will not speak at length,
but will focus on only the following points.

As members are well aware, the Israeli policy of
occupation and aggression since the establishment of
the United Nations has been the focus of great efforts
and energy on the part of the entire international
community, particularly in the Security Council, to put
an end to that policy of occupation and aggression,
which has lasted too long. I need not recall the various
reports prepared by Special Rapporteurs of the United
Nations on all the aspects of that policy; even the
Special Rapporteur on the right to food has criticized
the Israeli occupation of Arab territories. It also goes
without saying that the Human Rights Commission in
Geneva has condemned Israel's barbaric and bloody
conduct dozens of times and that the Human Rights
Council, successor to the Human Rights Commission,
was convened, only a few hours after it had been
established, in an emergency meeting to investigate
Israel's barbaric and criminal practices in Gaza and
Lebanon last July.

In addition, I wish to recall that Israel introduced
nuclear weapons to the region decades ago and is
opposed to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East. Moreover, the first hijacking
operation in recent history was committed by Israel in
1954, and it was a Syrian aircraft that was hijacked.
There is only one kind of terrorism in the region: the
State terror of Israel.

No matter how hard Israel's representatives try,
either in the Security Council or elsewhere, to conceal
the barbaric aspects of their occupation of other
peoples' lands, they will not succeed in concealing one
fact: the international community has voted more than
1,000 times against Israel and its barbaric policy of
occupying others' territories - a policy that it carries
out in total disregard for international law and
humanitarian law.

