Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Spain for convening this open
debate and for its efforts on the comprehensive review
of resolution 1540 (2004).

Canada recognizes the grave threat posed by the
proliferation of nuclear, biological, chemical and
radiological weapons to non-State actors. For this
reason, we reiterate our strong support for the full and
universal implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and are pleased to co-sponsor resolution 2325 (2016)
adopted today. Canada has long been a supporter of
global efforts to combat the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMD) and related materials. We
have invested more than $1.2 billion in this domain over
the past decade. Moreover, we will invest $63 million in
the coming year, including up to $6 million in dedicated
1540 (2004) related programming.

(spoke in English)

As a complement to resolution 1540 (2004),
Canada is engaged in a range of efforts to reduce the
threat of WMDs, including the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism in Syria, the Global Health
Security Agenda, and the Nuclear Security Contact
Group, among others. Additionally, Canada is leading
efforts to end fissile material production, a clear and
practical step towards countering WMD proliferation.
Canada supports recommendations to encourage and
strengthen regional and subregional implementation
and assistance approaches. To this end, Canada
is funding a regional 1540 (2004) implementation
coordinator for the Caribbean Community and is
engaged in cooperation and capacity-building in the
Caribbean through the Proliferation Security Initiative.

The promise and potential of resolution 1540
(2004) lie in its continual rejuvenation. We must evolve
and adapt to new and emerging risks, technologies and
threats. The comprehensive review has confirmed that,
despite progress, full and universal implementation
remains a challenge, with deficiencies in capacity,
matchmaking and assistance mechanisms. In this regard,
we welcome measures in today's resolution that call
for more detailed, specific assistance requests, revised
tools and templates, and a strengthening of the role of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). All of these will facilitate
effective assistance to States in the fulfilment of their
obligations and therefore combat WMD proliferation.

