Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank you, Madam President, for organizing this debate
to revisit the important issue of the rule of law. We also
acknowledge the presence of your Minister for Foreign
Affairs; this is the second time he has been with us,
which demonstrates Denmark's principled position on
the United Nations, and on the Security Council in
particular. We also thank Judge Rosalyn Higgins,
President of the International Court of Justice (ICJ), for
her seminal presentation this morning. Equally, we
thank Mr. Nicolas Michel, Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs, for his contextual presentation for this
debate.

Under the Charter, the Security Council has a
major role to play in implementing international law
with regard to the peaceful resolution of disputes and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
This forum provides us yet another opportunity to
reflect and to engage in a constructive dialogue on how
we apply the legal tools in our day-to-day
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security.

Working within the purview of international law,
the Council has a legal obligation to contribute to the
development and interpretation of international law. In
that context, one cannot but appreciate the progressive
evolution of numerous international legal mechanisms
that have been instrumental in carrying out the Security
Council's responsibilities. The establishment of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) are among the
major innovations that have come about in recognition
of the need to address international law.

The challenge to the rule of law and international
law posed by non-State actors can be daunting, but it is
not impossible to deal with. The indictments issued by
the ICC against non-State actors, such as the Lord's
Resistance Army, demonstrate the growing
determination of the international community to
address international criminality and impunity.
The Council has been taking appropriate steps in
accordance with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the Charter with respect to conflict and
post-conflict situations. The focus has been on
discharging its responsibilities on the issues of the rule
of law, human rights, transitional justice and
international humanitarian law. We commend, in
particular, the efforts taken through peacekeeping
missions to restore law and order in conflict and post-
conflict situations. While appreciating the positive
efforts that have been made so far, we are conscious of
the remaining gaps in the implementation of the
existing legal framework. In order to address those
gaps, the Council must strengthen mechanisms for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and post-
conflict situations.

In that context, we recognize and underline the
role of the International Court of Justice in
complementing the role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The United Republic of Tanzania attaches great
importance to the responsibility of States in ending
impunity and prosecuting those responsible for war
crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity and serious
violations of international humanitarian law. In that
respect, we would like to reaffirm our commitment to
and support of the International Criminal Court and the
principle that States and the international community
as a whole have a responsibility to protect.

In the same context, we applaud the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission. We
strongly believe that it will play a pivotal role in
establishing judicial systems, the rule of law,
reconciliation and the institutionalization of human
rights in post-conflict situations as part of good
governance.
It is on the basis of that conviction that we
support the establishment of a rule of law assistance
unit in the Secretariat. We believe that following its
establishment, the unit will be able to work hard, and
hand in hand with the Peacebuilding Commission, to
ensure that the rule of law prevails in post-conflict
situations, and that it will play a significant role in
preventing conflict as well.

Progressively, sanctions have become one of the
major policy tools of the Security Council. They have
become an indispensable instrument in the Council's
effort towards addressing the most rampant violations

of human rights and international humanitarian law in
conflict situations and beyond. However, by their very
nature, sanctions, whatever form they take, are
punitive. In their application, we should never lose
sight of their intended primary objective, that is, to
elicit compliance and cooperation from the parties in
ending conflicts, and not simply to punish the targets.
Sanctions should be applied in order to exert pressure
on those parties which fail to cooperate in peace efforts
or to prevent human rights violations, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and violations of international
law.

Understood and applied in that way, sanctions
regimes should be temporary rather than permanent in
nature. This understanding is important in determining
the credibility and effectiveness of sanctions. Based on
this perception, discussion of a systemic and
standardized approach to, and procedures for, listing
and delisting becomes essential.

In conclusion, we welcome the ongoing efforts
directed towards addressing the difficulties Member
States are facing in implementing United Nations
sanctions regimes. It is important to strike a balance
between enhancing the efficiency of sanctions against
targeted individuals and respect for the rule of law and
the human rights of the individuals concerned.

