Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman and Ambassador Cardi for
their informative briefings.

Kazakhstan is extremely concerned about another
provocative missile launch by Pyongyang. Our
Ministry for Foreign Affairs has issued an extremely
condemnatory statement on this matter. There is no
doubt that such actions run counter to the demands
of the international community and gravely violate
all relevant Security Council resolutions. Pyongyang
has to understand that the world will not accept its
nuclear status.

All sides should refrain from taking any provocative
action because further provocations will generate only
even greater confrontation and spur a new wave of
escalations, with untold consequences. The outcomes
of such a scenario will be most grave for all the parties
involved. We continue to hold the strong conviction
that there is no alternative to a peaceful solution to
the North Korean crisis, and that the stalemate can
be overcome only through negotiations, dialogue
and goodwill on the part of all parties. Economic
sanctions should be smart and targeted, and not lead
to a deterioration of the overall humanitarian situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We
must avoid heading down the military path, with often
unpredictable hazards from which we may not be able
to extricate ourselves.

Astana therefore stands for the tireless search
for a comprehensive and collective solution of the
issue through new, decisive political and diplomatic
actions. It is only through meaningful communication
and collective deliberations, accompanied by
confidence-building measures, that we will be able
to find a way out of this very complex situation. The
Council should remain united on that issue, and exert
a new, determined political will to avert undesired
consequences before the hostilities become even more
deeply entrenched and the last of the red lines has been
crossed irreversibly.

Once again, I thank Ambassador Cardi for his
informative report and for his most committed efforts
as Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006), especially since this will be his last
briefing on the subject in his current capacity. As
Italy will be leaving us at the end of this year, I would
like to acknowledge its outstanding contribution to
the work of the Security Council. We recognize the
practical outcomes of the Committee's work under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Cardi, who has provided
very good momentum through a series of ongoing
outreach activities, the provision of regular updated
lists of individuals and legal entities, the agreed and
approved list of weapons of mass destruction-related
and conventional arms-related weaponry, updated
information notes and fact sheets, and other
relevant data.

The well-organized work of the Committee has
undoubtedly contributed to the effective implementation
of all the relevant sanctions resolutions of the Council.
We hope that the thorough work of the Committee and
its investment on every front to resolve the overall issues
with North Korea will also contribute to persuading the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to abandon its
nuclear programme.

