Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank the Pakistani presidency of the
Security Council for this opportunity to share with the
Council Canada's views concerning the situation in the
Middle East. Canada would like to begin with a few
remarks on the situation in Syria.

(spoke in English)

In Syria, President Bashar Al-Assad's desperate
attempt to cling to power and deny Syrians their
legitimate democratic rights is as tragic as its is futile.
With more than 60,000 deaths and over 650,000 refugees
having been forced to flee the country, the agony of the
Syrian people cries out for action. Al-Assad's callous
disregard for the suffering or ordinary Syrians has made
it appallingly clear that he will not relinquish power
voluntarily, while the atrocities he has committed ensure
that the conflict will persist so long as he remains.
Therefore, we believe it incumbent on the international
community to take action. We call on the Security
Council to live up to its responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security by imposing binding
sanctions against the Al-Assad regime before any more
innocent lives are lost needlessly.

Canada stands with the Syrian people in their
struggle against tyranny. We have imposed 11 rounds of
sanctions on the Al-Assad regime and its supporters. We
have provided $23.5 million in humanitarian assistance
and have also provided support to Syria's neighbours,
which have generously taken on the huge burdens
associated with hosting so many refugees. We are also
working to support the peaceful democratic opposition,
encouraging them to reach out to all Syrian people,
including, in particular, the country's diverse ethnic and
religious communities. The Syrian opposition coalition
must convince Syrians that it is a viable alternative to
the Al-Assad regime - one that will respect minority
rights, preserve Syria's long tradition of pluralism, and
establish a new, peaceful, democratic Government that
respects the rights of all of its citizens.

Let me now turn to Iran. Canada continues to
believe that the regime in Iran poses the greatest
threat to international peace and security in the world
today. Regrettably, the regime continues to thwart
intensive efforts to find a negotiated resolution to the
crisis provoked by its nuclear ambitions. Last week,
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)

again renewed negotiations with Iran and, regrettably,
returned to Vienna empty-handed. Evidence is mounting
that Iran's nuclear programme is not exclusively for
peaceful purposes, and the Iranian regime seems to have
little genuine interest in allaying the concerns of the
international community. Canada is deeply concerned
that Iran is manipulating support for the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy as a cover for a weapons programme
that threatens regional and global security. We appeal
to the United Nations and all Member States to use their
influence with the Iranian regime to press for an urgent
and meaningful change in approach, beginning with
constructive engagement with both the IAEA and the
five permanent members of the Security Council and
Germany.

The Iranian regime also, in our view, poses
a threat to the fundamental human values that all
nations aim to protect and foster. One month ago, the
General Assembly adopted, for the ninth year in a
row, a comprehensive resolution on the human rights
situation in Iran (resolution 67/ 182). Regrettably, the
systematic repression of human rights has continued.
Executions, including public executions in stadiums
and public parks, and systematic abuses by Iranian
security services, the increasing stifling of freedom
of expression, persecution of ethnic and religious
minorities, and imposition ofrigid restrictions on social
and cultural life all continue. And, of course, the Iranian
regime is the foremost regional sponsor of repression,
since it backs Al-Assad's brutal despotism in Syria. The
Iranian people deserve better than a closed and airless
society, isolated from the international community.
Like all peoples, they aspire to the universal values
of freedom and democracy. They deserve to live in a
country that honours those universal human values,
and to enjoy the same rights and freedoms that this
Organization stands for.

(spoke in French)
Finally, Canada would like to take this opportunity
to address the issue of Palestinian participation in this
meeting and the fact that its representative is seated
behind a nameplate that reads "State of Palestine". We
fear that Palestine's participation in this meeting as the
State of Palestine creates a misleading impression. On
29 November, in a statement to the General Assembly
in the context of its adoption of resolution 67/19, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada, the Honourable
John Baird, clearly outlined Canada's position. It
has not changed. It should also be emphasized that

resolution 67/19 did not confer statehood on Palestine
any more than it constituted some kind of recognition
ofa Palestinian State.

Canada remains committed to the quest for a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, whereby two States can live side by side in peace
and security. We welcome attempts to encourage the
parties to resume direct peace negotiations without
delay or preconditions, in accordance with the Quartet's
statement of 23 September 2011. We share the goal of
a negotiated solution to the Israel-Palestinian conflict
that will allow two States to live side by side in peace
and security.

In our view, allowing the Palestinians to participate
under the name of the State of Palestine prejudices the
outcome of the final status negotiations and makes a
resumption of the peace talks more difficult. It raises
expectations without changing the facts on the ground
or improving living conditions, and risks giving the
false impression that Palestine has achieved statehood.
Canada will therefore continue to oppose any attempts
by the Palestinians to appropriate a higher status than
that which is recognized in the United Nations and
other international organizations.

(spoke in English)

Clearly, from our perspective, the best path to
achieving an independent Palestinian State living side
by side in peace and security with Israel is for both
parties to re-engage in direct negotiations immediately.

