Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): We join
other members of the Security Council in thanking Mr.
Vieira de Mello for his comprehensive and clear
statement on the development of the situation in East
Timor since his last visit, on 2 February. We are
pleased to note that, thanks to the efforts of Mr. Vieira
de Mello and his team, the situation on the ground
since the last meeting has greatly evolved in a positive
direction. Their efforts deserve to be acknowledged
here.

The concrete results achieved, and the
strengthening of relations between the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the Indonesian Government, on the one hand, and
among the Timorese themselves, on the other, is but
further proof of the favourable overall climate
prevailing on the ground.

Attacks against United Nations personnel and
sites continue, a factor that disrupts UNTAET's efforts
to guarantee stability and re-establish confidence
among all the parties.

We have emphasized on many occasions the
important role of humanitarian organizations in East
Timor. We have also called for their capacity to be
strengthened and for them to be assured of favourable
conditions to carry out their duties. Nevertheless, it is
regrettable that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
organizations have suspended their activities in three
East Timorese refugee camps.

It must be recognized that Mr. Vieira de Mello's
efforts, and the determination of the Government of
Indonesia to cooperate with UNTAET, continue to be
consolidated. The visit of the Governor of West Timor
to East Timor and Mr. Vieira de Mello's talks with the
Indonesian President in Jakarta are evidence of the
goodwill of the parties to speed up the return of
refugees to East Timor. In this connection, we are
gratified by the decision taken by UNTAET in
cooperation with the Government of West Timor and
the Consultative Council of East Timor to begin a new
repatriation operation for the 120,000 refugees still in
camps in West Timor.

The donors' conference held in Lisbon last week
was a very important event for the East Timorese. In
this context, we welcome the international
community's financial support for East Timor, which
has once again been renewed and strengthens the
political support that has already been extended. We
believe this support can be a catalyst for all the parties
in East Timor to begin a new phase that will lead to the
establishment of a Timorese administration and ensure
lasting development for that country.

Finally, it is our hope that the forthcoming talks
to be held on 28 and 29 June between UNTAET and the
Indonesian Government will make it possible for the
two parties to find solutions to various outstanding
issues and consolidate the results that have been
achieved.

