Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you on behalf of the Nigerian delegation for
convening this important meeting. I am particularly
pleased to see Guinea, a brotherly West African
country, preside over the affairs of the Security Council
for this month. Let me also, through you, compliment
Germany on the excellent manner in which it
conducted the affairs of the Council last month.

This is the third time that the Nigerian delegation
participates in the debate on the issue of Iraq since last
November. This circumstance is predicated on
Nigeria's deep concern over the consequences that the
escalating situation regarding Iraq could have on
international peace and security, in particular the
adverse effects its mishandling could have on Africa.
As the least developed region of the world, already
beset with severe economic and developmental
problems, Africa is bound to suffer most from any
possible war with Iraq. There is no doubt that the
present harsh socio-economic realities in the continent,
resulting from poverty, hunger, drought, HIV/AIDS
and other communicable diseases, will be exacerbated
in an international environment characterized by war.
Besides, the prospects for multilateral assistance for
Africa's development programmes could only suffer
negative impact from war.

For this reason Nigeria welcomed the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1441 (2002), which clearly
demonstrated the determination of the Council to deal
decisively with the issue of Iraq's disarmament.
Nigeria's longstanding position is that Iraq must
comply with all its obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including disarmament
and a full account of its weapons of mass destruction
and other prohibited items. Nigeria therefore calls on
Iraq to continue to cooperate actively with the
international inspectors and to fulfil its disarmament
obligations transparently, without conditions and to the
full satisfaction of the international community. We are
encouraged by the latest report of the chief weapons
inspector, Mr. Hans Blix, and of Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), stating that Iraq has increased its level of
cooperation with the United Nations inspectors.

Only a few months ago, the international
community, including members of the Council, called
for the return of inspectors to Iraq as a means towards
effecting its disarmament. The deployment of the
international inspectors only three months ago set the
disarmament process in motion. It is in the interest of
world peace that we not exert undue pressure on the
inspectors nor take any action that could undermine
their activities. As practical disarmament is the main
objective of resolution 1441 (2002), the Council should
take every necessary step to ensure the continuation of
the inspection process until Iraq fully disarms. We
should ensure that any new decision on the matter
should emanate from the Security Council after
consideration of the final report of the inspection team.

For any action on Iraq to enjoy international
legitimacy, it is important that it be taken in accordance
with the provisions of the United Nations Charter. Of
no less importance is the need for such action to reflect
the wish of the absolute majority of members of the
international community.

It is worth noting that resolution 1441 (2002)
confers a much greater mandate upon the inspectors
than has ever been the case. That mandate includes
complete access to all sites in order to enhance
inspections into a more rigorous system. We stress the
importance of maximizing the opportunities offered by
the new mandate to resolve the issue of Iraq's
disarmament. That new mandate has, no doubt, clearly
paved the way for success in Iraq's peaceful
disarmament. In that regard, Nigeria shares the
universal desire of the international community to
exhaust this peaceful means to resolve the Iraqi
problem.

The decision of the authorities in Baghdad to
allow the return of inspectors and to grant them access
to all sites without hindrance presents the world with
the best opportunity for a diplomatic solution. That
opportunity has just become available and is being
utilized, although it has not yet been exhausted. There
is a need to intensify and strengthen inspections and to
allow the inspectors adequate time to do their work.

My delegation agrees entirely with the view
expressed by Secretary-General Kofi Annan to the
effect that no amount of bombs can destroy the number
of weapons of mass destruction that inspectors can
identify and dismantle or destroy. Therefore, despite
the difficulties encountered in the course of that
important assignment, there is a need to recognize that
significant progress has been made since the return of
the inspectors. As part of that progress, we welcome
the latest report by Mr. Blix regarding Iraq's
destruction of Al Samoud 2 missiles, as demanded by
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission, which was described by Mr.
Blix himself as constituting a substantial measure of
disarmament.

Since then, the issue of unmanned aircraft drones,
which had hitherto not been known of, is yet another
milestone in the progress of inspections and
disarmament. The recent national legislation by the
authorities in Baghdad banning the importation and
production of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, as
demanded by the international community, is equally
significant. We are also encouraged by reports that
private interviews can now take place without the
presence of Iraqi officials. These are clear indications
of progress, and show signs that the international
community will eventually succeed in its effort to
achieve Iraq's disarmament. As reported by the
inspectors, there could be problems. But, on the whole,
progress is being made. It is therefore difficult at this
stage to see the need for recourse to any other means to
settle the crisis other than a peaceful one.

In line with the declaration of the Central Organ
of the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution of the African Union on
the Iraqi crisis, released on 3 February 2003, the
Nigerian delegation urges all parties to make sustained
efforts to avoid the use of force while ensuring the
effective implementation of resolution 1441 (2002).
That position is also consistent with the declaration of
the XIII Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement,
which concluded at Kuala Lumpur last month.

Military confrontation in Iraq on the basis of the
unilateral decision of any Member State will have
serious implications for world peace, as well as the
potential to destabilize the entire Middle East region
and beyond. We should therefore avoid actions that
will have damaging consequences on the legitimacy of
the Security Council. It is important that the hope for
resolution of global problems through peaceful means
is not forever destroyed. The issue of Iraq should be
dealt with in a manner that ensures respect for
international law and the maintenance of the integrity
of the United Nations Organization.

Multilateral cooperation therefore remains the
only option for a solution of this problem. Nigeria will
appeal against any precipitate action on Iraq that is
outside the authority of the United Nations or that
disregards its resolutions. Such action will be
detrimental to international peace and security. Nigeria
therefore calls for restraint and pleads that there should
be no unilateral action without the authority of the
Security Council.

Certainly there is greater honour and respect in
achieving our objectives through peaceful means than
by force. As the saying goes, we could win the war but
lose the peace. History will not fail to note the
achievements of diplomacy over force, just as it did
with regard to the peaceful and satisfactory solution of
the Cuban missile crisis in the early 1960s. In that
regard, I also wish to refer in particular to the fact that
the cold war ended without the use of any force. Those
are major landmarks in the history of diplomacy, as
well as examples of what can be achieved without
brutal force. Let us persevere in our determination to
pursue the solution of this crisis through peaceful
means.
